J Bus Ethics (2011) 104:283–297
DOI 10.1007/s10551-011-0912-z

The Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate Social
Responsibility: Empirical Evidence from Korea

Won Yong Oh • Young Kyun Chang •
Aleksey Martynov

Received: 30 August 2010 / Accepted: 19 May 2011 / Published online: 4 June 2011
Ó Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2011

Abstract Relatively little research has examined the
effects of ownership on the ﬁrms’ corporate social
responsibility (CSR). In addition, most of it has been
conducted in the Western context such as the U.S. and
Europe. Using a sample of 118 large Korean ﬁrms, we
hypothesize that different types of shareholders will have
distinct motivations toward the ﬁrm’s CSR engagement.
We break down ownership into different groups of share-
holders: institutional, managerial, and foreign ownerships.
Results indicate a signiﬁcant, positive relationship between
CSR ratings and ownership by institutions and foreign
investors. In contrast, shareholding by top managers is
negatively associated with ﬁrm’s CSR rating while outside
director ownership is not signiﬁcant. We conclude that
different owners have differential impacts on the ﬁrm’s
CSR engagement.
Keywords Ownership structure  Corporate social
responsibility  Korea

Introduction

A growing body of management research has studied the
relationships among ownership structure, strategic decision
making, and ﬁrm performance. Previous research has found

W. Y. Oh (&)  Y. K. Chang  A. Martynov
School of Business, University of Kansas,
1300 Sunnyside Avenue, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA
e-mail: pnl1999@ku.edu

Y. K. Chang
e-mail: ykchang@ku.edu

A. Martynov
e-mail: martynov@ku.edu

that ownership has an inﬂuence on organizational decision
making, motivation, and power (Hart and Moore 1990;
Finkelstein 1992). For instance, ownership structure affects
important ﬁrm-level decisions such as R&D spending
(Baysinger et al. 1991), innovation (Kochhar and David
1996), capital structure (Chaganti and Damanpour 1991),
entrepreneurship (Zahra 1996), and diversiﬁcation (Eisen-
mann 2002). In particular, the key owners (e.g., institu-
tional owners, managerial owners, etc.) can go beyond the
decision to invest or not to invest by proposing and voting
on ﬁrm’s strategic decisions through multiple channels.
Thus, given that corporate social actions can be seen as a
form of ‘‘investment’’ (McWilliam and Siegel 2001), it is
not surprising that the key owners are likely to be involved
in the ﬁrm’s strategic decisions about social investments.
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) has received a
signiﬁcant amount of attention from both academic
researchers and business practitioners. CSR is deﬁned as
corporate integrated responsibilities encompassing the
economic,
legal, ethical, and discretionary (or philan-
thropic) expectations that the society has of organizations
(Carroll 1979). For over a decade, several economic and
noneconomic determinants of CSR have been examined
(e.g. Aguilera et al. 2007). Previous studies have found that
external factors such as industry (Hackston and Milne
1996), customers (Vogel 2005), activist groups (den Hond
and de Bakker 2007), regulation/law (Dawkins and Lewis
2003), and communities (Boehm 2005) affect organiza-
tions’ decisions about CSR participation.

At the same time, other studies have emphasized the
role of organizational factors such as slack resources
(Waddock and Graves 1997), ﬁrm size (Fombrun and
Shanley 1990; Stanwick and Stanwick 1998), board
structure (Johnson and Greenings 1999), top managers’
moral principles (Davis et al. 1997), and so forth.

123


284

W. Y. Oh et al.

However,
relatively few researchers (e.g. Barnea and
Rubin 2010; Johnson and Greening 1999) have assessed
the extent to which the ownership structure explains the
ﬁrm’s social performance. In particular, since different
owners may have different objectives and decision-mak-
ing horizons (e.g., Hoskisson et al. 2002), it is worthwhile
to study the relationships between the different types of
owners and the ﬁrm’s social performance. In this article,
we break down owners into three separate categories:
institutional (pension funds, banks, insurance companies,
and securities ﬁrms), managerial (top management team
and outside directors), and foreign ownerships. We use
this classiﬁcation of owners because (1)
institutional
investors are traditionally large and may hold a sub-
stantial amount of a ﬁrm’s shares; (2) managers and
directors are best-informed about the ﬁrm’s situation and
often have the most signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the ﬁrm’s
strategy and investments; (3) foreign investors are likely
to be distinct from domestic investors in their preferences,
time horizons, and the extent of the information asym-
metry problem. Given these differences, we expect dif-
ferent owners to have different preferences regarding the
ﬁrms’ social investments.

Using a sample of large, public Korean ﬁrms, we found
that ownership by banks, pension funds, and foreign
investors has a signiﬁcant positive relationship with the
ﬁrm’s CSR ratings. Ownership by the ﬁrm’s managers,
however, has a signiﬁcant negative relationship with the
ﬁrm’s CSR ratings while the effect of outside director
ownership is not signiﬁcant. Our results suggest that Kor-
ean managers, who are often associated with the Chaebol
family (e.g. Baek et al. 2004; Chang 2003; Kim 2007), may
use their stock ownership to obtain personal beneﬁts at the
expense of the other stakeholders. Banks, pension funds,
and foreign investors may be forced to be long-term ori-
ented because they cannot easily sell their shares without
greatly affecting the stock price.
In addition, foreign
investors may be more inclined to pay attention to social
issues because of their familiarity with these issues and
greater emphasis on CSR in their home countries, as well
as because of the role of CSR engagement as an important
signaling mechanism that may reduce
information
asymmetry.

Theory and Hypotheses

In this article, we hypothesize that CSR participation is a
result of decisions made by the corporate managers under
pressure from the shareholders. We start our
theory
building with an overview of how an ownership structure
may affect corporate decisions,
including decisions to
participate in social issues.

123

There are various mechanisms through which owners
can affect corporate decision making. According to agency
theory (Eisenhardt 1989; Jensen and Meckling 1976),
managers are the ﬁrm’s owners’ agents that do not bear all
the consequences of their own decisions. One of the
problems with separation of ownership and control (Fama
and Jensen 1983) is the suboptimal decisions that
the
managers might make in order to serve their own interests.
If the owners of the corporation are dispersed and none of
them own a signiﬁcant percentage of the stock, none of the
owners will have signiﬁcant incentives to spend their time
monitoring and evaluating managerial decisions. Even if
some minor shareholders were willing to monitor mana-
gerial decisions,
they would not have any means of
affecting corporate decision making because they would
not have the voting power on the board.

This situation changes when some shareholders own
signiﬁcant percentage of the stock. Large shareholders will
usually have the power to affect corporate decisions via
appointing directors on the board (Boyd 1994) and share-
holder activism (Admati et al. 1994; Lee and Lounsbury
2011; Smith 1996). Thus, we would expect to see more
active monitoring and intervention of shareholders into
corporate decision making when some large shareholders
own signiﬁcant amounts of equity. Existing empirical
research supports the argument that ownership concentra-
tion affects corporate decision making (e.g. Baysinger et al.
1991; Kochhar and David 1996).

An important question is how ownership structure
affects the corporate decision making. By ownership
structure, we understand the absolute and relative shares of
the stock owned by the speciﬁc owners such as pension
funds, banks, and investment ﬁrms, etc. Previous research
has found that different types of owners have divergent
preferences regarding various corporate decisions and
investments. For example, Zahra (1996) found that exec-
utive ownership and long-term institutional ownership are
positively associated with corporate entrepreneurship,
whereas short-term institutional ownership has a negative
effect on it; furthermore, outside director ownership is
found to neutralize such a negative impact. In a similar
vein, Chaganti and Damanpour (1991) found a signiﬁcant
negative relationship between outside institutional owner-
ship and the ﬁrm’s capital structure (i.e., long-term debt-to-
capital ratio), yet family and inside institutional owners
moderate the relationship; in addition, executive ownership
strengthens the relationship between outside institutional
ownerships and ﬁnancial performance including ROA,
ROE, and P-E ratio. Importantly, Hoskisson et al. (2002)
focused on how corporate innovation strategies are actually
made by different
institutional owners, examining the
mediating effects of the roles of boards of directors. They
documented that the key stock owners inﬂuence corporate


Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate Social Responsibility

285

strategic decisions directly and indirectly, arguing that
directors in a corporate board are inﬂuenced by the owners
and, in turn, themselves inﬂuence corporate innovation
strategies.

Based on the existing evidence, we view CSR as a form
of investment and hypothesize that varying shares owned
by speciﬁc types of investors will have a differential effect
on the corporate decisions regarding CSR. First, we view
social investments as any other kinds of investments that
are supposed to yield beneﬁts for the shareholders (e.g.
Cochran and Wood 1984). In particular, we assume that
social investments lead to increased chances of long-term
survival of the company, which will be positively valued
by the stock market. There is evidence that socially
responsible business is positively associated with the per-
formance of ﬁrms, especially in the long run (Orlitzky et al.
2003), even though this relationship is not always reliable
(Margolis and Walsh 2003). Our argument is built on the
following premise. Socially irresponsible companies are
subject to legal sanction and punishment from the gov-
ernment and other powerful stakeholders (Agle et al.
1999). Such actions against the company hurt its chances of
survival in the long run. Therefore, it is optimal for socially
irresponsible companies to improve their social perfor-
mance by making charitable contributions, complying with
regulatory requirements and being proactive about envi-
ronmental issues, improving relations with local commu-
nities, etc.

Second, we argue that different shareholders may have
different time horizons and thereby different preferences
regarding corporate social investments. We assume that
long-term shareholders are more likely to support social
investments than short-term shareholders. This assumption
is based on the following reasoning. CSR investments are
most likely to pay off in the long run (Falck and Heblich
2007). In the short run, they might actually be a burden for
the ﬁrm. Since ﬁnancial markets are imperfectly efﬁcient
(Shleifer 2000), the stock market may not value social
investments correctly even if it is known that high CSR
ratings are good for business. Even if the markets were
perfectly efﬁcient (Fama 1970), they may not value social
investments correctly because the future is uncertain and it
is impossible to predict how a speciﬁc social initiative of
the company will pay off. As a result, short-term investors
may view social investments as risky and uncertain. Long-
term investors may be more supportive of social invest-
ments than short-term investors due to the long-term pay-
offs of social investments. Finally, social investments may
improve a ﬁrm’s reputation, which may allow the ﬁrm to
differentiate from its rivals and charge premium prices
(Shamsie 2003). Such reputation improvements are likely
to accrue over time, necessitating a longer time horizon
when making social investments.

Although our main proposition in this article is that
long-term investors will be more supportive of investments
that increase CSR ratings of the ﬁrm, we also propose that
investors will not support CSR-increasing investments if
those investors have other means to proﬁt from the ﬁrm. In
this regard, we suggest that the institutional context may
shape the behavior of the investors. While some countries
(i.e. Western economies) may have more transparent
markets and more efﬁcient mechanisms of monitoring and
control, others may lack such mechanisms or have them in
semi-developed, transitional forms. Such a difference in
institutional context may affect the relationship between
the corporation and its stakeholders. Thus, we would
expect to see signiﬁcant differences among investors in
non-Western economies (such as Korea), compared to
North America and Europe, regarding their support of
CSR.

In sum, the existing evidence suggests that different
owners may have divergent, rather than convergent, ori-
entations and preferences regarding corporate strategic
decisions. This insight suggests that different owners may
also have different orientations and preferences regarding
the ﬁrm’s strategic decisions about CSR participation.
Consequently, the relationship between ownership struc-
ture and CSR should vary depending on the shares of the
total stock owned by various shareholders. In the sub-
sequent section, we articulate how each type of owner
might make distinct decisions on social investments. Since
an investigation of the effects of all possible stock owners
on CSR is not feasible, we limit the scope of our theorizing
to several key owners that have received substantial
attention from management scholars, such as institutional
and managerial ownership (e.g., Baysinger et al. 1991;
Chaganti and Damanpour 1991; Chang 2003; Eisenmann
2002; Hoskisson et al. 2002; Kochhar and David 1996;
Zahra 1996). We also include foreign ownership in order to
capture the sample-speciﬁc characteristic (i.e. large Korean
ﬁrms) of this study.

Institutional Ownership

Many scholars suggest that institutional owners have sig-
niﬁcant inﬂuence on organizational decisions. For instance,
Shleifer and Vishny (1997) argued that institutional owners
are inﬂuential in organizational decisions by exercising
substantial voting power as well as having asymmetric
information advantages over other shareholders (Schnat-
terly et al. 2008). Using their power and information,
institutional investors tend to be more actively involved in
ﬁrms’ decisions than noninstitutional stockholders (Brick-
ley et al. 1988). Moreover, because institutional owners
often own signiﬁcant percentages of the ﬁrm’s stock and
cannot easily sell their shares, they are likely to be more

123


286

W. Y. Oh et al.

attentive to the ﬁrm’s strategic decisions than other
shareholders.

With respect

to organization’s decisions on social
investments, the good management theory (Graves and
Waddock 1994) suggests that the effect of institutional
ownership on CSR should be positive. Since the ﬁrm’s
long-term performance can be enhanced by good man-
agement practices, institutional holders are likely to be
willing to support CSR-related actions.

An additional rationale explaining why institutional
investors might support CSR participation comes from the
arguments presented by Siegel and Vitaliano (2007).
According to their reasoning, institutional investors such as
pension funds, insurance companies, banks, and securities
ﬁrms offer credence services characterized by signiﬁcant
information asymmetry between the institutional investor
and its clients. Investing in socially responsible businesses
and maintaining the CSR ratings of the ﬁrms is one way for
the institutional investor to signal to its potential clients
that this institutional investor is reliable and responsible,
and thereby to differentiate its services. Following this line
of argument, we would expect to see a positive association
between institutional ownership and CSR ratings.

Previous studies also support the positive relationship
between institutional holdings and CSR. For example,
Sethi (2005) argued that public pension funds tend to
consider the ﬁrm’s long-term effects on the environment,
sustainability, and good corporate citizenship when they
make an investment decision. Teoh and Shiu (1990)
empirically showed that institutional investors look favor-
ably at ﬁrms actively engaging in CSR. Graves and Wad-
dock (1994) also noted that institutions invest more heavily
in ﬁrms with better corporate social performance, ﬁnding
evidence of a positive relationship between the number of
institutions holding the shares of a ﬁrm and its CSR rating.
Given this description, we predict that institutional own-
ership will be positively associated with the ﬁrm’s
engagement in CSR.

Institutional ownership is positively associated with

H1a
the CSR rating of a ﬁrm.

Even though we assume an overall positive relationship
between institutional ownership and CSR, we do not expect
that all institutional owners will have the same orientation
toward the ﬁrm’s social investments, because the incen-
tives of different
institutional holders are not always
aligned (e.g., Brickley et al. 1988). Thus,
institutional
investors can fall into different categories since different
owners have distinctive motivations and time horizons
(e.g., Hoskisson et al. 2002). In this sense, we assume that
different types of institutional owners have their own dis-
tinct as well as potentially conﬂicting preferences for the
ﬁrm’s CSR engagement.

123

While some institutional

investors focus mainly on
short-term earnings such as quarterly results (Fortune
1993), others might concentrate on long-term performance.
For example, public pension funds have relatively long-
term perspectives due to pensioners’ longer time horizons
and the sheer size of their holdings. On the contrary,
investments by mutual funds, investment banks, security
ﬁrms, and insurance companies may have relatively short-
term orientations due to professional fund managers’ high
turnover rates (Bushee 1998) and compensation plans
based on short-term earnings (e.g. Johnson and Greening
1999). Since the returns from CSR are expected to be
realized mostly in the long run, the long-term oriented
institutional investors (i.e., public pension funds) might
support CSR, while other short-term oriented institutional
investors (i.e.,
investment banks, securities ﬁrms, and
insurance companies) may be less supportive of CSR
engagement. Therefore, we hypothesize:

H1b The positive relationship between institutional
ownership and CSR rating is stronger for long-term ori-
ented institutional investors than short-term oriented insti-
tutional investors.

Managerial Ownership

Agency theory (Eisenhardt 1989; Jensen and Meckling
1976) suggests that top managers have the power to allo-
cate resources among a broad range of stakeholders in a
way that assures support from them. However, the theory
also suggests that providing stock to managers is an
effective way to mitigate agency problems by aligning the
interests of the managers with those of the owners. If the
managers own signiﬁcant equity, they are more likely to
make decisions maximizing the shareholders’ value
(McConnell and Servaes 1990; Denis et al. 1997). If
socially responsible actions increase the ﬁrm’s value (Or-
litzky et al. 2003), as good management theory implies,
stock ownership might increase the managers’ incentives to
engage in CSR. Empirical ﬁndings also support the positive
relationship between ownership by managers and CSR
engagement. For example, Johnson and Greening (1999)
found a positive relationship between top management
equity and social performance in terms of environment and
product quality.

Another approach to the effect of managerial ownership
on the ﬁrm’s CSR rating is based on short-term versus
long-term orientation. Previously, we have assumed that
social performance positively affects ﬁrm’s performance.
This might be true in the long run but not in the short run
because it may be possible for a ﬁrm to engage in less CSR
and generate higher current proﬁts at the expense of future
performance (Narayanan 1985).


Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate Social Responsibility

287

In addition, the institutional context in different coun-
tries may encourage or discourage socially responsible
actions. Developed countries in North America and Europe
may impose greater institutional pressures on managers to
make socially responsible decisions (Campbell 2007). On
the other hand, managers in non-Western countries may not
be subjected to similar institutional pressures. In such
cases, managers may be more likely to pursue short-term
strategies that boost the company’s proﬁts and positively
affect their compensation. Lack of transparency in some
countries may also create incentives for managers to pursue
their personal agendas at the expense of other stakeholders.
Arguably, larger stock holdings by the managers in such
conditions are likely to endow the managers with greater
power to make decisions in their own interests. The
ﬁnancial markets in such economies may not value social
investments as highly as in developed economies. If this is
true, it would mean that stock-owning managers may not
reap the beneﬁts of social investments. Moreover, in some
Asian countries (e.g., Japan, China, and Korea) managers
of many public ﬁrms have strong ties to the founding
family (e.g. Claessens et al. 2000), which may wield dis-
proportional
inﬂuence on the decision-making process.
Managers tied to the founding family may adopt policies
that beneﬁt the family at the expense of the other stake-
holders. Such managers might expropriate value from other
shareholders to increase the wealth of the controlling
owners such as founding family members (Chang 2003).
As a result, the company’s CSR rating may suffer. In this
sense, managers in Korea might ﬁnd more opportunities to
proﬁt themselves and the founding family members by
reducing social investments than by increasing the long-
term value of the company. Overall, we predict that the
effect of managerial holdings on CSR ratings will be
negative:

H2a Top management ownership is negatively associated
with the CSR rating of the ﬁrm.

The resource dependence theory suggests that

the
selection of outside board members can be seen as a stra-
tegic decision for dealing with an organization’s relation-
ships with its business environments (Pfeffer and Salancik
1978). In an attempt to maintain the positive relationships
with the environment composed of a wide variety of
stakeholders, outside directors may help ﬁrms respond
appropriately to external constituents through complying
with environmental standards and participating in a wide
variety of stakeholder-oriented activities (Pfeffer 1973).

However, agency theory (Jensen and Meckling 1976;
Fama and Jensen 1983) may suggest that outside directors’
interests are not necessarily aligned with the interests of
other shareholders. One mechanism that can be used to
align the interests of various parties is the stock ownership.

Previous research suggests that outside directors’ owner-
ship of the stock is positively associated with the ﬁrm’s
ﬁnancial performance (Hambrick and Jackson 2000).
Outside directors that own stock of the ﬁrm may be more
engaged in monitoring managerial decisions if their own
ﬁnancial wealth is at stake. On the contrary, if outside
directors do not own signiﬁcant shareholdings, they are less
effective governance mechanism since their incentive to
monitor is low (Gedajlovic and Shapiro 1998). A similar
argument may be applied to social investments of the ﬁrm.
If, as we argued earlier, social investments increase the
ﬁrm’s long-term value, outside directors owning stock may
be inclined to support such investments. In addition,
ownership of stock by outside directors may give them
additional power and prestige (Finkelstein 1992). All of
these factors suggest that outside directors owning a sig-
niﬁcant percentage of the stock will be inclined to support
corporate social investments that increase corporate CSR
ratings. Therefore, we hypothesize:

H2b Outside director ownership is positively associated
with the CSR rating of a ﬁrm.

Foreign Ownership

It is assumed that higher levels of investment from abroad
might indicate a greater inﬂuence of foreign practices (e.g.,
Jeon et al. 2011; Yoshikawa et al. 2010). As an example,
the current trends of CSR implementation in many Asian
countries have been largely affected by Western-style
management practices, which we assume to have higher
levels of social engagement. Empirical ﬁndings also sup-
port this argument. For instance, Chapple and Moon (2005)
noted that globalization enhances ﬁrms’ CSR engagement
in Asian countries. Brancato (1997) also argued that U.S.
shareholders have pressured ﬁrms
social
responsibility issues for more than 60 years.

to address

A potential caveat of that argument, however, can be
found in oversimplifying the attributes of foreign investors
and overlooking the variability of
their proﬁles. For
example, one may argue that all foreign investors are not
always in favor of social investments. Many U.S. and
European investment companies have often been involved
in antisocial behaviors (e.g., Davis and Kim 2007). Hence,
in order to assert the positive inﬂuence of foreign owner-
ship on CSR, it is necessary to identify the foreign owners’
proﬁles that may indicate their investment orientations and
preferences.

In the case of Korea, ﬁrst of all, a substantial proportion
of foreign investment has been conducted by countries
where CSR is seen as desirable such as Europe and North
America. According to the statistics by the Bank of Korea
in 2009, foreign investments are largely from Western

123


288

W. Y. Oh et al.

countries including the EU (32.9%) and the U.S. (20.2%).
Since investors from these regional areas might prefer
active CSR engagement (Brancato 1997; Chapple and
Moon 2005), foreign shareholders from these countries are
likely to show similar behavior when they exert their power
on Korean ﬁrms. For example, Jeon et al. (2011) found that
foreign investors with substantial shareholdings (more than
5%) tend to lead Korean ﬁrms to pay more dividends (i.e.,
payout ratio), which is one of the critical evaluative criteria
for CSR in Korea.

Second, according to the 2004 annual report of Korea
Financial Supervisory Services (KFSS), 99.8% of total
foreign shareholdings invested in Korean ﬁrms are held by
foreign ‘‘institutional’’ investors, including mutual funds
(50.9%), banks (20.2%), and pension funds (10.4%),
whereas only 0.2% of shareholdings are owned by indi-
vidual investors. This statistic indicates that foreign own-
ership in Korea can be best characterized as ‘‘institutional’’
ownership than other kinds.

Furthermore, the reform of Chaebol (i.e. Korean form of
business conglomerate meaning ‘‘business family’’, e.g.
Samsung, Hyundai, and LG) has long been a critical issue
in Korea, especially since the Asian ﬁnancial crisis in late
1990s. Old Chaebol ﬁrms before the ﬁnancial crisis were
criticized for their ‘‘low transparency of corporate deci-
sion-making, low accountability of managers, and little or
no separation of ownership and control’’ (Kim 2007,
p. 1168). Researchers have argued that foreign investment
has a positive impact on the reform the corporate gover-
nance of Chaebol (e.g. Haggard et al. 2003), since the
reformation was driven largely by the Korean government
as a response to criticism from foreign investors. Since the
goals of Chaebol reformation (Choi and Aguilera 2009) are
aligned with the fundamental ideas of CSR (i.e. empha-
sizing ﬁrms’ social, ethical, and environmental responsi-
bilities), foreign investors are also assumed to have a
positive impact on the spread of CSR practices among
many Korean ﬁrms. Even though Asian ﬁrms might not
always trail behind their Western counterparts in CSR
(Welford 2005), it is assumed that foreign investors can
possibly force Korean ﬁrms to establish transparent cor-
porate governance and consequently encourage them to
engage in CSR to some extent.

Another line of argument relies on the idea of uncer-
tainty reduction that CSR investments may bring. As
argued earlier (Siegel and Vitaliano 2007), CSR invest-
ments may be a way for companies to differentiate them-
selves and signal
their trustworthiness. Investing in a
foreign country is risky and uncertain due to increased
information asymmetries (Gehrig 1993).
In this case,
investing in socially responsible companies is a way to
reduce risk for the institutional investor as well as a way to
show its clients that the institutional investor itself is highly

123

investors,

reputable. Given this line of reasoning, it is rational for
foreign investors, especially institutional
to
invest in socially responsible companies. This line of rea-
soning does not preclude active participation of foreign
investors in decision making. Once the signiﬁcant invest-
ment has been made, the foreign investor will be likely to
pressure managers to make socially responsible decisions
so as not to lose its investment due to bankruptcy or reg-
ulatory/legal sanction. Given the discussions above, we
expect
that foreign ownership will be associated with
higher levels of ﬁrms’ CSR ratings.

H3 Foreign ownership is positively associated with the
CSR rating of a ﬁrm.

Methods

In order to test our hypotheses, we used a sample of
large, public Korean ﬁrms. As we mentioned,
large
Korean ﬁrms have adapted to the Western-style man-
agement practices, especially since the Asian ﬁnancial
crisis in late 1990s. In particular, Korean ﬁrms have been
paying increasing attention to their stakeholder-oriented
practices such as CSR participation. Previous articles
found that Korea is one of the few Asian countries that
focus on the ﬁrms’ social responsibility (e.g., see Chapple
and Moon 2005). In this sense, Korea offers an inter-
esting setting for examining the links between ownership
and CSR ratings.

Sample

All our sample ﬁrms are large Korean ﬁrms listed on
Korean Stock Exchanges. We initially selected target ﬁrms
that appear in the list of ‘‘2006 top-200 best corporate
citizens’’, assessed by a leading Korean CSR institution,
Korea Economic Justice Institute (KEJI). The CSR ratings
are ofﬁcially labeled as KEJI Index. The trustworthiness of
the KEJI Index could be manifested by the 20-year-long
history of publication (since its inception in 1991) as well
as its extensive usage. The 2006 KEJI Index was based
upon the CSR ratings in 2005 (i.e., 2006 is the year of
publication).

We also collected ﬁrm-level data using the Korea Listed
Companies Association’s Directory of Corporate Man-
agement (i.e. for more details, see Kim 2005, 2007) and
KISVALUE, a Korean electronic database similar
to
COMPUSTAT in the U.S. Some of the ﬁrms in our sample
do not have detailed information of the ownership structure
such as institutional holdings by each ﬁnancial institution.
Due to the lack of full data availability, our ﬁnal sample
size is 118 ﬁrms.


Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate Social Responsibility

289

Variables

CSR Ratings (KEJI Index)

KEJI Index relies on multiple distinct data sources to
inform the ratings and analysis. It is known that data are
collected in a disciplined process from a wide variety of
companies, the Korean government, nongovernment orga-
nizations, and media sources. Firms are rated with stan-
dardized values based on the original interval scales (i.e.,
A, B, C, D, and E) in seven major sub-domains, including
Environment, Community, Corporate Governance, Corpo-
rate Integrity, Customer Satisfaction with Product Quality
& Safety, Employee Relations, and Long-term Orientation.
These domain-speciﬁcs appear to be comparable to Kinder,
Lydenberg, Domini Research & Analytics (KLD) ratings in
the U.S.1 Seventeen analysts—six KEJI’s senior analysts
and eleven high-proﬁle university faculty with doctoral
degrees in economics and business—are known to be
involved in creating the KEJI Index. For quality assurance,
the KEJI auditing committee, composed of multiple public
accountants, performs a quality review of every company
proﬁle, updating for content and ratings quality. A full
score of KEJI Index is 75. We used 2006 KEJI Index,
which represents the CSR ratings in 2005.

Ownership Structure

All ownership data were collected based on both the Korea
Listed Companies Association’s Directory of Corporate
Management and KISVALUE. We categorized ownership
structure into institutional ownership, managerial owner-
ship, and foreign ownership. First, under the umbrella term
of institutional ownership, we distinguished four different
types of institutional owners in our analysis: (1) public
pension funds, (2) insurance ﬁrms, (3) securities ﬁrms, and
(4) investment and commercial banks. There are four major
public pension programs in Korea; National Pension,
Government Employees Pension, Military Personnel Pen-
sion, and Teachers’ Pension (for private school teachers).
Institution_Pension Funds is the sum of ownership by
all pension funds
including these major ones. We
also collected the other ownership variables such as
Institution_Insurance (ownership by insurance ﬁrms),
Institution_Securities (ownership by securities ﬁrms), and
Institution_Banks (ownership by investment/commercial
banks). Second, with respect to managerial ownership, we
distinguished TMT ownership from Outside Director
Ownership. These variables are calculated as the number of

1 KLD ratings consist of multiple sub-domains: Environment,
Community, Diversity, Employee Relations, Human Rights, Product
Quality and Safety, and Corporate Governance.

shares owned by top managers and outside directors divi-
ded by the total number of outstanding shares. Finally, we
included Foreign Ownership, which is the percentage of
ownership by foreign investors. All ownership information
is the average of years 2002, 2003, and 2004. Thus, we
have an average 2-year time lag between the measurement
of the independent variables (ownership structure) and the
measurement of the dependent variable (CSR ratings). This
approach to measurement might not entirely establish
causality but helps in interpreting the results as an effect of
Ownership Structure on CSR, not vice versa.

The descriptive statistics for all shareholders such as
means, medians, and standard deviations are reported in
Table 1. Overall, pension funds (17.17%) are the most
signiﬁcant institutional shareholder in our sample. Man-
agers (0.11%) and outside directors (less than 0.01%) have
relatively small proportions of outstanding shares. Foreign
investors (13.71%) also have a signiﬁcant percentage of
ownership in our sample ﬁrms.

Control Variables

We included several control variables in order to control
industry and ﬁrm characteristics. Firm age, size,
for
ﬁnancial performance,
leverage, and industry dummies
were included in the analysis. First, previous research
found that Firm Age may be positively (Roberts 1992;
Moore 2001) or negatively (Cochran and Wood 1984)
associated with the ﬁrm’s CSR engagement. Firm age was
calculated by the number of years since its foundation. We
also measured Firm size by taking the natural logarithm of
its total sales, one of the most frequently used measures for
ﬁrm size (e.g., Hillman et al. 2007; Hambrick and Cannella
2004; Sanders and Boivie 2004). In addition, we controlled
for ﬁrms’ previous ﬁnancial performance in order to avoid
the alternative explanation by slack-resources
theory
(Waddock and Graves 1997). Slack-resource theory sug-
gests that because more proﬁtable ﬁrms have more orga-
nizational slack, they are likely to be more committed to
CSR participation. Therefore, we controlled for ﬁnancial
performance by including return on assets (ROA) and

Table 1 Descriptive statistics of shareholders (%)

Mean Median S.D. Max. Min.

Institution_Pension Funds

17.17

11.62

15.40

60.86

0.00

Institution_Insurance

Institution_Securities

Institution_Banks

TMT ownership

Outside director ownership

0.43

2.86

5.58

0.11

0.00

Foreign ownership

13.71

0.00

0.36

4.08

0.09

0.00

6.00

1.24

7.69

0.00

7.15

53.05

0.00

6.50

35.18

0.00

0.11

0.00

0.52

0.00

0.02

0.00

16.69

90.00

0.00

123


290

W. Y. Oh et al.

leverage by measuring Debt Ratio. Debt ratio was calcu-
lated as long-term debt divided by total assets. In order to
control for any potential
industry effects, we included
industry dummies provided by KEJI. Our samples indicate
that 45 ﬁrms fall into electronics/IT industry, 39 ﬁrms for
metal/steel/chemistry industry, and 34 ﬁrms for food/tex-
tile/paper industry. Thus, we created the two industry
dummies
(metal/steel/chemistry and food/textile/paper)
and included them in the analysis (electronics/IT is the
reference industry category). All control variables, except
industry dummies, are the average over 2002, 2003, and
2004. This again created a time lag so that all our predic-
tive variables are measured as an average of 3 years prior
to measuring CSR ratings.

Results

The means, standard deviations, and correlations for the
sample ﬁrms except industry dummies are presented in
Table 2. The average KEJI Index is approximately 47.46
(out of the full score 75) with a standard deviation of 2.46.
Correlation results indicate that KEJI Index is positively
associated with institutional ownership by pension funds
and banks as well as by foreign ownership, whereas it is
negatively associated with TMT ownership.

Results of OLS regression analysis are reported in
Table 3. As the base model, Model 1 has all of the control
variables. Firm size (P B 0.001) is positively associated

with CSR while high debt ratio (P B 0.05) has a negative
relationship with CSR. These ﬁndings are consistent with
existing theoretical frameworks. For example, the institu-
tion-legitimacy perspective (e.g. Stanwick and Stanwick
1998) indicates that institutional pressures often drive lar-
ger ﬁrms to engage in CSR activities more actively than
smaller ﬁrms. Moreover, slack-resource theory (e.g. Wad-
dock and Graves 1997) implies that since a high level of
debt makes it difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to continue to satisfy
multiple stakeholders’ expectations, it discourages man-
agers from committing to long-term-focused CSR and
forces them to concentrate on increasing the current proﬁts.
We also found that ﬁrms in food/textile/paper industry
were more likely to have higher CSR ratings (P B 0.05),
whereas there was no signiﬁcant difference between ﬁrms
in metal/steel/chemistry industry and the baseline case of
electronics/IT industry.

Hypotheses for the potential effects of institutional
ownership, managerial ownership, and foreign ownership
on CSR were tested in Models 2, 3, 4 and 5, respectively.
Hypothesis 1a suggested that overall institutional owners
will have a positive effect on the ﬁrms’ CSR ratings. Model
2 supports this hypothesis: the sum of all institutional
holdings (P B 0.01) is positively associated with CSR
ratings. In model 3, we tested the effects of each institu-
tional owner on ﬁrm’s CSR engagement. Hypothesis 1b
suggested that long-term oriented investors may be more
likely to support CSR. Our results provide a partial support
for Hypothesis 1b: while the long-term investors (i.e.

Table 2 Descriptive statistics and correlations

Mean S.D.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Firm age

Log sales

ROA

18.80

13.52

9.61

2.53 -0.12

4.50

5.03 -0.06 -0.06

Debt ratio

49.87

31.26 -0.02

0.56** -0.36**

Institution_

17.17

15.40 -0.07

0.14

0.02

0.04

Pension
Funds

Institution_
Insurance

Institution_
Securities

Institution_

Banks

0.43

1.24 -0.12

0.22*

0.12

0.00 -0.03

2.86

7.15 -0.13

0.17

0.08

-0.00 -0.13

0.40**

5.58

6.50

0.13

0.23* -0.21* -0.01

0.02

0.06

-0.02

TMT ownership

Outside director

0.11

0.00

0.11 -0.09 -0.09

0.13

-0.05 -0.37** -0.13

-0.13 -0.21*

0.00 -0.07 -0.17

-0.02

-0.09 -0.14

-0.06

-0.07 -0.12

0.09

ownership

Foreign

ownership

13.71

16.69 -0.09

0.21*

0.40** -0.17

0.03

0.16

0.02

0.09

-0.15

-0.01

CSR ratings

47.46

2.46

0.06

0.17

0.07

-0.05

0.20*

0.06

0.06

0.31** -0.31** -0.11

0.33**

* P \ 0.05, ** P \ 0.01 level, two-tailed coefﬁcient test (N = 118)

123


Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate Social Responsibility

291

Table 3 Regression analyses
(CSR rating is the dependent
variable)

Note: Standard errors are in
parentheses. R-square
signiﬁcance tests are based on
F values
  P \ 0.1, * P \ 0.05,
** P \ 0.01, *** P \ 0.001
level, two-tailed coefﬁcient test
(N = 118)

Variable

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

-0.026

(0.533)

1.155*

(0.564)

0.021

(0.024)

0.081

(0.513)

1.201*

(0.541)

0.022

(0.023)

0.446***

0.315**

(0.120)

-0.014

(0.050)

-0.024*

(0.011)

(0.122)

-0.013

(0.048)
-0.020 
(0.011)

4.137**

(1.298)

Metal/steel/chemistry industry

Food/textile/paper industry

Firm age

Log sales

ROA

Debt ratio

Institutional ownership (overall)

Institution_Pension Funds

Institution_Insurance

Institution_Securities

Institution_Banks

Managerial ownership

Top management team (TMT)

Outside director

Foreign ownership

0.066

(0.521)

1.128*

(0.542)

0.019

(0.023)
0.244 
(0.132)

0.012

(0.050)

-0.014

(0.011)

0.032*

(0.014)

0.087

(0.207)
0.078 
(0.040)

0.086*

(0.038)

-0.008

(0.528)

1.112*

(0.545)

0.015

(0.023)

0.386**

(0.119)

0.004

(0.048)

-0.023*

(0.011)

-0.073

(0.518)

0.154*

(0.547)

0.024

(0.023)

0.320*

(0.125)

-0.059

(0.051)

-0.017

(0.011)

-6.328**

(2.066)

-83.885

(372.275)

0.041**

(0.015)

Intercept

42.089***

42.476***

42.911***

43.551***

42.998***

R2
4R2

(1.503)

0.147**

(1.447)

(1.504)

(1.557)

(1.497)

0.222***

0.245***

0.219***

0.203***

0.075**

0.098*

0.072**

0.056**

pension funds) have a positive relationship with CSR rat-
ings (P B 0.05), investments by banks also have a positive
relationship (P B 0.05) with CSR among the hypothesized
short-term investors. Investments by securities ﬁrms are
marginally signiﬁcant (P B 0.10) and shareholdings by
insurance companies are insigniﬁcant. Insurance compa-
nies own less than half a percent of stock on average and
they invested only 56 ﬁrms in our sample. These facts
indicate that the effect of ownership by insurance compa-
nies is relatively limited. Further interpretation will be
elaborated in the discussion section.

Hypothesis 2a stated that managers may be short-term
oriented, especially in institutional contexts that do not
force managers to invest in CSR and allow managers to
pursue their own agendas or founding family’s interests at
the expense of other shareholders. Our results in Model 4

support Hypothesis 2a (P B 0.01). Thus, ownership by top
managements has a signiﬁcant negative effect on CSR
ratings. However, hypothesis 2b, which assumed a positive
relationship between outside director ownership and CSR
ratings, is not supported. This ﬁnding, however, does not
necessarily mean that outside director ownership never has
anything to do with CSR ratings. A more convincing rea-
son may be found in the extremely low levels of outside
director ownership in Korea (see Table 1). The size of
stock holdings by outside directors may not have been
sufﬁcient to generate any signiﬁcant effect.

Finally, hypothesis 3 was tested to examine the rela-
tionship between foreign ownership and CSR ratings. As
predicted, Model 5 indicates that foreign ownership was
found to be positively associated with CSR ratings
(P B 0.01). We interpret this result as conﬁrmation of the

123


292

W. Y. Oh et al.

fact that foreign investors, most of whom come from North
America and Europe, may place a relatively greater
emphasis on socially responsible business practices. The
reason would be their institutional norms at home, which
usually encourage social responsibility of business. Foreign
investors are also likely to be long-term oriented, given the
fact that most of them are institutional investors. Finally,
foreign investors will be likely to pressure Korean ﬁrms to
adopt socially responsible practices because of their desire
to signal to their clients that these investors are reliable and
responsible ﬁrms.

We do not test the full model with all independent
variables at once for the following reasons: (a) our vari-
ables might not be mutually exclusive and (b) there is a
possible lack of independence among the owners’ deci-
sions. First, each ownership variable can be overlapped
(e.g. double counting). For instance, an investment by a
European pension fund might be regarded as both an
institutional holding and foreign ownership at the same
time. Second, a potential problem with our dataset is the
possible lack of independence among various investors’
decisions. For example, it is possible that foreign investors
may experience more severe information asymmetry
problems. In that case they might imitate Korean institu-
tional
investors’ decisions. Another possibility is that
Korean institutional investors may follow the lead of large
foreign investors. Either way, including the unmodiﬁed
variables for institutional ownership and foreign ownership
in the same equation would violate the assumption of OLS
regression about independence of residuals.

In order to correct these issues, we used 2-stage least
squares (2SLS) regression, putting all of the variables in
the same equation. We performed the ﬁrst stage analysis by
regressing foreign investment on the other independent and
control variables and then using the residuals as the new
foreign ownership variable in the second stage OLS
regression, thereby controlling for any effects that institu-
tional investors may have had on the decisions made by
foreign investors. The same technique was used for the
opposite effect of foreign ownership on institutional own-
ership. Two sets of 2SLS regressions generated similar
results with our original OLS regression: a positive effects
of ownership by institutions and foreign investors on CSR
as well as negative effects of top manager holdings on
CSR2.

In sum, all key owners signiﬁcantly explain more vari-
ance in CSR ratings as one can see in the R-square change
over the control model; overall institutional holders (7.5%),
managerial ownership (7.2%), and foreign ownership

2 Although the results of two 2SLS regressions are not reported here
due to identical ﬁndings with our OLS regression models, additional
results are available from the authors upon request.

123

(5.6%). This indicates that ownership structure has signif-
icant effects on the ﬁrm’s CSR engagement. Speciﬁcally,
ownership by institutions including pension funds, invest-
ment/commercial banks, and securities ﬁrm (albeit only
marginal) are positively associated with the ﬁrm’s CSR
rating. In addition, foreign ownership, mainly from the
countries where CSR is well established such as the U.S.
and Europe, is also positively related to the CSR rating.
Ownership by top managers is negatively associated with
CSR engagement and outside director ownership is not
signiﬁcant.

Discussion

Based on the argument that shareholders have different
motivations and time horizons for corporate decisions (e.g.,
Hoskisson et al. 2002), we tested if different owners have
distinct inﬂuences on the ﬁrm’s CSR engagement. We
found that, as predicted, investors with long-term orienta-
tion such as large institutional shareholders and foreign
investors support the ﬁrm’s CSR initiatives. However, top
managers were found not to support active engagement in
CSR. We will discuss the ﬁndings based on existing the-
oretical frameworks and the Korean context.

Effects of Institutional Ownership on CSR

Our results show that ownership by large institutions such
as pension funds and banks is positively associated with
CSR ratings. Institutional shareholders holding signiﬁcant
ﬁrm equity cannot easily sell their stocks without severely
lowering the stock price (e.g. Pound 1992), so their
investments are likely to be based upon the long-term
competitiveness of the ﬁrm. We also assumed that certain
types of institutions (i.e. insurance companies, banks, and
securities ﬁrms) may pay more attention to short-term
performance, which induces less investment
in CSR.
However, our results suggest that ownership by banks and
securities ﬁrms (albeit marginal) is also positively associ-
ated with CSR ratings.

There are a few reasons for this ﬁnding. First, even
though ﬁnancial investors such as banks and securities
ﬁrms may be under more pressure for immediate economic
gain than pension funds, these institutional owners may be
unable to easily divest their shares without signiﬁcantly
lowering the stock price. Accordingly,
they cannot be
purely short-term oriented if they have signiﬁcant levels of
ownership. Second, banks and securities ﬁrms tend to
consider not only potential returns but also ﬁnancial risks
when they make investment decisions. Investment in a ﬁrm
that is socially irresponsible is not efﬁcient (Graves and
Waddock 1994) because socially irresponsible ﬁrms are


Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate Social Responsibility

293

exposed to the higher risk of regulatory action, legal pun-
ishment, or consumer activism. In this sense, banks and
securities ﬁrms might achieve similar return with less risk
by investing in ﬁrms with higher social performance.

Finally, the Korean government bailed many ﬁnancial
institutions out in a process of recovering from the Asian
ﬁnancial crisis. For example, the government took over
Woori Finance Group, one of the largest ﬁnancial groups in
Korea, in 1998 after injecting 12.8 trillion won (i.e. 10.8
billion U.S. dollars) in public funds to bail out Woori Bank
and its peers that later consolidated into a holding com-
pany. Thus, ﬁnancial institutions are not independent from
the inﬂuence of
the Korean government, which has
emphasized the importance of institutions’ social respon-
sibility as a ﬁnancial resource provider, rather than a short-
term economic gain seeker. Since ﬁnancial institutions are
under the government inﬂuence, it is hard for them to over-
emphasize economic gain at
social
responsibility.

the expense of

Effects of Managerial Ownership on CSR

In addition, we tested the effects of managerial ownership
by top managers and outside directors on CSR ratings.
Agency theory implies that managerial ownership can align
potentially divergent
interests of the shareholders and
managers. If CSR increases the ﬁrm’s value, as the good
management theory (Graves and Waddock 1994) suggests,
managerial ownership leads to more active engagement in
CSR. In contrast with this prediction, our ﬁndings indicate
that ownership by Korean top managers is negatively
associated with CSR ratings. The negative relationship
between managerial ownership and CSR could be under-
stood in the Korean context. Korean large ﬁrms including
Chaebol have been characterized by ‘‘little or no separation
of ownership and control’’ (Kim 2007). It indicates that
Chaebol family members and relatives, who also own
signiﬁcant amount of shares, frequently serve as managers
of the ﬁrm or exert signiﬁcant inﬂuence on managers. They
have been criticized for misbehavior; for instance, a study
of 250 Korean ﬁrms belonging to 38 family-run con-
glomerates found that a quarter of them revealed irregular
transaction records aiming at enriching the Chaebol family
(Albrecht et al. 2010; Moon 2006). Chang (2003), in a
study of 419 Chaebol afﬁliates ﬁrms during the period
1986–1996, also found that larger shareholders who are
also managers are able to expropriate value from other
shareholders. Thus, managers from the Chaebol family
with signiﬁcant shares are likely to overuse their power
given by the formal title and ownership. These behaviors
are against the ﬁrm’s ethical and social responsibility. In
this sense, ownership by managers in Korea might be
associated with decisions only enriching the family or

relatives of Chaebol even at the expense of other public
stakeholders, in turn, reducing the ﬁrm’s CSR ratings.

Furthermore, it is surprising that managers have a rela-
tively small proportion of share (mean = 0.11%), but exert
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on CSR ratings. Even though their
stockholdings are relatively small, they might have more
organizational decision power by complex ownership
characteristics such as ‘‘pyramid structures’’ and ‘‘cross-
holdings’’ (for detail see Chang 2003; Claessens et al.
2000). In this case, decision rights or voting rights fre-
quently exceed the rights formally entitled by ownership
size. Chaebol (i.e. business groups), usually consists of a
number of diversiﬁed ﬁrms, which is similar to multidivi-
sional organization, under which individual companies
function as operating divisions. Since individual ﬁrms are
often under inﬂuence of group-level staff (Chang & Hong,
2000) or controlling family, managers might exert more
power beyond their entitled ownership, especially when
they are related to or controlled by the founding family of
Chaebol. The complex ownership structure and inﬂuence
of Chaebol might explain the signiﬁcant negative effects of
managerial ownership even though they have such a small
proportion of shareholdings.

Moreover, we did not ﬁnd evidence between outside
director ownership and CSR ratings. First, the majority of
Chaebol afﬁliates’ boardrooms are generally ﬁlled with
insiders and friends of Chaebol families (Chang 2003,
p. 241). Thus, outside directors might not encourage
managers, who are not favorable to ﬁrm’s social respon-
sibility, to engage in socially responsible actions. Second,
more importantly, the size of stock holdings by outside
directors may not have been sufﬁcient to generate any
signiﬁcant effect. In our Korean ﬁrm sample, most of our
sample ﬁrms do not report any outside director ownership
and the reported maximum outside director ownership is
only 0.02%. These facts imply that the effect of director
ownership in our sample is highly limited. Finally, since
powerful large shareholders such as Chaebol have resisted
the governance reform such as empowering outside direc-
tors (e.g. Cho and Kim 2007), the role of outside directors
is relatively restricted in Korea, especially when they do
not possess
literature
(Gedajlovic and Shapiro 1998; Pedersen and Thomsen
1997) found that the role of outside directors is limited for
those companies in which there is lack of separation of
ownership and control.

sufﬁcient ownership. Previous

Effects of Foreign Ownership on CSR

We found that the higher levels of investment into Korea
from abroad are associated with enhanced CSR ratings.
Chapple and Moon (2005) argued that ‘‘the higher the level
of investment into a country from abroad, the higher the

123


294

W. Y. Oh et al.

likely inﬂuence of foreign practices on domestic companies
(p. 420)’’. Since the current trends in CSR are inﬂuenced
by Western practices, the level of Western investments is
assumed to be related to CSR engagement. In particular,
investments in Korea from abroad are largely from Wes-
tern countries such as the E.U. (32.9%) and the U.S.
(20.2%), so these investors are likely to facilitate CSR
participation. As previously argued, since the Asian crisis
of late 1990s, Korean ﬁrms have been making more efforts
toward achieving responsible and transparent governance
structures. Foreign investors have played an important role
in this process by shareholder activism and board partici-
pation (Choi et al. 2007). In addition, as we argued earlier,
foreign investors may use CSR ratings as a guide to making
investments due to signiﬁcant
information asymmetries
between foreign investors and Korean companies. Having
made the investment based on the CSR ratings, foreign
investors may start to pressure Korean managers to further
improve their companies’ social performance.

Conclusion

We found that ownership structure has signiﬁcant effects on
the ﬁrm’s CSR engagement. This study makes at least two
signiﬁcant contributions. First of all, there have been rela-
tively few studies (e.g. Barnea and Rubin 2010; Johnson and
Greening 1999) on the relationship between ownership
structure and CSR. Our study reconﬁrms the argument of
previous studies that ownership structure affects strategic
decisions of the ﬁrm (Baysinger et al. 1991; Hart and Moore
1990; Kochhar and David 1996) by showing that investors
have different attitudes toward CSR engagement. In partic-
ular, we categorize owners into three separate groups:
institutional (banks, pension funds, insurance companies,
and securities ﬁrms), managerial (top management team and
outside directors), and foreign ownerships. No previous CSR
research investigated the effect of such detailed ownership
structure on CSR. We found that top managers in Korea tend
to be less interested in improving their ﬁrms’ CSR ratings
than institutional investors and foreign owners. The results
enhance our understanding of the relationship between
ownership structure and CSR.

Second, this study examined the relationship between
ownership structure and CSR in a non-Western context.
Most of the previous studies on CSR have largely been
conducted in an institutional environment where the CSR is
relatively well established such as Western Europe and the
U.S. (Belal 2001). However, recent studies pointed out that
corporations elsewhere in the world other than Europe and
the U.S., have recently adopted CSR practices (Chapple and
Moon 2005; Matten and Moon 2008). By examining CSR in
non-Western context, we found that the ownership–CSR

123

relationship has a distinct implication in Non-Western con-
texts as compared to Western contexts. Using a sample of
large Korean ﬁrms, our study reveals that foreign investors
played a signiﬁcant role in the adoption of Western-style
management practices like CSR engagement. In addition,
although ﬁnancial institutions are highly motivated by short-
term economic gain, ownership of ﬁnancial institutions
inﬂuenced by the government affects the ﬁrm’s CSR par-
ticipation differently. Our results imply that ﬁnancial insti-
tutions are motivated to encourage CSR if they are under the
inﬂuence of the government, as is the case in Korea. This
study shows that the relationship between ownership struc-
ture and CSR can vary by the institutional context. Jones
(1999) also emphasized the importance of socio-cultural
environment and national institutional arrangement on CSR.
In this sense, we can draw the conclusion that the dynamics
of an institutional environment affect the ﬁrm’s strategic
choices (Peng 2003).

In addition to these theoretical contributions, there are
some policy and practical implications that can be drawn
from our ﬁndings. The policy implications are as follows.
First, this article supports the legitimacy of the governance
reform which has been implemented by the Korean gov-
ernment since late 1990s. As we have shown, excessive
power of the dominant coalition such as the Chaebol
family is detrimental to CSR engagement. In order to
promote CSR engagement, the government might need to
monitor the ownership structure of the dominant coalition,
which is associated with the decision rights. Second, our
ﬁndings provide insightful implications for the govern-
ment’s foreign ownership restriction policy. Numerous
countries have adopted ownership restriction policies
toward foreign investors, especially in emerging economies
such as China (e.g. Bailey and Jagtiani 1994; Chen et al.
2001). However, the previous literature found that foreign
ownership is positively associated with ﬁnancial perfor-
mance (e.g. Greenaway 2009) and sustainability (e.g.
Kronborg and Thomsen 2009). Additionally, Choi et al.
(2007) noted that foreign investors, who entered Korean
stock market after the abolition of the foreign equity
restriction policy in 1998, played a signiﬁcant role as
external governance mechanisms. Our ﬁnding sheds addi-
tional light on the positive effects of foreign ownership.
Allowing foreign owners to own more of the domestic
companies might facilitate socially responsible manage-
ment and social investments.

Our ﬁndings also provide practical implications. First,
organizations need to be careful to administer any stock-
based compensation to managers and directors. Our ﬁnd-
ings suggest that there may be a detrimental effect of inside
ownership in terms of CSR engagement, especially when
there is a dominant coalition (e.g. the Chaebol family).
Second, our ﬁndings show that different owners may have


Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate Social Responsibility

295

divergent and even competing perspectives on CSR. For
instance, top management owners have a negative view-
point toward CSR, whereas institutional and foreign own-
ers have a positive outlook. Such competing strategic
preferences may incur inefﬁcient procedures on social
investment decisions. Hence, ﬁrms need to develop more
sophisticated intervention mechanisms (e.g., an introduc-
tion of a CSR-focused division and executive ofﬁcers;
namely, CRO) to deal with conﬂicting voices that may
produce procedural complications.

In spite of these contributions, this study is not without
limitation. First, our study was done in one institutional
context (Korea), therefore, generalization of our results
should be done with caution. It is possible that replication
of this study in other countries would produce different
results. For example, the negative effect of managerial
ownership on CSR ratings may also be partially attributed
to the Korean context, especially the family orientation of
Chaebol. Future research needs to extend the study’s
context by investigating the ownership–CSR association in
other Non-Western countries. Second, our data were col-
lected cross sectionally, which means that we cannot claim
causation (even though there is a two-year average lag
between the measurements of the independent and depen-
dent variables). In addition, due to the lack of longitudinal
data, we cannot tell how stable the relationships between
ownership structure and CSR ratings are across time.
Future research needs to conduct longitudinal examinations
to validate the ﬁndings of this study. Third, this study does
not explore the dynamic interactions among owners in
terms of CSR. Drawn from existing literature focusing on
the interactions among different shareholders regarding
various corporate outcomes (e.g., Chaganti and Damanpour
1991), future research needs to investigate the dynamics
among different types of owners regarding CSR.

In conclusion,

to date CSR has received substantial
attentions from both academic scholars and practitioners.
Among others, factors and conditions that determine CSR
have been of a primary interest. This study advances the
existing knowledge by proposing and providing evidence
that different owners have distinctive impacts on CSR
participation. It is our hope that this insight can have a
meaningful impact on the stream of research connecting
corporate governance to CSR.

References

Admati, A. R., Pﬂeiderer, P., & Zechner, J. (1994). Large shareholder
activism, risk sharing, and ﬁnancial market equilibrium. The
Journal of Political Economy, 102, 1097–1130.

Agle, B. R., Mitchell, R. K., & Sonnenfeld, J. A. (1999). Who matters
to CEOs? An investigation of stakeholder attributes and salience,

corporate performance, and CEO values. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 42, 507–525.

Aguilera, R. V., Rupp, D. E., Williams, C. A., & Ganapathi, J. (2007).
Putting the S back in corporate social responsibility: a multilevel
theory of social change in organizations. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 32, 836–863.

Albrecht, C., Turnbull, C., Zhang, Y., & Skousen, C. J. (2010). The
relationship between South Korean Chaebols and Fraud. Man-
agement Research Review, 33, 257–268.

Baek, J. S., Kang, J. K., & Park, K. S. (2004). Corporate governance
and ﬁrm value: Evidence from the Korean ﬁnancial crisis.
Journal of Financial Economics, 71, 265–313.

Bailey, W., & Jagtiani, J. (1994). Foreign ownership restrictions and
stock prices in the Thai capital market. Journal of Financial
Economics, 36, 57–87.

Barnea, A., & Rubin, A. (2010). Corporate social responsibility as a
conﬂict between shareholders. Journal of Business Ethics, 97,
71–86.

Baysinger, B. D., Kosnik, R. D., & Turk, T. A. (1991). Effects of
board and ownership structure on corporate R&D strategy.
Academy of Management Journal, 34, 205–214.

Belal, A. R. (2001). A study of corporate social disclosures in

Bangladesh. Managerial Auditing Journal, 16, 274–289.

Boehm, A. (2005). The participation of businesses in community

decision making. Business & Society, 44, 144–177.

Boyd, B. K. (1994). Board control and CEO compensation. Strategic

Management Journal, 15, 335–344.

Brancato, C. K. (1997). Institutional investors and corporate gover-
nance: beat practices for increasing corporate value. Chicago,
IL: McGraw-Hill.

Brickley, J. A., Lease, R. C., & Smith, C. W. Jr. (1988). Ownership
structure and voting on antitakeover amendments. Journal of
Financial Economics, 20, 267–291.

Bushee, B. (1998). The inﬂuence of institutional investors on myopic
R&D investment behavior. The Accounting Review, 73,
305–333.

Campbell, J. L. (2007). Why would corporations behave in socially
responsible ways? An institutional theory of corporate social
responsibility. Academy of Management Review, 32, 946–967.

Carroll, A. B. (1979). A three-dimensional conceptual model of
corporate social performance. Academy of Management Review,
4, 497–505.

Chaganti, R., & Damanpour, F. (1991). Institutional ownership,
capital structure, and ﬁrm performance. Strategic Management
Journal, 12, 479–491.

Chang, S. J. (2003). Ownership structure, expropriation and perfor-
mance of group-afﬁliated companies in Korea. Academy of
Management Journal, 46, 238–253.

Chang, S. J., & Hong, J. (2000). Economic performance of group-
afﬁliated companies in Korea: Intragroup resource sharing and
internal business transaction. Academy of Management Journal,
43, 429–448.

Chapple, W., & Moon, J. (2005). Corporate social responsibility in
Asia: A seven country study of CSR website reporting. Business
and Society, 44, 415–441.

Chen, G. M., Lee, B. S., & Rui, O. (2001). Foreign ownership
restrictions and market segmentation in China’s stock markets.
Journal of Financial Research, 24, 133–156.

Cho, D. S., & Kim, J. T. (2007). Outside directors, ownership
structures and ﬁrm proﬁtability in Korea. Corporate Gover-
nance: An International Review, 15, 239–250.

Choi, S., & Aguilera, R. V. (2009). CSR dynamics in South Korea
and Japan: A comparative analysis. In C. A. Mallin (Ed.),
Corporate
study approach
(pp. 123–147). Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.

responsibility: A case

social

123


296

W. Y. Oh et al.

Choi, J. J., Park, S. W., & Yoo, S. S. (2007). The value of outside
directors: Evidence from corporate governance reform in Korea.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 42, 941–962.

Claessens, S., Djankov, S., & Lang, L. P. H. (2000). The separation of
ownership and control in East Asian corporations. Journal of
Financial Economics, 58, 81–112.

Cochran, P. L., & Wood, R. A. (1984). Corporate social responsibility
and ﬁnancial performance. Academy of Management Journal,
27, 42–56.

Davis, G. F., & Kim, E. H. (2007). Business ties and proxy voting by

mutual funds. Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 552–570.

Davis, J. H., Schoorman, F. D., & Donaldson, L. (1997). Toward a
stewardship theory of management. Academy of Management
Review, 22, 20–47.

Dawkins, J., & Lewis, S. (2003). CSR in stakeholder expectations and
their implications for company strategy. Journal of Business
Ethics, 44, 185–193.

Den Hond, F., & De Bakker, F. G. A. (2007). Ideologically motivated
activism: How activist groups inﬂuence corporate social change
activities. Academy of Management Review, 32, 901–924.

Denis, D. J., Denis, D. K., & Sarin, A. (1997). Agency problems,
equity ownership, and corporate diversiﬁcation. The Journal of
Finance, 52, 135–160.

Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Agency theory: An assessment and review.

Academy of Management Review, 1, 57–74.

Eisenmann, T. R. (2002). The effects of CEO equity ownership and ﬁrm
diversiﬁcation on risk taking. Strategic Management Journal, 23,
513–534.

Falck, O., & Heblich, S. (2007). Corporate social responsibility:

Hart, O., & Moore, J. (1990). Property rights and the nature of the

ﬁrm. Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1119–1158.

Hillman, A. J., Shropshire, C., & Cannella, A. A. (2007). Organiza-
tional predictors of women on corporate boards. Academy of
Management Journal, 50, 941–952.

Hoskisson, R. E., Hitt, M. A., Johnson, R. A., & Grossman, W.
(2002). Conﬂicting voices: The effects of institutional ownership
heterogeneity and internal governance on corporate innovation
strategies. Academy of Management Journal, 45, 697–716.

Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. H. (1976). Theory of the ﬁrm:
Managerial behavior, agency costs, and ownership structure.
Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305–360.

Jeon, J. Q., Lee, C., & Moffett, C. M. (2011). Effects of foreign
ownership on payout policy: Evidence from Korean market.
Journal of Financial Market, 14, 344–375.

Johnson, R. A., & Greening, D. W. (1999). The effects of corporate
governance and institutional ownership types on corporate social
performance. Academy of Management Journal, 42, 564–576.

Jones, M. T.

(1999). The institutional determinants of social

responsibility. Journal of Business Ethics, 20, 163–179.

Kim, Y. (2005). Board network characteristics and ﬁrm performance
in Korea. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 13,
800–808.

Kim, Y. (2007). The proportion and social capital of outside directors
and their impacts on ﬁrm value: Evidence from Korea. Corporate
Governance: An International Review, 15, 1168–1176.

Kochhar, R., & David, P. (1996). Institutional investors and ﬁrm
innovation: A test of competing hypotheses. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 17, 73–84.

Doing well by doing good. Business Horizons, 50, 247–254.

Kronborg, D., & Thomsen, S. (2009). Foreign ownership and long

Fama, E. F. (1970). Efﬁcient capital markets: A review of theory and

term survival. Strategic Management Journal, 30, 207–219.

empirical work. The Journal of Finance, 25, 383–417.

Fama, E. F., & Jensen, M. C. (1983). Separation of ownership and

control. Journal of Law and Economics, 26, 301–325.

Finkelstein, S. (1992). Power in top management teams: Dimensions,
measurement, and validation. Academy of Management Journal,
35, 505–538.

Fombrun, C., & Shanley, M. (1990). What’s in a name? Reputation
building and corporate strategy. Academy of Management
Journal, 33, 233–258.

Fortune, (1993). What activist investors want. March, 8, 59–63.
Gedajlovic, E. R., & Shapiro, D. M. (1998). Management and
ownership effects: Evidence from ﬁve countries. Strategic
Management Journal, 19, 533–553.

Gehrig, T. (1993). An information based explanation of the domestic
bias in international equity investment. The Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 95, 97–109.

Graves, S. B., & Waddock, S. A. (1994). Institutional owners and
corporate social performance. Academy of Management Journal,
37, 1034–1046.

Greenaway, D., Guariglia, A., & Yu, Z. (2009). The more the better?
Foreign ownership and corporate performance in China.
Working Paper.

Hackston, D., & Milne, M. J. (1996). Some determinants of social and
environmental disclosures in New Zealand companies. Account-
ing Auditing and Accountability Journal, 9, 77–108.

Haggard, S., Lim, W. H., & Kim, E. S. (2003). Economic crisis and
corporate restructuring in Korea: Reforming the Chaebol.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hambrick, D. C., & Cannella, A. A. (2004). CEOs who have COOs:
Contingency analysis of an unexplored structural form. Strategic
Management Journal, 25, 959–979.

Lee, M. D. P., & Lounsbury, M. (2011). Domesticating radical rant
and rage: An exploration of the consequences of environmental
shareholder
resolutions on corporate environmental perfor-
mance. Business & Society, 50, 155–188.

Margolis, J. D., & Walsh, J. P. (2003). Misery loves companies:
Rethinking social initiatives by business. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 48, 268–305.

Matten, D., & Moon, J. (2008). ‘‘Implicit’’ and ‘‘Explicit’’ CSR: A
conceptual
framework for a comparative understanding of
corporate social responsibility. Academy of Management Review,
33, 404–424.

McConnell, J. J., & Servaes, H. (1990). Additional evidence on equity
ownership and corporate value. Journal of Financial Economics,
27, 595–612.

McWilliam, A., & Siegel, D. (2001). Corporate social responsibility
and ﬁnancial performance: Correlation or misspeciﬁcation?
Strategic Management Journal, 21, 603–609.

Moon, I. (2006, May 3). Korea’s Chaebol syndrome persists. Business Week.
Moore, G. (2001). Corporate social and ﬁnancial performance: An
industry. Journal of

investigation in the U.K. supermarket
Business Ethics, 34, 299–315.

Narayanan, M. P.

(1985). Managerial

incentives for short-term

results. Journal of Finance, 40, 1469–1484.

Orlitzky, M., Schmidt, F. L., & Rynes, S. L. (2003). Corporate social
and ﬁnancial performance: A meta-analysis. Organization Stud-
ies, 24, 403–441.

Pedersen, T., & Thomsen, S. (1997). European patterns of corporate
ownership: A twelve-country study. Journal of International
Business Studies, 28, 759–778.

Peng, M. W. (2003). Institutional transitions and strategic choices.

Academy of Management Review, 28, 275–296.

Hambrick, D. C., & Jackson, E. M. (2000). Outside directors with a
stake: The Linchpin in improving governance. California
Management Review, 42, 108–127.

Pfeffer, J. (1973). Size, composition, and function of hospital boards
linkage.

of directors: A study of organization-environment
Administrative Science Quarterly, 18, 349–364.

123


Effect of Ownership Structure on Corporate Social Responsibility

297

Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. R. (1978). The external control of
organizations: A resource dependent perspective. New York:
Harper & Row.

Pound, J. (1992). Beyond takeovers: Politics comes to corporate

control. Harvard Business Review, 70, 83–93.

Roberts, R. W. (1992). Determinants of corporate social responsibility
disclosure: An application of stakeholder theory. Accounting
Organizations and Society, 17, 595–612.

Sanders, W. G., & Boivie, S. (2004). Sorting things out: Valuation of
new ﬁrms in uncertain markets. Strategic Management Journal,
25, 167–186.

Schnatterly, K., Shaw, K. W., & Jennings, W. W. (2008). Information
advantages of large institutional owners. Strategic Management
Journal, 29, 219–227.

Sethi, S. P. (2005). Investing in socially responsible companies is a
must for public pension funds—Because there is no better
alternative. Journal of Business Ethics, 56, 99–129.

Shamsie, J. (2003). The context of dominance: An industry-driven
framework for exploiting reputation. Strategic Management
Journal, 24, 199–215.

Shleifer, A. (2000). Inefﬁcient markets: An introduction to behavioral

ﬁnance. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1997). A survey of corporate

governance. The Journal of Finance, 52, 737–783.

Siegel, D. S., & Vitaliano, D. F. (2007). An empirical analysis of the
responsibility. Journal of

strategic use of corporate social
Economics & Management Strategy, 16, 773–792.

Smith, M. P. (1996). Shareholder activism by institutional investors:
Evidence from CalPERS. The Journal of Finance, 51, 227–252.
Stanwick, P. A., & Stanwick, S. D. (1998). The relationship between
corporate social performance, and organizational size, ﬁnancial
performance, and environmental performance: An empirical
examination. Journal of Business Ethics, 17, 195–204.

Teoh, H. Y., & Shiu, G. Y. (1990). Attitudes towards corporate social
responsibility and perceived importance of social responsibility
information characteristics in a decision context. Journal of
Business Ethics, 9, 71–77.

Vogel, D. (2005). The market for virtue: The potential and limits of
corporate social responsibility. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institute.

Waddock, S. A., & Graves, S. B. (1997). The corporate social
performance—ﬁnancial performance link. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 18, 303–319.

Welford, R. (2005). Corporate social responsibility in Europe, North
America, and Asia. Journal of Corporate Citizenship, 17, 33–52.
Yoshikawa, T., Rasheed, A. A., & Del Brio, E. B. (2010). The impact
of ﬁrm strategy and foreign ownership on executive bonus
compensation in Japanese ﬁrms. Journal of Business Research,
63, 1254–1260.

Zahra, S. A. (1996). Governance, ownership, and corporate entrepre-
neurship: The moderating impact of
industry technological
opportunities. Academy of Management Journal, 39, 1713–1735.

123

