Journal of Business Logistics, 2012, 33(2): 128–144
Ó Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals
A Global Analysis of Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in
Supply Chains
Ayman Omar1, Beth Davis-Sramek2, Matthew B. Myers3, and John T. Mentzer3
1Kogod School of Business, American University
2University of Louisville
3University of Tennessee

G lobal supply chains are growing rapidly, and the ability to manage cross border logistics operations has become a necessity to

maintain a competitive advantage in a dynamic environment. This research addresses current gaps in the literature by investigating
the buyer–supplier integration dynamics in a global context with a focus on the antecedents and outcomes involved in the process.
Empirical data from 320 U.S. based manufacturing companies that source from overseas was collected and used to test the framework.
In addition to providing empirical evidence for the importance of orientation on collaboration, operational coordination, and integration
this research explains how manufacturing companies can enhance the ﬂexibility of their global suppliers and how that impact their logis-
tics as well as overall ﬁrm performance. Managerial and research implications are provided as well as areas for future research.

Keywords: global supply chain management; global supplier integration; logistics performance

INTRODUCTION

Dynamic changes in manufacturing and supply strategies
and increased levels of global competition have brought
about increased strategic attention to an integrated supply
chain (Handﬁeld et al. 1999; Ragatz et al. 2002; Kumar and
Kopitzke 2008; Manuj and Mentzer 2008; Chen et al. 2009a;
Shoenherr 2009). Reﬂected by how much activities in one
company are synchronized with the activities of its suppliers
or customers (Stock et al. 1999), supply chain integration
has become a strategic lever for performance improvement
(Zailani and Rajagopal 2005), and ﬁrms are increasingly
emphasizing continuity and a ‘‘seamless’’ end-to-end pipeline
(Frohlich and Westbrook 2001). Successful
integration
allows ﬁrms to link their internal processes to external sup-
pliers
advantage
through leveraging interwoven activities and processes that
cannot be easily replicated (Mentzer et al. 2001).

and customers,

competitive

creating

This study contributes to the signiﬁcant and growing body
of global supply chain research examining the integration–
performance link in several ways. Theoretically, this research
examines global supplier integration (GSI) antecedents and
outcomes and builds a corresponding theoretical model using
strategic management theory through the relational view of
competitive advantage. The central thesis of this theory is
that ﬁrms in a supply chain can develop relationships that
result in interorganizational processes which allow them to
systematically identify valuable know-how and then integrate
it across organizational boundaries (Dyer and Singh 1998).
Unlike other theories of competitive advantage, the rela-
tional view considers strategic relationships in the analysis

Corresponding author:
Beth Davis-Sramek, Department of Marketing and Logistics,
College of Business, University of Louisville, 152 College of
Business, Louisville, KY 40292, USA; E-mail: beth.davis@
louisville.edu

(Prior 2006), and consistent with this view, we examine a
speciﬁc relationship between a manufacturer and one of its
key global suppliers. Hence, strategic resources lie beyond
the boundaries of the ﬁrm (Das and Teng, 2000), and com-
petitive advantage stems from competing as an integral part
of a supply chain and no longer as individual ﬁrms (Green
and Inman 2005; Cagliano et al. 2006).

Because supply chain integration can encompass many links
in the supply chain, we narrow the scope of our research to
GSI, and we examine this phenomenon through the lens of the
relational view. Integration of suppliers with internal business
processes requires a set of skills that extend beyond mere order
placement to managing supply bases and combining resources
with key suppliers (Wagner 2003). Further, addressing GSI
(where at least one member is located cross border) has
become particularly germane as the changing landscape and
increasing level of globalization creates new opportunities for
ﬁrms engaged in the global business environment (Mentzer
et al. 2001; Kotabe and Murray, 2004). Since eﬀective supplier
integration will be a key factor for ﬁrm survival (Ragatz et al.
1997), further extension in a global context will be critical for
future ﬁrm success and performance gains.

integration antecedents

While there has been a tendency to focus on supplier inte-
gration activities in new product development (e.g., Petersen
et al. 2005a; Koufteros et al. 2007),
there is a lack of
research in other contexts (Wagner 2003) and also in exam-
ining supplier
(Eltantawy et al.
2009). We address this gap by examining how collaboration
and the management of product and information ﬂows
through operational coordination foster GSI. Further, there is
a contention that integration involves a ﬁrm’s disposition to
integrate with suppliers, and this stems from cultural and
attitudinal factors that result in fairly consistent behavior
(Wagner 2003). Thus, to operationalize the activities and
processes that facilitate structural
integration, ﬁrms must
develop a managerial philosophy that becomes a key element
of strategy, enabling ﬁrms to see the implications and impor-


Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in Global Supply Chains

129

tance of an integrated approach to the supply chain (Mentzer
et al. 2001; Hult et al. 2008). Therefore, we build on more
recent supply chain research and suggest that supply chain
orientation (SCO) is a critical antecedent of GSI.

With recent calls to provide more empirical evidence of
the relative and respective contributions of strategic supplier
integration (Swink et al. 2007; Eltantawy et al. 2009), our
extension of this growing body of research leads to the theo-
retical model shown in Figure 1. We expect that GSI will
positively inﬂuence supplier ﬂexibility, which in turn will
impact logistics eﬃciency and logistics eﬀectiveness, and both
then impact overall ﬁrm performance. Finally, we hypothesize
that cultural distance (CD) between a buyer and an overseas
supplier will negatively impact the relationship between SCO
and both collaboration and operational coordination eﬀorts.
In sum, the theoretical contribution resides in illustrating a
comprehensive picture of supplier integration in a global
context, which incorporates the impact to both the supplier
through ﬂexibility and to the manufacturer through increased
logistics and ﬁnancial performance.

THEORY BUILDING AND HYPOTHESES

In the following section, we ﬁrst oﬀer insights from the rela-
tional view that will be the foundation for GSI and the cor-
responding theoretical model. This discussion is followed by
the development of the theoretical constructs in the model
and the related hypotheses.

Relational view of competitive advantage

Research suggests that buyer–supplier relationships are shift-
ing from transaction to relationship-oriented (Dwyer et al.
1987; Davis-Sramek et al. 2007), with an emphasis on
realigning the supplier’s capabilities to the buyer’s needs
(Sanchez-Rodriguez 2009). Just as internal processes, prac-
tices, and people are assets, so are relational ones (Wagner
2006). The relational view of the ﬁrm provides an alternative

Figure 1: Theoretical framework.

route to competitive advantage compared to the industry
and resource-based views (Dyer and Singh 1998). Advanta-
ges of an individual ﬁrm are often linked to the network of
relationships in which the ﬁrm is embedded, where critical
resources
span ﬁrm boundaries and are entrenched in
interﬁrm routines and processes. Therefore, a singular focus
on ‘‘the ﬁrm’’ limits the explanatory power of models that
attempt to explain ﬁrm performance, and ﬁrms can combine
resources to realize an advantage through joint investments,
knowledge
scarce
resources, and more eﬀective governance mechanisms. Con-
sequently, the focus is on the supplier–customer relationship
and the embedded routines when examining models predict-
ing performance.

combining

exchange,

valuable

and

The relational view infers that performance is more signiﬁ-
cantly impacted when ﬁrms have the appropriate governance
structures in place (Cousins and Menguc 2006). Recent sup-
ply chain research has examined supply chain integration as
a vital governance mechanism (e.g., Frohlich and Westbrook
2001; Narasimhan and Das 2001; Ragatz et al. 2002).
Although ‘‘integration’’ is a broad term which describes a
variety of structural
linkages, ﬁrms can integrate diﬀerent
elements of their operations, including those that are both
tangible (such as product ﬂows and measurement), or intangi-
ble (such as relationships and information)
(Chen et al.
2009b). Regardless of its speciﬁc application, the contention
is that ﬁrms which engage in integrative activities will out-
perform less-integrated ﬁrms due to better alignment of
objectives and business processes, operational coordination,
and ﬁt (Swink et al. 2007).

Global supplier integration
As ﬁrms are being challenged to build superior supply
chains, supplier integration represents one signiﬁcant pro-
gram in these eﬀorts (Eltantawy et al. 2009). Strategic sup-
plier relationships represent a potent source of competitive
advantage stemming from the interorganizational collective
learning and a long-term focus on upgrading processes and
routines
interface (Wagner

in the manufacturer–supplier

Supplier Rela(cid:415)onship

Integra(cid:415)on and
Performance

Collabora(cid:415)on

h4b

h4a

h3

h11c

h5a

Global
Supplier

Integra(cid:415)on

h6

Supplier
Flexibility

Opera(cid:415)onal
Coordina(cid:415)on

h5b

h7

h8

Firm

Performance

Logis(cid:415)cs
Eﬃciency

h9

Overall

Performance

Logis(cid:415)cs

Eﬀec(cid:415)veness

h10

Rela(cid:415)onship
Orienta(cid:415)on

Supply Chain
Orienta(cid:415)on

h1

h11a

h2

h11b

Cultural
Distance


130

A. Omar et al.

2006). We focus speciﬁcally on GSI, which is deﬁned in this
context as the level in which activities between a manufac-
turer and a global supplier are structured and synchronized
(Cagliano et al. 2006; Koufteros et al. 2007; Swink et al.
2007). GSI allows manufacturers to meet production require-
ments through developing and eﬀectively exploiting both
supplier and plant capabilities and cost structures (Swink
et al. 2007). Therefore, an understanding of the drivers of
GSI is essential in order to enhance the advantages aﬀorded
to companies that initiate GSI activities.

Supplier ﬂexibility
Supplier integration outcomes typically consist of unique
links with suppliers that facilitate the ﬂow and quality of
materials into and out of buying ﬁrms (Eltantawy et al.
2009). The relational view suggests that GSI should impact
performance for both the manufacturer and the supplier
through integration behaviors and mechanisms (Cousins and
Menguc 2006). While integration is studied in the context of
performance outcomes for the manufacturing ﬁrm, research
is limited in examining the supplier outcomes of integration.

We extend this stream of research by focusing on supplier
ﬂexibility, deﬁned as the manufacturer’s perception of the
supplier’s ability to respond to changes in the environment,
including changes in supply and demand or changing risk
levels in the home country (Christopher, 2000). While ﬂexi-
bility has been most commonly associated with the manufac-
turing ﬂexibility literature, (e.g., Upton 1995), more recent
literature has extended this view to the broader supply chain
(Krajewski et al. 2005) to include more explicit interﬁrm ele-
ments (Kumar et al. 2006). This research stream remains lim-
ited, however, and there has been a call to include studies
that incorporate the ﬂexibility created by both upstream and
downstream supply chain partners (Stevenson and Spring
2009).

Antecedents to GSI and supplier ﬂexibility

Supply chain orientation
Recent evidence found that obstacles hampering supplier
relationships include behavioral elements such as lack of
trust, disparate goals, and incongruent communication struc-
tures (Forslund and Jonsson 2009). Another study found
that some ﬁrms are more ‘‘inclined’’ to integrate suppliers
than others, citing a strong relationship between the degree
of supplier integration and cultural or attitudinal factors
(Wagner 2003). The relational view indicates that relation-
ships which create competitive advantage require ﬁrms to
view exchange partners as collaborators rather than adver-
saries (Dyer and Singh 1998). For ﬁrms that encourage GSI,
employees must do diﬀerent things, make diﬀerent decisions,
and perform in diﬀerent ways (Kim, 2009). They must be
able communicate eﬃciently with their suppliers, and often,
this involves a signiﬁcant attitudinal shift for ﬁrms (Cousins
and Menguc 2006).

Given this disposition needed for GSI, SCO has been
deﬁned in the literature as the mindset that cooperation,
mutual dependence, trust, and shared goals between supply
chain partners positively impact performance (Mentzer et al.

that

factor

incorporates

second order

2001). Therefore, SCO is a philosophy adopted by ﬁrms
to facilitate GSI, while supply chain management is the
implementation of the philosophy. Consistent with previous
research (Min et al. 2007), we model SCO as a multi-
dimensional,
the
behavioral elements necessary for creating the mindset facili-
tating the orientation for integration. Trust is the extent of
conﬁdence the manufacturer has in the supplier’s integrity
and the perception that the supplier will fulﬁll its obligations
(Moorman et al. 1993). Commitment is the manufacturer’s
enduring desire to maintain a valued relationship with the
supplier (Moorman et al. 1993). Cooperative norms are the
manufacturer’s perceptions of
the joint eﬀorts between
the ﬁrm and its supply chain members to achieve its goals
(Siguaw et al. 1998). Organizational compatibility refers to
the degree that the manufacturer and global supplier have
similar cultures and management styles (Bucklin and Seng-
upta 1993). Finally, top management support is the amount
of encouragement and motivation provided by top manage-
ment to work with the supplier and maintain a strong rela-
tionship with them (Jaworski and Kohli 1993). The
collection of these relational variables reﬂect an organiza-
tional culture that is an antecedent to successful execution of
networking with supply chain partners.

short-term ﬂows,

Operational coordination and collaboration
For this research, we view operational coordination as the
management of systems, processes and product ﬂow, and the
alignment of decisions between the manufacturer and a glo-
bal supplier (Sahin and Robinson 2002). It allows for activi-
ties which facilitate better alignment with global supply
chain objectives (Fugate et al. 2006) and represents the more
operational and tangible elements concerned with better syn-
including transactions,
chronization of
materials movements, and order processes
(Swink et al.
2007). Additionally, we focus on collaboration, which has
often been used interchangeably with coordination (Zacharia
et al. 2009). We distinguish the two, however, by proposing
that operational coordination reﬂects more tangible elements
while collaboration is the informal behavior that occurs
between the manufacturer and global supplier based on
resource and information sharing. Behaviors that encourage
information, knowledge, and resource exchange must be
present in supply chain relationships for ﬁrms to achieve
common goals or objectives (Ellinger et al. 2000).

relationships among partners

As Figure 1 illustrates, SCO is a necessary prerequisite of
operational coordination, collaboration, and GSI. Establish-
ing the organizational
to
attain system and operational coordination and collabora-
tion is a challenging task, but research suggests that volun-
tary (vs. contractual or adversarial) information exchange
in informal and
and collaboration are more
‘‘close’’ manufacturer–supplier
et al.
1988). Governance structures that employ informal safe-
guards such as trust and commitment are more likely to
decrease conﬂict, increase cooperation, and encourage long-
term relationships (Morgan and Hunt 1994). The relational
view also proposes that advantage is realized if ﬁrms have
compatible cultures which facilitate coordinated action and

eﬀective
exchanges

(Frazier


Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in Global Supply Chains

131

collaborative decision-making processes (Dyer and Singh
1998). Therefore, we contend that the extent of GSI should
likewise be impacted by the overall philosophy (mindset) of
the manufacturer.

H1: Supply chain orientation is positively related to col-

laboration.

H2: Supply chain orientation is positively related to

operational coordination.

H3: Supply chain orientation is positively related to glo-

bal supplier integration.

Firms that pursue integration with suppliers create struc-
tures and operational linkages, and develop behaviors that
enhance GSI (Metcalf et al. 1992; Wagner 2003). Two key ele-
ments that need to be present between companies to have an
integrated relationship are collaboration and operational
coordination (Ellinger et al. 2002; Fugate et al. 2006). There-
fore, antecedents that facilitate integration include both objec-
tive elements akin to operational coordination and behavioral
elements suggestive of collaboration (Petersen et al. 2005b).
In line with the relational view, competitive advantage is cre-
ated when ﬁrms develop superior overlapping knowledge
bases and interaction routines (Dyer and Singh 1998). Also
consistent with the literature,
integration requires ﬁrms to
take deliberate steps to coordinate and collaborate with select
global suppliers in order to jointly achieve objectives (Chen
et al., 2009b). Further, by strengthening relationships with
global supply chain members, ﬁrms can develop a unique set
of capabilities to enhance ﬂexibility, which helps to reduce
concept-to-customer cycle time, costs, and quality problems
(Ragatz et al. 2002). Thus, we expect that collaboration and
operational coordination between a ﬁrm and its supplier will
directly impact supplier ﬂexibility (Tracey 2004).

H4: Collaboration is positively related to (a) global sup-

plier integration, and (b) supplier ﬂexibility.

H5: Operational coordination is positively related to (a)

global supplier integration, and (b) supplier ﬂexibility.

Outcomes of GSI

There have been previous calls for further empirical research
on the link between integration and performance (Stank
et al. 2001; Wisner 2003; Rodrigues et al. 2004). Given that
the relational view oﬀers support for competitive advantage
speciﬁc to the buyer–seller relationship,
integration with a
key global supplier should impact performance. As Figure 1
illustrates, this research models performance outcomes con-
sistent with previous research which maintains that
the
impact of integration on ﬁrm performance is mediated by
‘‘intermediate’’ performance outcomes (e.g., Vickery et al.

2003; Droge et al. 2004; Cousins and Menguc 2006). The
proceeding hypotheses reﬂect the expected outcomes of GSI,
including the relationships among GSI, supplier ﬂexibility,
logistics eﬃciency,
logistics eﬀectiveness, and overall ﬁrm
performance.

In a constantly changing environment, ﬂexibility provides
ﬁrms the capacity to adapt, and integration is a necessary
prerequisite given the nature of
interﬁrm dependence
(Tracey 2004). Several studies have supported the notion
that higher levels of integration between supply chain part-
ners are crucial
for improved responsiveness and higher
ﬂexibility (e.g., Daugherty et al. 2006; Paulraj and Chen
2007). When the manufacturer and supplier are engaging in
collaborative behaviors and managing product and informa-
integration
tion ﬂow the result
between both ﬁrms. This
integration
should allow suppliers
to more quickly and eﬃciently
respond to changes when they arise.

is a stronger structural
increased level of

Early supplier involvement, partner development, opportu-
nity to leverage partner competency, and relationship com-
mitment can lead to greater ﬂexibility in supply chains.
Eﬀective processes achieved through GSI may enhance orga-
nizational responsiveness (Damanpour and Gopalakrishnan,
2001; Khazanchi et al. 2007), providing ﬁrms with organiza-
tional practices and expertise that could be used for develop-
ing
overall
operational and market ﬂexibility (Azadegan and Dooley
2010). Therefore, we expect that greater ﬂexibility will be
achieved when there is more interaction and learning among
supplier chain members which allow them to adapt quickly
and swiftly to unforeseen changes in the environment.

alternative

improving

solutions

and

the

H6: Global supplier integration is positively related to

supplier ﬂexibility.

Logistics and ﬁrm performance
Given the contention that GSI increases supplier ﬂexibility,
research which subsequently examines the eﬀect on the man-
ufacturer’s performance remains negligible (Avittathur and
Swamidass 2007). This research models the outcomes associ-
ated with performance related to logistics processes, speciﬁ-
cally, logistics eﬃciency (the function of resources utilized)
and logistics eﬀectiveness (the extent
to which goals are
achieved). When a global supplier can respond to unexpected
changes in customer demand or the environment, the manu-
facturer can improve eﬃciency by reducing redundancies,
conﬂicts, and confusion, all of which can decrease the associ-
ated logistics costs. Supplier ﬂexibility also allows for a more
uniﬁed response to shorten the time required to match sup-
ply and demand,
logistics
costs (Fugate et al. 2009).

lowering investments in overall

H7: Supplier ﬂexibility is positively related to logistics

eﬃciency.

Supplier ﬂexibility enables the manufacturer to meet these
goals through aligning the ‘‘promise to deliver’’ made by
the manufacturer with the actual delivery. Eﬀectiveness will


132

A. Omar et al.

also improve when greater supplier ﬂexibility results in a
faster response which should increase the likelihood of
meeting deadlines for pre-deﬁned goals. Thus, the custom-
ers’ perceived quality of delivered product and service is
enhanced.

H8: Supplier ﬂexibility is positively related to logistics

eﬀectiveness.

Finally, as supported by previous research (e.g., Stank
et al. 1999; Ellinger et al. 2000; Fugate et al. 2009), we exam-
ine the logistics performance ﬁ ﬁrm performance relation-
ship. Higher levels of logistics eﬃciency results from an
elimination of waste,
lower expenses, and reductions in
inventory and cash (Mentzer and Konrad 1991), all of which
increase return on assets and earnings. Likewise,
logistics
eﬀectiveness can impact customer satisfaction and repeat
purchasing, increasing top-line revenue.

H9: Logistics eﬃciency is positively related to ﬁrm per-

formance.

H10: Logistics eﬀectiveness is positively related to ﬁrm

performance.

The moderating eﬀects of national CD
Culture is the interactive aggregate of common characteris-
tics that inﬂuence a group’s response to its environment
(Cheung et al. 2010). Culture is a multilevel concept where
various levels of cultural phenomena are nested within each
other from the macro level of global culture,
through
national cultures, organizational cultures, group cultures,
and individual’s cultural values (Leung et al. 2005). Of these
types, national culture is most often examined in interna-
tional marketing research and has been deﬁned as patterns
of thinking, feeling, and acting rooted in common beliefs
and conventions of society (Nakata and Sivakumar 1996)
Traditionally, cross-national research rests on the premise of
culturally founded norm expectations being embedded in
bilaterally established relational
(Griﬃth and
Myers 2005; Cannon et al. 2010).

strategies

Intercultural exchange scenarios are determined jointly by
dyad partners, and are embedded with national cultural ele-
ments of each party in the exchange. Previous research on
intercultural encounters in the functioning of multinational
business organizations has suggested that CD between the
countries representing exchange partners will inﬂuence man-
agerial decision making in a global business environment
(Kogut and Singh 1988). These diﬀerences may cause dis-
parity in the levels of commitment, trust, dependence, and
shared goals of exchange partners (Cheung et al. 2010).
Relational norm governance mechanisms,
including the
exchange of knowledge and information between partners
(Zhang et al. 2003), are speciﬁc to each exchange partner
and diﬀer signiﬁcantly depending on culturally established
expectations. For example, collectivism can moderate the
relationship between dependence (a key SCO component)

and relational governance mechanisms such as cooperation
and coordination (see Roath et al. 2002). Cross-border buy-
ers and suppliers that have similar national cultures will
have less disparity in the way they view the value of shar-
ing information (Cheung et al. 2010) and have a stronger
propensity to coordinate operations collaborate on opera-
tionally related decisions, and establish more integrated
supply chain structures.

From this research, we hypothesize that the eﬀects of SCO
on collaboration and operational coordination mechanisms
are negatively inﬂuenced by CD between exchange partners.
We deﬁne CD as the diﬀerence in national culture between
the home country of the manufacturer and the home country
of the supplier (Hofstede 1980; Hutzschenreuter and Voll
2008). These cultural dimensions moderate how supply chain
partners perceive buyer–seller exchanges, and the greater the
CD between partners, the less likely the SCO of the ﬁrm will
have positive beneﬁts on collaboration, operational coordi-
nation, and integration. Thus:

H11: Cultural distance has a negative inﬂuence on the

relationships between supply chain orientation and
(a) collaboration, (b) operational coordination,
and (c) global supplier integration.

RESEARCH METHOD

The sampling procedure

In order to test the proposed theoretical model, we focused
on manufacturing ﬁrms based in the United States that
source from global suppliers. Consistent with the contentions
of the relational view, we drew out perceptions of the rela-
tionship between the manufacturer and a key global supplier.
The unit of analysis was the manufacturer’s perception of
the relationship with a key global supplier. Supply chain
experts and purchasing and logistics managers ensured con-
tent validity and assisted in a pretest.

The pretest was conducted in order to validate the mea-
sures in this research and to identify potential problems
related to face validity. The process also provided face valid-
ity of the measures. The ﬁve step process recommended by
Dillman (2000) was used for the implementation of the pre-
test survey. The pretest was administered through a web-
based survey, following Dillman (2000) using a list of manu-
facturers across multiple industries provided by InfoUSA.
From 425 contacts that qualiﬁed over the phone, 103
resulted in completed online surveys, yielding a response rate
of 24%. Respondents answered 77 substantive questions
related to the theoretical framework and 17 questions cap-
turing control variables and ⁄ or demographic-type questions.
The small sample size precluded use of conﬁrmatory factor
analysis (CFA), thus principal component factor analyses
assisted the evaluation of scale unidimensionality and Cron-
bach’s coeﬃcient alpha assessed scale reliability (Selnes and
Sallis 2003). Scales containing more than three items were
examined for potential improvement by assessing item–total


Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in Global Supply Chains

Table 1: Sample industry distribution

Table 2: Home country of global suppliers

311
313
315
321
322
324
325
326
332
333
334
336

Three-digit NAICS

Food
Textile mills
Apparel
Wood products
Paper
Petroleum and coal products
Chemicals
Plastics and rubber products
Fabricated metal products
Machinery
Computers and electronics
Transportation equipment
Total

n

23
26
24
31
26
25
28
25
24
27
38
23
320

%

7
8
8
10
8
8
9
8
8
8
12
7

Note: NAICS, North American Industry Classiﬁcation System.

correlation, communalities, Cronbach’s alpha if-item-deleted,
and the inter item correlation matrix. Preliminary evidence
for discriminant validity also relied on principal components
analysis and correlation matrices. In summary, the pretest
oﬀered provisional validation for both the newly developed
measures and literature-based scales.

The ﬁnal population frame was drawn from a list of manu-
facturers across multiple industries supplied by InfoUSA. The
initial list had 5,000 contacts. Pre qualiﬁcation phone calls
were made, and after identifying contacts that did not have
adequate supply chain knowledge, did not do business with
global suppliers, or could not be reached, the sampling frame
contained 1,452 entries. From this, 855 respondents agreed to
take the online survey, each of whom were mid- and top-level
logistics, purchasing, or supply chain managers, and had ﬁrst-
hand knowledge of their supplier relationships. After follow-
up phone calls to ensure participation,
the ﬁnal sample
yielded 320 responses (320 ⁄ 855 = 37% response rate).

The average relationship age between manufacturers sur-
veyed and their corresponding suppliers was 6 years. Less than
1% of the respondents reported annual sales of under $1 mil-
lion, while 11% had sales of over $500 million. Sixty percent
of respondents held job levels of director or higher, with the
remaining reporting middle-level manager positions (e.g., pur-
chasing manager or materials manager). Firms came from the
following industries: apparel ⁄ textiles, appliances, automotive,
chemicals ⁄ plastics, consumer packaged goods, electronics,
industrial products, medical ⁄ pharmaceutical, and aerospace.
Table 1 provides detail based on the primary three-digit NA-
ICS distribution. The respondents discussed a diverse range of
global suppliers that spanned across 33 countries. Table 2 lists
the home country of the global suppliers.

Capturing nonrespondent’s verbal answers to ﬁve items
and testing for diﬀerences against survey data responses
allowed for potential response bias evaluation (Mentzer and
Flint 1997). Speciﬁcally, 110 nonrespondents who had previ-
ously indicated they were qualiﬁed—but not interested or
capable to take the survey due to time constraints—were
contacted by phone and asked to respond to ﬁve questions

Country of supplier

Australia
Austria
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
China
Denmark
Ecuador
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
Malaysia
Mexico
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Russia
S. Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
UK
Venezuela
Total

n

1
1
1
6
41
102
2
1
2
7
25
1
11
1
1
2
10
23
1
3
22
2
1
1
1
6
4
4
5
15
3
12
2
320

133

%

0.3
0.3
0.3
1.9
12.8
31.9
0.6
0.3
0.6
2.2
7.8
0.3
3.4
0.3
0.3
0.6
3.1
7.2
0.3
0.9
6.9
0.6
0.3
0.3
0.3
1.9
1.3
1.3
1.6
4.7
0.9
3.8
0.6

100

(four items from the collaboration scale and their job title).
No signiﬁcant diﬀerences (p £ .05) were found between items
and verbal responses.

Measurement scales
SCO was modeled as a second order reﬂective construct with
ﬁve dimensions, which is consistent with other research mea-
suring SCO (e.g., Min et al. 2007). The items used to mea-
sure SCO were adapted from the existing literature with each
scale having seven points labeled strongly disagree (=1) to
strongly agree (=7). Items for trust were adapted from Do-
ney and Cannon (1997); commitment and cooperative norms
items were adapted from (Siguaw et al. 1998); organizational
compatibility items were adapted from Min et al. (2007); and
top management support items were adapted from Jaworski
and Kohli (1993). Since SCO was a second order construct,
a two step approach was taken to construct a composite
scale to be used in the overall CFA and structural models.
Table 3 outlines the SCO dimensions (trust, commitment,


134

Table 3: Supply chain orientation (SCO) dimensions and items

Scale

Trust

Reliability

93

Items

Mean

(T1) This supplier is trustworthy
(T2) We believe that this supplier keeps our best

interest in mind

(T3) This supplier is genuinely concerned that our

business succeeds

Commit.

91

(COM1) We expect our relationship to continue with

this supplier for a long time

(COM2) We will do what it takes to preserve our

relationship with this supplier

(COM3) The continuity of our relationship with this

supplier is very important to us.

Norms

93

(NRM1) We believe our supply chain members must

work together to be successful

(NRM2) We view our supply chain as a value added

piece of our business

(NRM3) We believe we can improve our performance

by adapting to any necessary changes with our
supplier

Comp.

91

(CMP1) The culture of our ﬁrm is similar to that of

this supplier.

(CMP2) Our executives have a management style

similar to this supplier

(CMP3) Our ﬁrm has a compatible corporate culture

to that of our supplier.

TMS

88

(TMS1) Top managers repeatedly encourage

SD

1.60
1.65

1.68

1.45

1.48

1.47

1.93

1.94

1.90

1.68

1.62

1.64

1.52

4.28
4.87

4.24

5.31

4.96

5.23

5.54

5.52

4.74

3.68

3.50

3.67

4.54

employees to maintain our relationship with this
supplier

(TMS2) Top managers repeatedly tell employees that
sharing valuable strategic ⁄ tactical information with
our supplier is important to improve our performance
(TMS3) Top management supports a stronger working

relationship with our supplier

3.97

1.67

4.72

1.48

A. Omar et al.

Item-to-total
correlation

.84
.89

.88

.81

.84

.84

.90

.92

.82

.82

.85

.83

.79

.84

.78

SCO ﬁt statistics: v2 = 138.37, df = 80, v2 ⁄ df = 1.729, comparative ﬁt index (CFI) = .98, and root mean square error of approximation
(RMSEA) = .048.

cooperative norms, organizational compatibility, and top
management support) and oﬀers the item-to-item correla-
tions. All items demonstrated good discriminant and conver-
gent validity, reliability, and a good ﬁt statistics of the CFA
model. Second, a composite scale for SCO was established
with ﬁve items representing the mean of each of the ﬁve
dimensions.

Collaboration was measured by asking respondents to
indicate the level of resource, information, and knowledge
sharing that takes place between their ﬁrm and their global
supplier with items adapted from Stank et al. (2001) and
Min et al. (2007). Respondents reﬂected on operational coor-
dination by indicating the degree of mechanisms used to
align product ﬂow and movement between their ﬁrm and
their supplier (Sahin and Robinson 2002; Romano, 2003)
with items adapted from Jap (2001). GSI was measured
through items adapted from Narasimhan and Das (2001)
and Swink et al. (2007) to assess the overall level of struc-

tural integration with a key global supplier. Flexibility was
measured by assessing how well the supplier could adapt
under changing conditions of supply, demand, and the exter-
nal environment (Swaﬀord et al. 2008).

Performance constructs were anchored by seven point
scales which compared the manufacturers’ performance with
that of their competitors. Adapted from Fugate et al. (2009),
logistics eﬃciency was assessed by asking how well cost
objectives were met, and logistics eﬀectiveness was measured
by asking the extent to which logistics objectives had been
achieved relative to competition. Firm performance was mea-
sured by perceptions of ﬁrm performance relative to compe-
tition along the dimensions of proﬁtability and growth (Min
et al. 2007). All survey items are shown in Table 4.

CD was measured by incorporating Hofstede’s (1980, 2001)
framework which identiﬁes ﬁve dimensions of cultural varia-
tion among nations. They include uncertainty avoidance, indi-
vidualism versus collectivism, power distance, masculinity


Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in Global Supply Chains

Table 4: Main survey items

Scale

Reliability

Items

Mean

Collaboration

93

(COL1) We share information with our supplier on operational

decisions

(COL2) We share knowledge and speciﬁc know–how with our

supplier on operational decisions

(COL3) We work closely with our supplier on issues related to

operational decisions

Operational

coordination

90

(COR1) We coordinate operations with our supplier
(COR2) Our ﬁrm and this supplier have systems or processes in

Integration

79

(OPI1) We have a high level of process integration with this

place to facilitate the movement and ﬂow of products
(COR3) We use one or more mechanisms to coordinate

operations with our supplier

supplier

(OPI2) Our operations are integrated with this supplier
(OPI3) We emphasize early supplier involvement in new

product development with this supplier

Flexibility

89

(FLEX1) This supplier can respond quickly to unexpected

changes in demand

(FLEX2) This supplier can respond quickly to unexpected

changes in supply

(FLEX3) This supplier can respond quickly to unexpected

political changes in the supplier’s home country

(FLEX4) This supplier can respond quickly to unexpected

economic changes in the supplier’s home country

(FLEX5) This supplier can respond quickly to unexpected

actions by our competitors

Logistics eﬃciency

88

Relative to competition in the previous ﬁscal year, our

Logistics

eﬀectiveness

81

Firm performance

92

performance was (much worse or much better)

(OE1) Warehousing costs
(OE2) Inventory costs
(OE3) Order processing costs
(OE4) Overall logistics costs
Relative to competition in the previous ﬁscal year, our

performance was (much worse or much better)
(OF1) Number of back orders ⁄ stock-outs
(OF2) Time between order receipt and order delivery
(OF3) Shipping errors
(OF4) Damage free goods
(FP1) Our business unit’s return on assets relative to our

competitors

(FP2) Our business unit’s return on investment relative to our

competitors

(FP3) Our business unit’s return on sales relative to our

competitors

(FP4) Our business unit’s sales growth relative to our

competitors

(FP5) Our business unit’s market share growth relative to our

competitors

3.49

3.63

3.54

3.73
4.22

4.23

4.03

4.68
4.57

3.72

3.78

3.91

4.14

4.27

4.56
4.54
4.66
4.60

4.55
4.98
4.63
4.81
4.74

4.66

4.72

4.76

4.70

135

SD

1.81

1.89

1.86

1.79
1.76

1.76

1.67

1.59
1.65

1.45

1.31

1.38

1.76

1.82

1.89
1.30
1.84
1.72

1.43
1.35
1.41
1.44
1.21

1.26

1.87

1.65

1.39

versus femininity, and long term versus short term orientation.
This secondary data set was developed to assess cultural char-
acteristics of individual countries. The dimensions were devel-
oped on the basis of over 100,000 survey respondents in 66
countries and are most representative of middle class individu-

als in multinational corporations from which the sample was
drawn. In calculating CD between two nations, represented by
the cross-border dyadic exchange relationships of our respon-
dents who are native managers to the country where they
work, we followed Kogut and Singh’s (1988) method and use


136

A. Omar et al.

Hofstede’s indices to form a composite index for CD based
upon the deviation along each of the cultural dimensions
between the two nations.

Measurement model validation
Evaluation of measures began by grouping items into a pri-
ori conceptualized construct
scales and examining their
capacity to demonstrate unidimensionality, convergent and
discriminant validity, and reliability. To assess overall mea-
surement ﬁt within CFA, the measurement model was run in
AMOS 7. The CFA ﬁt statistics were good (v2 = 747.4,
df = 433, v2 ⁄ df = 1.726, CFI = .95, and RMSEA = .048)
(Garver and Mentzer 1999).

speciﬁed that

constrained the

All factor loadings were statistically signiﬁcant, indicating
good convergent validity. Discriminant validity was exam-
ined by the nested models approach, where a series of nested
models were
covariance
between clusters of constructs to one (Anderson and Gerbing
1982). Constrained models were compared to baseline mod-
els that allowed parameters to correlate freely. Analyses
revealed all diﬀerences between constrained and uncon-
strained models were signiﬁcant (p £ .05), indicating that dis-
tinct theoretical constructs posed a better ﬁt. The average
variance extracted (AVE) was computed for each construct
and compared to the shared variance between all possible
pairs of constructs (Fornell and Larcker 1981). All compari-
sons met the stated criteria where AVE was greater than
shared variance (see Table 5). Finally, all constructs had
good reliability and fell within the acceptable range.

Logistics and ﬁrm performance measures were

self-
reported in this study. Several previous studies demonstrate
that self-reported performance assessment is consistent with
external secondary data and objective internal performance
(Tan et al. 1999; Kannan and Tan 2006; Fugate et al. 2009).
A total of 65 respondents voluntarily provided their ﬁrm
names, which were also available in the Compustat database.
Three objective indicators (return on investment, return on
assets, return on sales, and sales growth) obtained via Com-
pustat for the 65 companies were compared with the Likert-
scale measures. This resulted in a positive, signiﬁcant correla-
tion of .72 for return on investment, .69 for return on assets,
and .66 for return on sales, each signiﬁcant at p < .01.

Table 5: Average variance extracted (AVE)

RESULTS

The hypotheses were tested using AMOS 7.0 and the stan-
dardized regression weights of each relationship are shown
in Table 6. The overall ﬁt of the structural model was good
and all of the ﬁt statistics were within the acceptable range
(v2 = 1,004.31, df = 449, v2 ⁄ df = 2.23, CFI = 0.92, and
RMSEA = .062).

As depicted in H1 through H3, higher levels of SCO lead
to higher levels of collaboration (standardized regression
weight = .249, p < .001), operational coordination (stan-
dardized regression weight = .323, p < .001), and GSI
(standardized regression weight = .394, p < .001) with a
key global supplier.

H4a and H5a predicted that higher levels of collaboration
and operational coordination would lead to higher levels
GSI. Both of those hypotheses were supported (standardized
regression weights = .345, p < .001 and .485, p < .001,
respectively). H4b and H5b predicted that higher levels of col-
laboration and operational coordination would lead to
higher levels of supplier ﬂexibility. Neither of these hypothe-
ses were supported (standardized regression weights = .12,
p = .13 and .13, p = .18, respectively). Higher levels of GSI
lead to higher levels of supplier ﬂexibility as predicted in H6
(standardized regression weight = .554, p < .001). H7 pre-
dicted that higher levels of supplier ﬂexibility will improve
logistics eﬃciency. This was supported (standardized regres-
sion weight = .239, p < .001). This was also the case for H8
where higher levels of supplier ﬂexibility was hypothesized as
a predictor for improved logistics eﬀectiveness (standardized
regression weight = .269, p < .001).

Finally, H9 and H10 predicted a positive relationship
between logistics eﬃciency and ﬁrm performance as well as
the relationship between logistics eﬀectiveness and ﬁrm per-
formance, respectively. Both hypotheses were supported (H9,
standardized regression weight = .39, p < .001 and H10,
standardized regression weight = .318, p < .001) indicating
that improvements in logistics eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness do
lead to an overall improvement in ﬁrm performance.

The Sobel test (Sobel 1982) was used to directly examine the
signiﬁcance of mediation eﬀects. This test is superior to test
for mediation eﬀects in terms of power and intuitive appeal

SCO

Collab.

Op. coord.

GSI

Flex.

Eﬃciency

Eﬀect.

Perform.

SCO
Collab.
Op. Coord.
GSI
Flex.
Eﬃciency
Eﬀectiveness
Perform

.639
.226
.276
.297
.089
.076
.094
.035

.8318
.4747
.4543
.0437
.0339
.0210
.0029

.7632
.5730
.0655
.0620
.0437
.0146

Notes: Diagonal (bolded values) = AVE; Lower matrix = R2.
GSI, global supplier integration; SCO, supply chain orientation.

.6703
.1183
.0818
.0718
.0313

.5870
.1520
.2655
.0286

.6517
.2632
.2510

.6824
.2323

.6848


Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in Global Supply Chains

137

Table 6: Summary of results

Hypothesis and description

H1: SCO ﬁ Collaboration
H2: SCO ﬁ Operational coordination
H3: SCO ﬁ GSI
H4a: Collaboration ﬁ GSI
H4b: Collaboration ﬁ Supplier ﬂexibility
H5a: Operational coordination ﬁ GSI
H5b: Operational coordination ﬁ Supplier ﬂexibility
H6: GSI ﬁ Supplier ﬂexibility
H7: Supplier ﬂexibility ﬁ Logistics eﬃciency
H8: Supplier ﬂexibility ﬁ Logistics eﬀectiveness
H9: Logistics eﬃciency ﬁ Firm performance
H10: Logistics eﬀectiveness ﬁ Firm performance
H11a: CD moderates SCO ﬁ Collaboration
H11b: CD moderates SCO ﬁ Operational coordination
H11c: CD moderates SCO ﬁ GSI

Standardized
regression weight

Signiﬁcance (p<)

Conclusion

.251
.326
.378
.334
.12
.478
.13
.366
.238
.267
.390
.318
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A

.001
.001
.001
.001
.13
.001
.18
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.131
.180
.832

Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Not supported
Supported
Not supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Not supported
Not supported
Not supported

CD, cultural distance; GSI, global supplier integration; SCO, supply chain orientation.

(Mackinnon et al. 2002; Carey et al. 2011). We found strong
support for the role of GSI in fully mediating collaboration to
supplier ﬂexibility (t = 4.64, p < .01), and operational coor-
dination to supplier ﬂexibility (t = 4.82, p < .01). We also
found strong support for the role of supplier ﬂexibility in fully
mediating GSI to logistics eﬃciency (t = 2.59, p < .01) and
GSI to logistics eﬀectiveness (t = 2.62, p < .01).

In order to test the moderating eﬀect of CD, we conducted
multiple-group analyses to examine whether the eﬀects of
SCO on collaboration and operational coordination are
moderated by CD (Figure 1). The scores for CD for each
supplier home country were calculated using the method sug-
gested by Kogut and Singh (1988).1 The scores of each cul-
tural dimension as well as the values for the CD between the
home country of the manufacturer (USA in this research)
and the host country (supplier home country) are shown in
Appendix. The data were then dichotomized by grouping
CD scores into two categories—low CD and high CD.2
Finally, the parameters of interest (i.e., the paths from SCO
to collaboration, SCO to operational coordination, and SCO
to GSI) were labeled in order to constrain the estimates of
their values and the ﬁt statistics of the two models were com-

1 We followed Kogut and Singh (1988) and used Hofstede’s
indices to form a composite index for CD based upon the
deviation along each of cultural dimensions between the two
P
countries.
4
CDbs ¼

n
ð
Iib   Iis

=4 where Ii stands for the index

Þ2=Vi

o

i¼1

for the ith cultural dimension, and b indicates the buyer
country, Vi is the variance of the index of the ith dimension,
s indicates the supplier country, and CDbs is the cultural dis-
tance between the buyer country and the supplier country.
2 We ran a similar test using groups dichotomized by a med-
ian split, with no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in results.

pared (constrained vs. unconstrained). The ﬁrst model was
the moderated model (paths were free to vary). In the second
model, the no-moderation model, each path was constrained
once (Path 1 High = Path 1 Low, Path 2 High = Path 2
Low, etc.). Therefore, the no-moderation model constrained
the path weights to be the same regardless of the level of
CD, while the moderation model allowed for diﬀerences in
CD to change the path weights. The two models were then
compared to check for diﬀerences in ﬁt. The nested model
comparison showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the
moderated model and the no-moderation model. In all three
cases (H11a, H11b, and H11c), the moderating eﬀects of CD
(p > .05). Therefore, we
were not statistically signiﬁcant
concluded that the eﬀects of SCO on collaboration, opera-
tional coordination, and GSI are not moderated by CD.

DISCUSSION

Global competition compels ﬁrms around the world to re-
think their approach to a market increasingly characterized
by a network of competing global supply chains. The trend
toward globalization has intensiﬁed business competition
and resulted in shrinking proﬁt margins in many industries,
leading the nature of competition to evolve to pairs and net-
works of allied ﬁrms (Eltantawy et al. 2009). Therefore, the
supply chain management concept and its implementation
are predicated on integration across the supply chain (Pagell
2004; Green and Inman 2005).

Theoretical implications

In support of calls to address gaps in knowledge about global
supply chain management, the purpose of this study was to
test a theory of supplier integration in a global business


138

A. Omar et al.

context. Extending the supply chain integration literature to
encompass the relational view of the ﬁrm (Dyer and Singh
1998), we suggest that a manufacturer and supplier can estab-
lish a symbiotic relationship and create interwoven processes
to acquire resources and ﬁll resource gaps which facilitates
performance gains exclusive to that relationship (Grant 1991).
In building a theoretical model grounded in the relational
view, we focused on GSI as it is becoming an increasingly
valuable source of competitive advantage, enhancing ﬂexibil-
ity performance outcomes which then translate into supply
chain value (Frazier 1999). By asking managers involved in
supply chain operations about their relationship with a key
global supplier, we oﬀer more insight about the signiﬁcance
of the manufacturer–supplier relationship as a vehicle for cre-
ating unique capabilities that lead to create ‘‘win-win’’ oppor-
tunities
study examined the
relationships among the drivers of GSI which include both
behavioral and operational components, and GSI outcomes
that aﬀect the supplier’s ﬂexibility. This represents a signiﬁ-
cant contribution to the existing body of knowledge given the
lack of empirical studies utilizing the relational view of the
ﬁrm in a global supply chain interﬁrm context.

for both. Speciﬁcally,

this

The ﬁrst part of the theoretical model addressed the driv-
ers of GSI. This research oﬀers more support for the impor-
tance of ﬁrm’s disposition through examining the inﬂuence
of SCO on the ﬁrm’s ability to create collaborative behaviors
and coordinating mechanisms and to also directly enable
GSI. These dispositions inﬂuence how ﬁrms behave and
interact in interﬁrm relationships (Johnson and Sohi 2001),
and previous research indicates that they remain fairly con-
sistent across situations and over time (Weiss and Adler
1984). SCO encompasses those attitudes that create the phi-
losophy that establishing common win-win goals with key
global suppliers will elevate ﬁrm and overall supply chain
performance through greater levels of integration.

The research highlights that there can be a lack of opera-
tional coordination, collaboration, and integration between
manufacturers and whom they perceived as ‘‘key’’ global
suppliers. Davis-Sramek et al. (2007) point out that on the
continuum of exchange, ﬁrms can engage with key suppliers
through frequent buying yet they have no characteristics
found in relational exchange. Therefore, researchers should
be careful to distinguish between supplier relationships that
are strictly volume driven with little coordinated activity and
information sharing, and those that are truly strategic in nat-
ure and create integrative processes. Given the signiﬁcant
relationship between the integration structures and logistics
and ﬁrm performance, this research oﬀers more insight into
the beneﬁts of ‘‘true’’ integration with suppliers.

Finally, this research also addresses another important issue
in the global supply chain management literature—eﬀects of
CD and national characteristics on supply chain relationships
and operating mechanisms. The literature on this issue has
been controversial with several recent studies ﬁnding signiﬁ-
cant or insigniﬁcant impact from CD (Farley and Lehmann
1994; Bowman et al. 2000; Bolton and Myers 2003; Homburg
et al. 2005; Myers and Cheung 2008). Thus, these results
strengthen the idea that CD (in business contexts) is overshad-
owed by other factors (Levitt 1983; Heuer et al. 1999), such as

the nature or orientation of a ﬁrm’s strategy. SCO in this
study had a strong impact on the level of GSI.

Managerial implications

The study supports the contention that integration results
from both informal behaviors residing in the willingness to
share information and knowledge with suppliers through col-
laboration, and also in the operational decisions that facili-
tate product ﬂow and movement
through operational
coordination. Therefore, supply chain management strategies
must interconnect what a company ‘‘thinks’’ or ‘‘should do’’
with what a company ‘‘does’’ to facilitate the physical ﬂows
as well as the associated service, information, and ﬁnancial
ﬂows. This would be especially critical in a global environ-
ment where risk and rewards lead to signiﬁcant consequences
(good or bad) and as ﬁrms take advantage of international
economies of scale, scope, learn from diﬀerent foreign mar-
kets, and identify location speciﬁc advantages to exploit cost
diﬀerentials in factors of production or the limited availabil-
ity of resources (Roth and Morrison 1992).

As Figure 1 indicates, this research also examined the per-
formance implications of GSI. Our contention is that GSI
should enable the manufacturer to increase performance
through ﬁrst impacting the supplier’s ﬂexibility. In an envi-
ronment where demand is changing rapidly, industry charac-
teristics are evolving quickly, and companies are facing new
challenges every day, ﬂexibility becomes critical, allowing
suppliers to make changes or adjustments with a minimum
amount of time and resources (Carlsson 1989; De Toni and
Tonchia 2001). In increasingly dynamic environments, this
research provides empirical support that manufacturing ﬁrms
can experience a higher level ﬂexibility from their overseas
suppliers by integrating their supply chain processes. Thus,
ﬁrms that value ﬂexibility in their operations can adjust their
process integration levels to attain the required level of ﬂexi-
bility.

When a supplier can respond to both macro and micro
environmental changes, the manufacturer beneﬁts through
more logistics eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness. Through greater
supplier ﬂexibility, manufacturers can then focus on utilizing
resources to reduce costs and to focus on enhancing eﬀec-
tiveness through more consistent delivery, a reduction in
stockouts, and less damage and errors. These mediation per-
formance eﬀects also provide more understanding about the
role of
integration in enhancing ﬁrm performance. Both
logistics eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness had a positive impact on
ﬁrm performance. Therefore, we ﬁnd more evidence of the
importance of these intermediate performance outcomes as
‘‘routes’’ to ﬁrm performance, where integration is critical in
this ‘‘chain of events’’ (Vickery et al. 2003).

Another managerial contribution relates to the nature of
SCO within the ﬁrm. SCO is referred to as a ‘‘mindset,’’ a
‘‘philosophy,’’ and an ‘‘organizational culture.’’ Conceptu-
ally, this is consistent with an overall orientation of a ﬁrm
with all of its supply chain counterparts. While the concept
does represent a philosophy that a company adopts to man-
age its supply chain, this does not necessarily mean that the
company uses this orientation with all of its suppliers and ⁄ or


Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in Global Supply Chains

139

customers. Companies may apply the 80–20 rule or other
methods to segment and indentify the important and critical
suppliers and ⁄ or customers and implement this orientation
accordingly. An example of this would be when a company
has a partnership and strategic relationship with one supplier
while dealing with others on a transactional ⁄ arms-length
basis. Doing business with a ‘‘key’’ supplier may also mean
frequent transactions yet the structure and governance of a
transactional (rather than relational) orientation (see Davis-
Sramek et al. 2007). So despite the fact that SCO relates to a
ﬁrm’s mindset, this mindset could be directed to one segment
of the company’s supply chain.

The lack of ﬁndings regarding the inﬂuence of national
cultural characteristics in this research may indicate that in a
B2B context, more emphasis should be placed on the com-
patibility and similarity of corporate cultures as opposed to
national culture. Supply chain managers involved in global
operations may be able to engage better and establish better
integration structures with global suppliers or vendors with
similar corporate cultures.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH

The study involved the weaknesses associated with cross-sec-
tional surveys (Podsakoﬀ et al. 2003), using a single infor-
mant per ﬁrm to collect perceptual data (Van Bruggen et al.
2002), and it is also marked with the constraints of the depth
of information a survey can capture. One drawback of using
a cross-sectional survey is that investigation of supply chain
behavioral dimensions across global players is limited to a
point-in-time assessment. Future research should be directed
toward longitudinal studies that can capture those behavioral
elements,
in the context of global operations, over an
extended period of time. This could paint a clearer picture
on the eﬀects of behavioral elements on global supply chain
operations and its performance implications.

Perceptual versus actual behavioral data were used to test
the hypotheses. Informants reported perceptions of their expe-
riences working with providers. While we mitigated potential

APPENDIX

Table A1: Cultural distance dimensions and values

bias in the accuracy of the responses by qualifying informants
and asking them about their level of their conﬁdence in their
answers, perceptual data are still dependent upon respondents’
ability and willingness to mentally retrieve and accurately
report on their mental evaluation. Future research would ben-
eﬁt from obtaining company data that track coordination
mechanisms set in place, collaboration eﬀorts that are docu-
mented, or other relevant data. Finally, we assessed percep-
tions of the relationship from only the manufacturer’s frame
of reference, and we examined supplier ﬂexibility through
manufacturer’s observation as well. The next step to investi-
gate this theory would be to include the supplier’s assessment
of the relationship, thereby examining dyadic data to increase
our understanding of the relationship.

Direct extensions of this research might incorporate diﬀer-
ent contexts or the perceptions of other ﬁrms in the supply
chain for example: retailers, suppliers, or manufacturing
ﬁrms in other geographic regions such as Latin America,
Europe, or Asia. Also relevant in the global context would
be the service providers such as transportation companies,
is particularly
customs brokerages, expediters, etc. This
important
to gain more understanding of
the eﬀects of
national characteristics and CD in the context of global sup-
ply chain operations. Research on this topic has been contro-
versial (Bowman et al. 2000; Bolton and Myers 2003; Myers
and Cheung 2008). Findings from this research did not sup-
port the hypothesis that CD plays a role in moderating the
relationship between SCO and collaboration or operational
coordination. More research is warranted in this area given
the trend of globalization of supply chains and the criticality
of understanding how to manage global operations, taking
factors such as culture distance into consideration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The ﬁrst three authors dedicate this research to their late
coauthor, Dr.
(Tom) Mentzer. The authors
acknowledge Lockheed Martin Corporation for supporting
this research.

John T.

Power
distance

40.00
36.00
11.00
72.00
69.00
39.00
80.00
18.00
78.00

USA
Australia
Austria
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
China
Denmark
Ecuador

Individualism

Masculinity

Uncertainty
avoidance

Long term
orientation

Cultural
distance*

91.00
90.00
55.00
14.00
38.00
80.00
20.00
74.00
8.00

62.00
61.00
79.00
50.00
49.00
52.00
66.00
16.00
63.00

46.00
51.00
70.00
80.00
76.00
48.00
30.00
23.00
67.00

29.00
31.00
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
65.00
23.00
118.00
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A

0.00000
0.01733
1.25328
3.22190
1.87586
0.11238
2.69878
1.87848
3.39763

Continued.


140

Table A1: (Continued)

Power
distance

33.00
68.00
35.00
60.00
77.00
78.00
28.00
13.00
50.00
54.00
93.00
104.00
81.00
38.00
68.00
63.00
93.00
60.00
57.00
31.00
34.00
80.00
64.00
35.00
81.00

Finland
France
Germany
Greece
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
Malaysia
Mexico
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Russia
S. Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
UK
Venezuela

A. Omar et al.

Individualism

Masculinity

Uncertainty
avoidance

Long term
orientation

Cultural
distance*

63.00
71.00
67.00
35.00
48.00
14.00
70.00
54.00
76.00
46.00
39.00
26.00
30.00
80.00
60.00
27.00
39.00
18.00
51.00
71.00
68.00
20.00
20.00
89.00
12.00

26.00
43.00
66.00
57.00
56.00
46.00
68.00
47.00
70.00
95.00
36.00
50.00
69.00
14.00
64.00
31.00
36.00
39.00
42.00
5.00
70.00
66.00
34.00
66.00
73.00

59.00
86.00
65.00
112.00
40.00
48.00
35.00
81.00
75.00
92.00
95.00
36.00
82.00
53.00
93.00
3.58
95.00
85.00
86.00
29.00
58.00
30.00
64.00
35.00
76.00

N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
31.00
N ⁄ A
61.00
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
80.00
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
44.00
32.00
N ⁄ A
N ⁄ A
75.00
N ⁄ A
23.00
N ⁄ A
118.00
56.00
25.00
N ⁄ A

1.21813
1.32712
0.37830
3.04646
1.31575
3.02909
0.29785
1.44146
0.49108
2.36482
3.56439
3.45971
2.65029
1.55000
1.54406
3.08905
3.56439
3.11916
1.60084
2.38894
0.31279
2.69878
2.78907
0.06869
3.50378

*The cultural distance values were calculated using the Kogut and Singh (1988) formula based on the ﬁrst four dimensions since
the ﬁfth dimension was missing several values.

REFERENCES

Anderson, J., and Gerbing, D. 1982.

‘‘Some Methods for
Re-Specifying Measurement Models to Obtain Unidimen-
sional Construct Measurement.’’ Journal of Marketing
Research 19(4):453–60.

Avittathur, B., and Swamidass, P. 2007.

‘‘Matching Plant
Flexibility and Supplier Flexibility: Lessons From Small
Suppliers of U.S. Manufacturing Plants in India.’’ Journal
of Operations Management 25(3):717–35.

Azadegan, A., and Dooley, K. 2010. ‘‘Supplier Innovative-
ness, Organizational Learning Styles and Manufacturer
Performance: An Empirical Assessment.’’ Journal of Oper-
ations Management 28(6):488–505.

Bolton, R., and Myers, M. 2003. ‘‘Price-Based Global Mar-
ket Segmentation for Services.’’ Journal of Marketing
67(3):108–28.

Bowman, D., Farley, J., and Schmittlein, D. 2000. ‘‘Cross-
National Empirical Generalization in Business Services
Buying Behavior.’’ Journal of International Business Stud-
ies 31(4):667–85.

Bucklin, L., and Sengupta, S. 1993. ‘‘Organizing Successful
Co-Marketing Alliances.’’ Journal of Marketing 57(2):
32–46.

Cagliano, R., Caniato, F., and Spina, G. 2006. ‘‘The Linkage
Between Supply Chain Integration and Manufacturing
International Journal of
Improvement Programmes.’’
Operations and Production Management 26(3):282–99.

Cannon, J., Doney, P., Mullen, M., and Petersen, K. 2010.
‘‘Building Long-Term Orientation in Buyer-Supplier Rela-
tionships: The Moderating Role of Culture.’’ Journal of
Operations Management 28(6):505–21.

Carey, S., Lawson, B., and Krause, D. 2011. ‘‘Social Capital
Conﬁguration, Legal Bonds and Performance in Buyer-
Seller Relationships.’’ Journal of Operations Management
29(4):277–88.

Carlsson, B. 1989. ‘‘Flexibility and the Theory of the Firm.’’
International Journal of Industrial Organization 7(2):179–
203.

Chen, H., Daugherty, P., and Landry, T. 2009a.

‘‘Supply
Chain Process Integration: A Theoretical Framework.’’
Journal of Business Logistics 30(2):27–46.

Chen, H., Daugherty, P., and Roath, T. 2009b. ‘‘Deﬁning
and Operationalizing Supply Chain Process Integration.’’
Journal of Business Logistics 30(1):63–84.

Cheung, M.-S., Myers, M., and Mentzer, J. 2010.

‘‘Does
Relationship Learning Lead to Relationship Value? A


Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in Global Supply Chains

141

Cross-National Supply Chain Investigation.’’ Journal of
Operations Management 28(6):472–87.

Christopher, M. 2000. ‘‘The Agile Supply Chain.’’ Industrial

Marketing Management 29(1):37–44.

Cousins, P., and Menguc, B. 2006.

‘‘The Implications of
Socialization and Integration in Supply Chain Manage-
ment.’’ Journal of Operations Management 24(5):604–20.

Damanpour, F., and Gopalakrishnan, S. 2001.

‘‘The
Dynamics of the Adoption of Product and Process Inno-
vations in Organizations.’’ Journal of Management Studies
38(1):45–65.

Das, T., and Teng, B. 2000. ‘‘Resource-Based Theory of Stra-

tegic Alliances.’’ Journal of Management 26(1):31–62.

Daugherty, P., Richey, R., Roath, A., Min, S., Chen, H.,
Arndt, A.D., and Genchev, S.E. 2006. ‘‘Is Collaboration
Paying Oﬀ for Firms?’’ Business Horizons 49:61–70.

Davis-Sramek, B., Fugate, B., and Omar, A. 2007. ‘‘Func-
tional ⁄ Dysfunctional Supply Chain Exchanges.’’ Interna-
tional Journal of Logistics and Physical Distribution
Management 37(1):43–63.

De Toni, A., and Tonchia, S. 2001. ‘‘Deﬁnitions and Link-
ages Between Operational and Strategic Flexibilities.’’
Omega 33(6):525–40.

Dillman, D. 2000. Mail and Internet Surveys: The Tailored

Design Method. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Doney, P., and Cannon, J. 1997. ‘‘An Examination of the
Nature of Trust in Buyer-Seller Relationships.’’ Journal of
Marketing 61:35–51.

Internal Versus External

Droge, C., Jayaram, J., and Vickery, S. 2004. ‘‘The Eﬀects
of
Integration Practices on
Time-Based Performance and Overall Firm Performance.’’
Journal of Operations Management 22(6):557–73.

Dwyer, F., Schurr, P., and Oh, S. 1987. ‘‘Developing Buyer-

Seller Relationships.’’ Journal of Marketing 51(2):11–27.

Dyer, J., and Singh, H. 1998. ‘‘The Relational View: Cooper-
ative Strategy and Sources of Interorganizational Compet-
itive Advantage.’’ Academy of Management Review
23(4):660–79.

Ellinger, A., Daugherty, P., and Keller, S. 2000. ‘‘The Rela-
tionship Between Marketing ⁄ Logistics Interdepartmental
Integration and Performance in U.S. Manufacturing
Firms: An Empirical Study.’’ Journal of Business Logistics
65(4):82–105.

Ellinger, A.E., Ellinger, A.D., and Keller, S. 2002. ‘‘Logistics
Managers’ Learning Environments and Firm Perfor-
mance.’’ Journal of Business Logistics 23(1):19–37.

Eltantawy, R., Giunipero, L., and Fox, G. 2009. ‘‘A Strate-
gic Skill Based Model of Supplier Integration and Its
Eﬀect on Supply Management Performance.’’ Industrial
Marketing Management 38(8):925–36.

Farley, J., and Lehmann, D. 1994. ‘‘Cross-National ‘Laws’
and Diﬀerences in Market Response.’’ Management Sci-
ence 40(1):111–22.

Fornell, C., and Larcker, D. 1981.

‘‘Evaluating Structural
Equation Models With Unobservable Variables and Mea-
surement Error.’’ Journal of Marketing Research 18(1):39–
50.

Forslund, H., and Jonsson, P. 2009. ‘‘Obstacles to Supply
Chain Integration of the Performance Management Pro-

cess in Buyer-Supplier Dyads: The Buyers’ Perspective.’’
International Journal of Operations and Production Man-
agement 29(1):77.

Frazier, G. 1999. ‘‘Organizing and Managing Channels of
Distribution.’’ Journal of the Academy of Marketing Sci-
ence 27(2):226–40.

Frazier, G., Spekman, R., and O’Neal, C. 1988.

‘‘Just-in-
Time Exchange Relationships in Industrial Markets.’’
Journal of Marketing 52(4):52–67.

Frohlich, M., and Westbrook, R. 2001. ‘‘Arcs of Integration:
An International Study of Supply Chain Strategies.’’ Jour-
nal of Operations Management 19(2):185–200.

Fugate, B., Sahin, F., and Mentzer, J. 2006. ‘‘Supply Chain
Management Coordination Mechanisms.’’ Journal of Busi-
ness Logistics 27(2):129–61.

Fugate, B., Stank, T., and Mentzer, J. 2009.

‘‘Linking
Improved Knowledge Management to Operational and
Organizational Performance.’’ Journal of Operations Man-
agement 27(3):247–64.

Garver, M., and Mentzer, J. 1999.

‘‘Logistics Research
Methods: Employing Structural Equation Modeling to
Test for Construct Validity.’’ Journal of Business Logistics
20(1):33–57.

Grant, R. 1991. ‘‘The Resource-Based Theory of Competi-
tive Advantage: Implications for Strategy Formulation.’’
California Management Review 33(3):114–35.

Green, K., and Inman, R. 2005. ‘‘Using a Just-in-Time Sell-
ing Strategy to Strengthen Supply Chain Linkages.’’ Inter-
national Journal of Production Research 43(16):3437–53.

Griﬃth, D., and Myers, M. 2005. ‘‘The Performance Impli-
cations of Strategic Fit of Relational Norm Governance
Strategies in Global Supply Chain Relationships.’’ Journal
of International Business Studies 36:254–69.

Handﬁeld, R., Ragatz, G., Petersen, K., and Monczka, R.
‘‘Involving Suppliers in New Product Develop-

1999.
ment.’’ California Management Review 42(1):59–84.

Heuer, M., Cummings, J., and Hutabarat, W. 1999. ‘‘Cultural
Stability or Change Among Managers in Indonesia?’’ Jour-
nal of International Business Studies 30(3):599–610.

Hofstede, G. 1980. Culture’s Consequences: International Dif-
ferences in Work-Related Values. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage
Publications.

Hofstede, G. 2001. Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Val-
Institutions and Organizations Across

ues, Behaviors,
Nations. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Homburg, C., Kuester, S., Beutin, N., and Menon, A. 2005.
‘‘Determinants of Customer Beneﬁts in Business-to-Busi-
ness Markets: A Cross-Cultural Comparison.’’ Journal of
International Marketing 13(3):1–31.

Hult, G., Ketchen, D., Adams, G., and Mena, J. 2008. ‘‘Sup-
ply Chain Orientation and Balanced Scorecard Perfor-
mance.’’ Journal of Managerial Issues 20(4):526–44.

Hutzschenreuter, T., and Voll, J. 2008. ‘‘Performance Eﬀects
of Added Cultural Distance in the Path of International
Expansion: The Case of German Multinational Enter-
prises.’’ Journal of International Business Studies 39(1):
53–70.

Jap, S. 2001. ‘‘Pie-Sharing in Complex Contexts.’’ Journal of

Marketing Research 38(1):86–99.


142

A. Omar et al.

Jaworski, B., and Kohli, A. 1993.

‘‘Market Orientation:
Antecedents and Consequences.’’ Journal of Marketing
57(3):53–70.

Johnson, J., and Sohi, R. 2001. ‘‘The Inﬂuence of Firm Pre-
dispositions on Interﬁrm Relationship Formation in Busi-
International Journal of Research in
ness Markets.’’
Marketing 18(4):299–318.

Kannan, V., and Tan, K. 2006. ‘‘The Impact of Supplier Selec-
tion and Buyer-Supplier Engagement on Relationship and
Firm Performance.’’ International Journal of Physical Dis-
tribution and Logistics Management 36(10):755–75.

Khazanchi, S., Lewis, M., and Boyer, K. 2007. ‘‘Innovation-
Supportive Culture: The Impact of Organizational Values
on Process Innovation.’’ Journal of Operations Manage-
ment 25(4):871–84.

Kim, W. 2009. ‘‘An Investigation on the Direct and Indirect
Eﬀect of Supply Chain Integration on Firm Perfor-
mance.’’ International Journal of Production Economics
119(2):328–46.

Kogut, B., and Singh, H. 1988. ‘‘The Eﬀect of National Cul-
ture on the Choice of Entry Mode.’’ Journal of Interna-
tional Business Studies 19(3):411–32.

Kotabe, M., and Murray, J. 2004. ‘‘Global Sourcing Strategy
and Sustainable Competitive Advantage.’’ Industrial Mar-
keting Management 33(1):7–8.

Koufteros, X., Cheng, E., and Kee-hung, L. 2007. ‘‘Black-
box’’ and ‘‘Gray-box’’ Supplier Integration in Product
Development: Antecedents, Consequences and the Moder-
ating Role of Firm Size.’’ Journal of Operations Manage-
ment 25(4):847–70.

Krajewski, L., Wei, J., and Tang, L. 2005. ‘‘Responding to
in Build-to-Order Supply Chains.’’

Schedule Changes
Journal of Operations Management 23(5):452–69.

Kumar, V., Fantazy, K., Kumar, U., and Boyle, T. 2006.
‘‘Implementation and Management Framework for Sup-
ply Chain Flexibility.’’ Journal of Enterprise Information
Management 19(3):303–19.

Kumar, S., and Kopitzke, K. 2008. ‘‘A Practitioner’s Deci-
sion Model for the Total Cost of Outsourcing and Appli-
cation to China, Mexico and the United States.’’ Journal
of Business Logistics 29(2):107–39.

Leung, K., Bhagat, R., Buchan, N., Erez, M., and Gibson,
C. 2005.
‘‘Culture and International Business: Recent
Advances and Their Implications for Future Research.’’
Journal of International Business Studies 36(4):357–78.

Levitt, T. 1983. ‘‘The Globalization of Markets.’’ Harvard

Business Review 61(3):92–102.

Mackinnon, D., Lockwood, C., Hoﬀman, J., West, S., and
‘‘A Comparison of Methods to Test
Sheets, V. 2002.
Mediation and Other Intervening Variable Eﬀects.’’ Psy-
chological Methods 7(1):83–104.

Manuj, I., and Mentzer, J. 2008. ‘‘Global Supply Chain Risk
Management.’’ Journal of Business Logistics 29(1):133–55.
Mentzer, J., DeWitt, W., Keebler, J., Min, S., Nix, N.,
‘‘Deﬁning Supply
of Business Logistics

Smith, C., and Zacharia, Z. 2001.
Chain Management.’’
22(2):1–25.

Journal

Mentzer, J., and Flint, D. 1997.

‘‘Validity in Logistics

Research.’’ Journal of Business Logistics 18(1):199–216.

Mentzer, J., and Konrad, B. 1991. ‘‘An Eﬃciency ⁄ Eﬀective-
ness Approach to Logistics Performance Analysis.’’ Jour-
nal of Business Logistics 12(1):33–61.

Metcalf, L., Frear, C., and Krishnan, R. 1992. ‘‘Buyer-Seller
Relationships: An Application of the IMP Interaction
Model.’’ European Journal of Marketing 26(2):27–46.

Min, S., Mentzer, J., and Ladd, R. 2007. ‘‘A Market Orienta-
tion in Supply Chain Management.’’ Journal of Academy
of Marketing Science 35(4):507–22.

Moorman, C., Deshpande, R., and Zaltman, G. 1993. ‘‘Fac-
tors Aﬀecting Trust in Market Research Relationships.’’
Journal of Marketing 57(1):81–101.

Morgan, R., and Hunt, S. 1994. ‘‘The Commitment-Trust
Theory of Relationship Marketing.’’ Journal of Marketing
58(3):20–38.

Myers, M., and Cheung, M.-S. 2008. ‘‘Sharing Global Sup-
ply Chain Knowledge.’’ Sloan Management Review 49(4):
67–74.

Nakata, C., and Sivakumar, K. 1996. ‘‘National Culture and
New Product Development: An Integrative Review.’’
Journal of Marketing 60(1):61–72.

Narasimhan, R., and Das, A. 2001. ‘‘The Impact of Purchas-
ing Integration and Practices on Manufacturing Perfor-
mance.’’ Journal of Operations Management 19(5):593–
609.

Pagell, M. 2004. ‘‘Understanding the Factors That Enable
and Inhibit the Integration of Operations, Purchasing and
Logistics.’’ Journal of Operations Management 22(5):459–
87.

Paulraj, A., and Chen, I. 2007. ‘‘Environmental Uncertainty
and Strategic Supply Management: A Resource Depen-
dence Perspective and Performance Implications.’’ Journal
of Supply Chain Management 43(3):29–42.

Petersen, K., Handﬁeld, R., and Ragatz, G. 2005a. ‘‘Supplier
Integration Into New Product Development: Coordinat-
ing Product, Process and Supply Chain Design.’’ Journal
of Operations Management 23(3 ⁄ 4):371–88.

Petersen, K., Handﬁeld, R., and Monczka, R. 2005b. ‘‘An
Examination of Collaborative Planning Eﬀectiveness and
Supply Chain Performance.’’ Journal of Supply Chain
Management: A Global Review of Purchasing and Supply
41(2):14–25.

Podsakoﬀ, P., MacKenzie, S.,

Jeong Yeon, L., and
Podsakoﬀ, N. 2003. ‘‘Common Method Biases in Behav-
ioral Research: A Critical Review of the Literature and
Recommended Remedies.’’ Journal of Applied Psychology
88(5):879–903.

Prior, D. 2006. ‘‘Integrating Stakeholder Management and
Relationship Management: Contributions From the Rela-
tional View of the Firm.’’ Journal of General Management
32(2):17–30.

Ragatz, G., Handﬁeld, R., and Petersen, K. 2002. ‘‘Beneﬁts
Associated With Supplier Integration Into New Product
Development Under Conditions of Technology Uncer-
tainty.’’ Journal of Business Research 55(5):389–400.

Ragatz, G., Handﬁeld, R., and Scannell, T. 1997. ‘‘Success
Factors
Into New Product
Development.’’ The Journal of Product Innovation Man-
agement 14(3):190–202.

Integrating Suppliers

for


Orientation, Coordination, and Flexibility in Global Supply Chains

143

Roath, A., Miller, S., and Cavusgil, S. 2002. ‘‘A Conceptual
Framework of Relational Governance in Foreign Distrib-
International Business Review
utor Relationships.’’
11(1):1–15.

Rodrigues, A., Stank, T., and Lynch, D. 2004.

‘‘Linking
Strategy, Structure, Process, and Performance in Inte-
grated Logistics.’’ Journal of Business Logistics 25(2):
65–94.

Romano, P. 2003.

‘‘Coordination and Integration Mecha-
nisms to Manage Logistics Processes Across Supply Net-
work.’’ Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 9:
119–34.

Roth, K., and Morrison, A. 1992. ‘‘Business-Level Competi-
tive Strategy: A Contingency Link to Internationaliza-
tion.’’ Journal of Management 18(3):473–87.

Sahin, F., and Robinson, P. 2002. ‘‘Flow Coordination and
Information Sharing in Supply Chains: Review, Implica-
tions, and Direction for Future Research.’’ Decision Sci-
ences 33(4):505–36.

Sanchez-Rodriguez, C. 2009. ‘‘Eﬀect of Strategic Purchasing
on Supplier Development and Performance: A Structural
Model.’’ Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing
24(3 ⁄ 4):161–72.

Selnes, F., and Sallis, J. 2003.

‘‘Promoting Relationship

Learning.’’ Journal of Marketing 67(3):80–95.

Shoenherr, T. 2009. ‘‘Logistics and Supply Chain Manage-
ment Applications Within a Global Context: An Over-
view.’’ Journal of Business Logistics 30(2):1–26.

Siguaw, J., Simpson, P., and Baker, T. 1998. ‘‘Eﬀects of Sup-
plier Market Orientation on Distributor Market Orienta-
tion and the Channel Relationship: The Distributor
Perspective.’’ Journal of Marketing 62(3):99–111.

Sobel, M. 1982. ‘‘Asymptotic Conﬁdence Intervals for Indi-
rect Eﬀects in Structural Equations Models.’’In Sociologi-
cal Methodology, edited by S. Leinhart, 290–312. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Stank, T., Daugherty, P., and Ellinger, A. 1999. ‘‘Market-
ing ⁄ Logistics Integration and Firm Performance.’’ Inter-
national Journal of Logistics Management 10(1):11–24.

Stank, T., Keller, S., and Daugherty, P. 2001. ‘‘Supply Chain
Collaboration and Logistical Service Performance.’’ Jour-
nal of Business Logistics 22(1):29–48.

Stevenson, M., and Spring, M. 2009. ‘‘Supply Chain Flexibil-
ity: An Inter-Firm Empirical Study.’’ International Journal
of Operations and Production Management 29(9):946–71.

Stock, G., Greis, N., and Kasarda, J. 1999. ‘‘Logistics Strat-
egy and Structure: A Conceptual Framework.’’ Interna-
tional Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics
Management 29(4):224–39.

Swaﬀord, P., Ghosh, S., and Murthy, N. 2008. ‘‘Achieving
Supply Chain Agility Through IT Integration and Flexi-
International Journal of Production Economics
bility.’’
116(2):288–97.

Swink, M., Narasimhan, R., and Wang, C. 2007. ‘‘Managing
Beyond the Factory Walls: Eﬀects of Four Types of
Strategic Integration on Manufacturing Plant Performance.’’
Journal of Operations Management 25(1):148–64.

Impact on Performance.’’ International Journal of Opera-
tions and Production Management 19(10):1034–52.

Tracey, M. 2004.

‘‘A Holistic Approach to New Product
Development: New Insights.’’ Journal of Supply Chain
Management 40(4):37–55.

Upton, D. 1995. ‘‘What Really Makes Factories Flexible?’’

Harvard Business Review 73(4):74–84.

Van Bruggen, G., Lilien, G., and Kacker, M. 2002. ‘‘Infor-
mants in Organizational Marketing Research: Why Use
Multiple Informants and How to Aggregate Responses.’’
Journal of Marketing Research 39(4):469–78.

Vickery, S., Jayaram, J., Droge, C., and Calantone, R. 2003.
‘‘The Eﬀects of an Integrative Supply Chain Strategy on
Customer Service and Financial Performance: An Analy-
sis of Direct Versus Indirect Relationships.’’ Journal of
Operations Management 21(5):523–39.

Wagner, S. 2003. ‘‘Intensity and Managerial Scope of Sup-
plier Integration.’’ Journal of Supply Chain Management:
A Global Review of Purchasing and Supply 39(4):4–15.

Wagner, S. 2006. ‘‘A Firm’s Responses to Deﬁcient Suppliers
of Business

Journal

and Competitive Advantage.’’
Research 59(6):686–95.

Weiss, H. M., and Adler, S. 1984. ‘‘Personality and organiza-
tional behavior.’’ In Research in Organizational Behavior,
edited by B.M. Staw and L.L. Cummings, Vol. 6. Green-
wich, CT: JAI Press.

Wisner, J. 2003. ‘‘A Structural Equation Model of Supply
Chain Management Strategies and Firm Performance.’’
Journal of Business Logistics 24(1):1–26.

Zacharia, Z., Nix, N., and Lusch, R. 2009. ‘‘An Analysis of
Supply Chain Collaborations and Their Eﬀect on Perfor-
mance.’’ Journal of Business Logistics 30(2):101–24.

Zailani, S., and Rajagopal, P. 2005. ‘‘Supply Chain Integra-
tion and Performance: US Versus East Asian Compa-
nies.’’ Supply Chain Management 10(5):379–93.

Zhang, C., Cavusgil, S., and Roath, A. 2003. ‘‘Manufacturer
Governance of Foreign Distributor Relationships: Do Rela-
tional Norms Enhance Competitiveness in the Export Mar-
ket?’’ Journal of International Business Studies 34(6):550–66.

SHORT BIOGRAPHIES

Ayman Omar (PhD University of Tennessee) is an Assis-
tant Professor and Marvin Fair Faculty Fellow at the Kogod
School of Business at American University. His research
interests target diﬀerent aspects of global supply chain man-
agement. Primarily, his focus is on drivers and outcomes of
global supply chain integration with an emphasis on supply
chain ﬂexibility. In addition, Dr. Omar’s research interests
include global supply chain sustainability, and global supply
chain risk management. He has published in the Journal of
Business Logistics, International Journal of Physical Distribu-
tion, and Logistics Management. He has worked for several
years in the oil industry in Europe and Northern Africa and
has consulted for numerous multinational, public, and pri-
vate corporations.

Tan, K., Kannan, V., Handﬁeld, R., and Ghosh, S. 1999.
‘‘Supply Chain Management: An Empirical Study of Its

Beth Davis-Sramek (PhD University of Tennessee) is an
Assistant Professor in the Department of Marketing at the


144

A. Omar et al.

University of Louisville. Her research interests include the
role of logistics in supply chain management, the impact of
logistics service in developing customer loyalty, and the stra-
tegic role of logistics in creating competitive advantage. She
has published articles appearing in the Journal of the Acad-
emy of Marketing Science, Journal of Operations Manage-
ment, Journal of Business Logistics, International Journal of
Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, and Interna-
tional Journal of Logistics Management. She previously
worked in the services industry in both product development
and service operations.

Matthew B. Myers (PhD Michigan State University) is the
Nestle Professor and Associate Dean of Executive Education

at the University of Tennessee. Dr. Myers’ primary areas of
research are in global supply chain networks, foreign market
entry strategies, and comparative marketing systems. His
research has been published or is forthcoming in a number
of outlets including the Strategic Management Journal, Jour-
nal of Marketing, Journal of Operations Management, Journal
of International Business Studies, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, and Sloan Management Review. He is
also coeditor of the Handbook of Global Supply Chain Man-
agement (Sage). He has studied, taught, and worked in Cen-
tral America, South America, Europe, Central and East
Asia, and has acted as a consultant to organizations in the
global distribution, chemical, insurance, pharmaceutical, and
marketing research industries.


Copyright of Journal of Business Logistics is the property of Wiley-Blackwell and its content may not be
copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written
permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

