International Journal of Selection and Assessment

Volume 18 Number 2 June 2010

Improving Prediction of Work Performance
Through Frame-of-Reference Consistency:
Empirical evidence using openness
to experience

Victoria L. Pace* and Michael T. Brannick**

*Department of Psychology, Florida International University, University Park DM 256, 11200 S.W. 8th Street,
Miami, FL 33199. vpace@ﬁu.edu
**Department of Psychology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA

A work-speciﬁc measure of openness to experience was compared with the general NEO
PI-R Openness scale for predicting supervisory ratings of creative performance at work.
Results at the scale and facet levels indicated that the use of a consistent and criterion-
matched frame of reference improved validity of this personality construct for the prediction
of work-related creative problem solving. Scores from the Work-speciﬁc Openness scale
signiﬁcantly predicted creative work performance, whereas scores from the general measure
did not. Results also showed incremental validity of the Work-speciﬁc scale over the NEO
PI-R scale. Evidence is mounting that specifying a work context for personality measures can
increase validity for predicting job performance beyond that typically observed when using
general scales.

1. Introduction

T he idea that context plays an important role in

determining behavior is not new. In fact, Mischel’s
inﬂuential book (1968) that led to a relatively dormant
period for personality research and use in the 1970s
and 1980s emphasized the role of contextual inﬂuences
on behavior,
including work-related performance. Cer-
tainly, the difference between one’s general work envir-
onment and his/her home or recreational environment
may be substantial. Such differences may inﬂuence asso-
ciated personas, which may differentially predict job
performance.

Although a great deal of more recent favorable re-
search has supported the validity of certain personality
constructs for prediction of job performance (e.g., Bar-
rick & Mount, 1991; Salgado, 1997; Tett,
Jackson, &
Rothstein, 1991) and several methods have illustrated
the usefulness of such levels of validity (e.g., Hogan &
Roberts, 2001; Schmidt, Hunter, McKenzie, & Muldrow,
1979), some are not convinced by the criterion-related
validities observed in practice (e.g., Morgeson et al., 2007;
see Viswesvaran, Deller, & Ones, 2007, along with other

articles in the 2007 special issue of the International Journal
of Selection and Assessment for more extensive coverage
of this topic). For the sake of
further improving the
validity of these measures, it might be wise to maintain an
interactionist perspective by incorporating a recognition
that individuals often behave differently in different con-
texts.

Providing all test-takers a common context or frame-
of-reference may clarify the meaning of items and help to
reduce measurement error (Bing, Whanger, Davison, &
VanHook, 2004; Holtz, Ployhart, & Dominguez, 2005;
Lievens, De Corte, & Schollaert, 2008). Accordingly, a
small body of research has found that personality mea-
sures achieved higher criterion-related validity when test
and criterion contexts were matched (Bing et al., 2004;
Hunthausen, Truxillo, Bauer, & Hammer, 2003; Lievens
et al., 2008; Schmit, Ryan, Stierwalt, & Powell, 1995).

Although conscientiousness has been widely re-
searched in these studies, especially in the school setting,
openness to experience at work has not been as
extensively studied. In support of the potential usefulness
of openness, a meta-analysis by Tett et al. (1991) found
that the corrected validity coefﬁcient of openness was

& 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.,
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main St., Malden, MA, 02148, USA


Improving Prediction Through Context Speciﬁcity

231

.27. A more recent meta-analysis by Hurtz and Donovan
(2000) found that occupation moderated this validity.

Openness may be especially helpful in jobs that require
employees to adapt to rapidly changing work demands
and to generate novel problem solutions. Individual open-
ness, especially to work-related experience and content,
may simultaneously enhance breadth and depth of knowl-
edge and lead to the effective combination of domain-
relevant knowledge and skills with creativity-relevant
ones, such as the ability to draw useful parallels. This
combination is critical for the creative process of work-
related idea generation (Amabile, 1983). The need for
additional research into the prediction of creative pro-
blem solving is particularly keen given that this dimension
of performance is critical to organizational success in
industries that rely on innovative idea generation and
development of new products, procedures, and services.
For prediction of adaptive problem-solving performance,
there is reason to believe that work-speciﬁcity of items will
increase the criterion-related validity of the openness scale
in much the same way as for conscientiousness. Arguably,
conscientiousness is the personality variable that is most
intuitively aligned with job performance expectations. Test-
takers may be more likely to consider themselves in a job
context as they respond to general conscientiousness scale
items than they would be when responding to general
openness items. If increased match between predictor and
criterion contexts enhances validity (Lievens et al., 2008),
then measuring openness using a work-speciﬁc frame of
reference may produce an even larger increase in validity
than that seen for conscientiousness because the match is
improved to a greater degree.

2. The current study

The current study helped to answer a call by Robie,
Schmit, Ryan, and Zickar (2000) for research in ﬁeld
settings to assess the inﬂuence of personality scale
context speciﬁcity on validity for work criteria. This
study was speciﬁcally directed toward the prediction of
supervisory ratings of employees’ performance in solving
technical problems creatively and adaptively, and its de-
sign allowed for a direct computation of
incremental
validity of the context-speciﬁc scale over the noncontex-
tual scale. Because facets may exhibit differential relation-
ships with creativity and other performance measures
(Grifﬁn & Hesketh, 2004), openness to experience was
measured at both global and facet levels in the current
study.

2.1. Hypothesis

Based on previous research, context speciﬁc personality
scales were expected to show stronger associations with
behavior in the relevant context than were general

personality scales. For this study, Work-speciﬁc Open-
ness to Experience was hypothesized to predict creative
performance at work better than would the NEO PI-R
measure of general Openness to Experience.

2.2. Exploratory research question

Correlations between separate facets of Openness and
the supervisory ratings were computed and compared to
determine if facets differentially predicted creative work
performance.

3. Method

3.1. Participants

Research study packets were distributed to 254 employ-
ees from a variety of workplaces in the southeastern
United States. Some of these packets were distributed to
employed undergraduate students in engineering, com-
puter information systems, and architecture at a large
university. The remaining packets were distributed to
nonstudent employees in technical positions at the uni-
versity and in a variety of other organizations, including an
engineering ﬁrm and a government crime lab, with the
approval of
their supervisors. All participants were
volunteers who stated that their job required them to
solve technical problems. A few of the represented job
titles were electrical engineer, manufacturing engineer,
senior software specialist, and toxicology analyst.

In total, 83 participants and their supervisors returned
data that could be matched and used. Five was the
maximum number of responses received from any parti-
cular employing department or business. Such a sample of
employees from technically oriented jobs in a variety of
organizations may be more likely to generalize to a wider
spectrum of technical
jobs because extraneous situa-
tional and individual factors peculiar to any one organiza-
tion or supervisor should affect the results to a much
lesser degree (similar to random error or ‘noise’) than if
employees from a single organization dominated. Em-
ranged from 19 to 57 (M¼ 31.16,
ployee ages
SD¼ 10.66). The mean number of hours worked per
week was 34.35 (SD¼ 11.05). Employee tenure at their
current organizations ranged from 2 months to 25 years
(M¼ 4.25 years).

3.2. Predictor measures

3.2.1. NEO PI-R Openness scale
The 48-item NEO PI-R Openness scale was used to
measure general Openness including its six facets, (Open-
ness to) Aesthetics, Fantasy, Feelings, Values, Ideas, and
Actions. Response options followed a 5-point Likert-style
format from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
Costa and McCrae (1992) provided coefﬁcient a

& 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

International Journal of Selection and Assessment
Volume 18 Number 2 June 2010


232

Victoria L. Pace and Michael T. Brannick

Table 1. Scale correlations and statistics

Scales

Mean

SD Work-speciﬁc

Openness

NEO
PI-R
Openness

Supervisor-
rated creative
performance

Supervisor-
rated overall
performance

Supervisor-
rated technical
proﬁciency

Work-speciﬁc Openness
NEO PI-R Openness
Supervisor-rated creative performance
Supervisor-rated overall performance
Supervisor-rated technical proﬁciency
Note. Scale reliabilities italicized. Performance and proﬁciency scores were calculated by averaging scale item scores. **po.01

168.82 16.03
.86
165.90 18.51
.72
.32**
0.87
0.73
.17
0.67  .06

.88
.09
 .01
 .12

.92
.60**
.21

3.89
4.46
4.53

–
.44**

–

reliability statistics ranging from .58 to .80 for the six
facets in the self-administered version for their employ-
ment sample. Coefﬁcient a for the full scale was .88 in the
current study. Other statistics are included in Table 1.

3.2.2. Work-speciﬁc Openness scale
As other researchers have explained (Holtz et al., 2005;
Lievens et al., 2008; Schmit et al., 1995), simply adding ‘at
work’ to existing NEO Openness items (the standard
frame-of-reference treatment in most studies of other
factors) does not make sense on many of the items.
Therefore,
it was necessary to write new items to
contextualize them, following the precedent of Robie et
al. (2000) with a conscientiousness item. The 48 items in
this scale were developed in an earlier study (Pace, 2005)
using a rational method for generation of a larger item
pool,
followed by item selection using a combined
rational and empirical approach to maximize facet scale
reliabilities while maintaining the best parallel in content
to NEO PI-R facet scales. Facets and response format
mirrored the NEO PI-R Openness scale (see Appendix A
for example items). In a previous development sample of
employed undergraduates, reliabilities for Work-speciﬁc
facet scales ranged from .68 to .74 with reliability of the
full Openness scale at .87. In the current sample, coefﬁ-
cient a reliability was found to be .86 and convergent
validity with the NEO PI-R was .72. This lends support to
the successful matching of the underlying construct and
facets of the NEO PI-R while making them more work-
relevant. Additional scale statistics are included in Table 1.
Because scores on the NEO PI-R conscientiousness scale
were also collected from the development sample, facet
scores from the three scales were analyzed using princi-
pal component analysis with oblique (Oblim) rotation.
To support the construct validity of the Work-speciﬁc
Openness scale,
its facets and those from the NEO
PI-R Openness scale should load substantially on the
same factor, while the NEO PI-R Conscientiousness
scales should load on a separate factor. When two
rotated factors were examined, each of the six facets of
the NEO PI-R conscientiousness scale and the six facets
from each openness scale (NEO PI-R and Work-speciﬁc)
exhibited factor loadings above .40 on the two expected

factors, which were interpretable as conscientiousness
and openness.

3.3. Criterion measures

3.3.1. Supervisory rating form
Most studies have evaluated the validity of personality
factors for prediction of global measures of job perfor-
mance. Because openness may be a signiﬁcant predictor
within certain jobs only or of narrower performance
criteria, the current study focused on prediction of
creative performance in solving problems at work, and
compared this with predictions of overall and technical
performance.

A 5-item measure of the employee’s level of creative
performance on the job was completed by his or her
supervisor. The supervisor rated the employee on ﬁve
declarative statements regarding the employee’s quantity,
quality, and dependability of creative work solutions. An
example item is ‘In your observations, this employee
proposes exceptionally creative work solutions.’ Re-
sponse options followed a 5-point Likert format from
strongly disagree to strongly agree. The mean rating on
these ﬁve items was used as the employee’s creativity
rating. Two additional single-item ratings were included
on the form to serve as separate indicators of overall job
performance and technical proﬁciency.

3.4. Procedure

Study packets were distributed to voluntary participants
who completed the employee surveys and returned them
by mail. The employee survey included all items from the
NEO PI-R Openness scale and the Work-speciﬁc Open-
ness scale, interspersed with items that were meant to
disguise the study purpose. Standard demographic items
were included at the end of the survey.

Each survey packet also included instructions,

in-
formed consent documents, a supervisory rating form,
and self-addressed stamped return envelopes for both
the employee and supervisor. The employee was asked to
give the supervisory rating form, accompanying instruc-
tions, an informed consent document, and a return
envelope to their supervisor. Rating forms were returned

International Journal of Selection and Assessment
Volume 18 Number 2 June 2010

& 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.


Improving Prediction Through Context Speciﬁcity

233

by supervisors directly to the researcher, who matched
each with the completed employee survey bearing the
same number. A sample of supervisors was contacted to
verify supervisory ratings data.

4. Results

Means and standard deviations for each variable, as well
as correlations between criterion measures and criter-
ion-related validities of the total Work-speciﬁc and NEO
PI-R Openness scales, are listed in Table 1. Although no
serious range restriction was noted in predictor vari-
ables, most criterion variables were negatively skewed.
Overall performance and technical proﬁciency ratings
were single item measures and exhibited particularly
strong ceiling effects, so analyses using these two criteria
should be interpreted with caution.

As hypothesized, Work-speciﬁc Openness to Experi-
ence predicted creative performance at work better than
did the NEO PI-R measure of general Openness to
Experience. Whereas the correlation between NEO PI-
R Openness total scores and supervisory ratings of work
creativity was not signiﬁcant (r¼.09, NS), the correlation
between Work-speciﬁc Openness scores and supervi-
sory ratings of work creativity was signiﬁcant and larger
than typically seen for relations between personality
scales and work criteria (r¼.32, po.01).

In a simultaneous regression of supervisory ratings of
creative performance onto both NEO PI-R and Work-
speciﬁc Openness total scores, the model R2 was .14
(po.01), and the standardized beta weight of the total
Work-speciﬁc Openness variable was signiﬁcant (b¼ .52,
po.01), whereas that of the total NEO PI-R Openness
variable was not (b¼ .281, NS). Hierarchical regres-
sions of supervisory ratings of creative performance onto
Work-speciﬁc and NEO PI-R total scores showed strong
evidence of
incremental validity of the Work-speciﬁc
scale over the NEO PI-R Openness scale, but not the
reverse. Speciﬁcally, initial entry of NEO PI-R scores did
not yield a signiﬁcant change in R2 (DR2¼ .01, NS),
whereas the addition of Work-speciﬁc scores produced
a signiﬁcant change (DR2¼ .13, po.01; see Table 2).
Reversing the entry order, initial entry of Work-speciﬁc
scores produced a signiﬁcant change in R2 (DR2¼ .10,
po.01), whereas addition of the NEO PI-R facet scores
did not increase R2 signiﬁcantly.

To address our exploratory research question, corre-
lations of openness facets with creative performance
ratings were examined for evidence of differential pre-
diction. Although some work-speciﬁc facets (Values,
Fantasy, Actions, and Ideas) were signiﬁcant predictors
of supervisory ratings and others (Aesthetics and Feel-
ings) were not, differences between these validity coefﬁ-
cients were not
found to be signiﬁcant using the
Hotelling–Williams test. Validities of the facet subscales
of NEO PI-R and Work-speciﬁc Openness are shown in
Table 3.

5. Discussion

This study found greater criterion-related validity of a
measure of work-speciﬁc openness to experience rela-
tive to a general openness measure, consistent with
previous study results for other personality factors and
contexts (Bing et al., 2004; Hunthausen et al., 2003;
Lievens et al., 2008; and Schmit et al., 1995).
In the
current study, the focal criterion was a speciﬁc aspect of
job performance, supervisory ratings of creative problem
solving, for a sample of technical personnel. It appears
that there is an advantage to using items that have a work
frame of reference for prediction of job performance.

A limitation of the current study is that an increase in
validity due to frame-of-reference consistency may co-
exist with an increase in validity due to item content
because of the necessity of writing new items for this
construct. Every attempt was made to rationally develop
a scale for the workplace that matched the NEO PI-R
openness construct deﬁnition and facets provided by
Costa and McCrae (1992), and convergent correlations
supported the success of this effort.

Although some work-speciﬁc facets (Values, Fantasy,
Actions, and Ideas) were signiﬁcant predictors of super-
visory ratings and others were not, the differences
between these validity coefﬁcients were not signiﬁcant.
Because one possible reason for the lack of signiﬁcance is
lack of power, research with larger samples is warranted.
Continued research into frame-of-reference of per-
sonality scales is necessary to determine if increases in
criterion-related validity will be observed for other
occupations and personality factors. We also invite
researchers to investigate empirically what speciﬁc as-
pects of context are most important to match with those

Table 2. Hierarchical regression of supervisory ratings onto Work-speciﬁc and NEO PI-R Openness

Model

1. NEO PI-R Openness
2. NEO PI-R and Work-speciﬁc Openness

1. Work-speciﬁc Openness
2. Work-speciﬁc and NEO PI-R Openness

R

.092
.374

.319
.374

R2

.008
.140

.102
.140

R2 change

Signiﬁcance of F for change

.008
.132

.102
.038

.410
.001

.003
.063

& 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

International Journal of Selection and Assessment
Volume 18 Number 2 June 2010


234

Victoria L. Pace and Michael T. Brannick

Table 3. Validities of openness facet scores

Scale

Work-speciﬁc Fantasy
NEO PI-R Fantasy
Work-speciﬁc Aesthetics
NEO PI-R Aesthetics
Work-speciﬁc Feelings
NEO PI-R Feelings
Work-speciﬁc Actions
NEO PI-R Actions
Work-speciﬁc Ideas
NEO PI-R Ideas
Work-speciﬁc Values
NEO PI-R Values
*po.05.

Supervisory ratings of
employee creativity

Supervisory ratings of
overall job performance

.26*
.11
.08
 .05
.15
 .11
.22*
.12
.25*
.21
.25*
.10

.18
.08
.11
 .11
.05
 .02
.10
.04
.22
.15
 .03
 .16

Supervisory ratings of
technical proﬁciency
 .10
 .11
 .07
 .18
 .04
 .15
 .15
 .07
.01
.06
.17
 .002

of the criterion. Although we have a long way to go
before we fully understand the personality characteristics
that are most predictive of various components of job
performance, and the optimal way to measure them, this
study provides one piece of the emerging puzzle. The use
of predictor measures that match the context of the
criterion, along with more speciﬁc identiﬁcation and use
of predictor facets that are conceptually related to
criteria such as creative problem solving, may greatly
help to improve the validity of personality tests and to
enrich our understanding of personality–performance
linkages.

Acknowledgements

This paper is based on research conducted as part of the
ﬁrst author’s Master’s thesis while at the University of
South Florida. She would like to thank her major
professor, Dr Michael T. Brannick, as well as committee
members Dr Walter C. Borman and Dr Bill Kinder for
their thoughtful suggestions. She would also like to
acknowledge the efforts of undergraduate assistants, Jill
Cantrell, Katherine Karr, Galatiani Maglis, Aida Progri,
Iravonia Rawls, and Zachary Staley, who provided support
during data collection.

References

Amabile, T.M. (1983). The social psychology of creativity. New

York, NY: Springer-Verlag.

Barrick, M.R., & Mount, M.K. (1991). The Big Five personality
dimensions and job performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel
Psychology, 44, 1–26.
Bing, M.N., Whanger,

J.B.
(2004). Incremental validity of the frame-of-reference effect
in personality scale scores: A replication and extension.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 150–157.

J.C., Davison, H.K., & VanHook,

Costa, P.T, Jr., & McCrae, R.R. (1992). Revised NEO personality
inventory and NEO ﬁve-factor inventory professional manual.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.

Grifﬁn, B., & Hesketh, B. (2004). Why openness to experience is
not a good predictor of job performance. International Journal
of Selection and Assessment, 12, 243–251.

Hogan, R., & Roberts, B.W. (2001). Introduction: Personality
and industrial and organizational psychology. In B.W. Roberts,
& R. Hogan (Eds.), Personality psychology in the workplace
(pp. 3–16). Washington, DC: American Psychological Asso-
ciation.

Holtz, B.C., Ployhart, R.E., & Dominguez, A. (2005). Testing the
rules of justice: The effects of frame-of-reference and pre-
test validity information on personality test responses and
test perceptions. International Journal of Selection and Assess-
ment, 13, 75–86.

Hunthausen, J.M., Truxillo, D.M., Bauer, T.N., & Hammer, L.B.
frame-of-reference effects on
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88,

(2003). A ﬁeld study of
personality test validity.
545–551.

Hurtz, G.M., & Donovan,

(2000). Personality and job
performance: The Big Five revisited. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 85, 869–879.

J.J.

Lievens, F., De Corte, W., & Schollaert, E. (2008). A closer look
at the frame-of-reference effect in personality scale scores
and validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 268–279.

Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York, NY:

Wiley.

Morgeson, F.P., Campion, M.A., Dipboye, R.L., Hollenbeck, J.R.,
Murphy, K., & Schmitt, N. (2007). Reconsidering the use of
personality tests in personnel selection contexts. Personnel
Psychology, 60, 683–729.

Pace, V.L. (2005). Creative performance on the job: Does Openness
to Experience matter? Unpublished master’s thesis, University
of South Florida, Tampa.

Robie, C., Schmit, M.J., Ryan, A.M., & Zickar, M.J. (2000). Effects
of item context speciﬁcity on the measurement equivalence
of a personality inventory. Organizational Research Methods, 3,
348–365.

Salgado, J.F. (1997). The ﬁve-factor model of personality and job
performance in the European community. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 82, 30–43.

International Journal of Selection and Assessment
Volume 18 Number 2 June 2010

& 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.


Improving Prediction Through Context Speciﬁcity

235

Schmidt, F.L., Hunter, J.E., McKenzie, R.C., & Muldrow, T.W.
(1979). Impact of valid selection procedures on work-force
productivity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64, 609–626.

Schmit, M.J., Ryan, A.M., Stierwalt, S.L., & Powell, A.B. (1995).
Frame-of-reference effects on personality scale scores and
criterion-related validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 607–
620.

Tett, R.P., Jackson, D.N., & Rothstein, M. (1991). Personality
measures as predictors of job performance: A meta-analytic
review. Personnel Psychology, 44, 703–742.

Viswesvaran, C., Deller, J., & Ones, D.S. (2007). Personality
measures in personnel selection: Some new contributions.
International
and Assessment, 15,
354–358.

Selection

Journal

of

Appendix A

Appendix A1. Example items from the Work-speciﬁc Openness scale

Ideas
I am curious about competitors’ ideas.
I get ideas for work solutions from seemingly unrelated knowledge and situations.
Values
I think people who want to change the workplace would probably be better off ﬁnding a different workplace. (R)
I think it is best if people who work together are very similar. (R)
Aesthetics
The visual appeal of my work area is important to me.
For me, artistic considerations make the difference between good and great work products.
Fantasy
When I am considering job solutions, I like to follow very unusual thoughts to see where they might lead.
I think spending time fantasizing about projects is a waste of effort. (R)
Feelings
Different work environments affect my mood for better or worse.
I seldom notice how work tasks make me feel. (R)
Actions
I prefer to stick with job tasks I do well rather than to try new tasks. (R)
I like jobs with tasks that change frequently.

& 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

International Journal of Selection and Assessment
Volume 18 Number 2 June 2010

