 
 
Information Technology as Competitive Advantage: The Role of Human, Business, and
Technology Resources
Author(s): Thomas C. Powell and  Anne Dent-Micallef
Source: Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 18, No. 5 (May, 1997), pp. 375-405
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3088167
Accessed: 01-02-2017 19:56 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3088167?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Strategic Management
Journal

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 18:5, 375-405 (1997)

 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AS COMPETITIVE
 ADVANTAGE: THE ROLE OF HUMAN, BUSINESS,
 AND TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES

 THOMAS C. POWELL and ANNE DENT-MICALLEF
 Bryant College, Smithfield, Rhode Island, U.S.A.

 This paper investigates linkages between information technology (IT) and firm performance.
 Although showing recent signs of advance, the existing IT literature still relies heavily on case
 studies, anecdotes, and consultants' frameworks, with little solid empirical work or synthesis
 of findings. This paper examines the IT literature, develops an integrative, resource-based
 theoretical framework, and presents results from a new empirical study in the retail industry.
 The findings show that ITs alone have not produced sustainable performance advantages in
 the retail industry, but that some firms have gained advantages by using ITs to leverage
 intangible, complementary human and business resources such as flexible culture, strategic
 planning-IT integration, and supplier relationships. The results support the resource-based
 approach, and help to explain why some firms outperform others using the same ITs, and why
 successful IT users often fail to sustain IT-based competitive advantages. ? 1997 by John
 Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 INTRODUCTION

 As the field of strategic management has
 expanded, strategy researchers and practitioners
 have shown increasing interest in the role of
 information technology (IT) in strategy formu-
 lation and implementation, and in its impacts on
 financial performance (e.g., Sabherwal and King,
 1991; Holland, Lockett, and Blackman, 1992;
 Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993; Kettinger et
 al., 1994). However, the literature is fragmented
 and far-flung, and-despite some recent
 advances-weighs heavily toward case studies,
 anecdotes, and conceptual frameworks, with
 insufficient empirical work and minimal synthesis
 of findings. This paper attempts to redress this
 imbalance by examining and integrating IT's role
 in producing competitive advantage, and
 presenting results from a new empirical study in
 the retail industry.

 Contrary to the prevailing case studies and
 anecdotes, the findings suggest that, owing to IT
 imitation by competitors, ITs have not, in and
 of themselves, produced sustained performance
 advantages. The resource-based 'strategic neces-
 sity hypothesis' (Clemons and Row, 1991) sug-
 gests, and the data corroborate, that IT creates
 advantage by leveraging or exploiting preexisting,
 complementary human and business resources. In
 the retail industry, sophisticated IT users did not
 generally outperform less sophisticated users, but
 those that combined IT with critical complemen-
 tary resources did gain performance advantages.
 The results provide support for the resource-based
 approach, and help to explain apparent anomalies
 in the existing literature, in which some firms
 experience spectacular IT success while others
 lag and struggle, and in which spectacular suc-
 cesses seem singularly difficult to sustain.

 Key words: information technology; competitive
 advantage; resource-based view

 CCC 0143-2095/97/050375-31 $17.50
 ? 1997 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Received 17 April 1995

 Final revision received 15 July 1996

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 376 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY,
 STRATEGY, AND FIRM
 PERFORMANCE

 Orlikowski and Gash (1992: 2) defined IT as
 'any form of computer-based information system,
 including mainframe as well as microcomputer
 applications.' In business applications, the range
 and strategic impacts of such systems are vast;
 for example

 * In pharmaceuticals distribution, McKesson pro-
 vides its pharmacists with computer terminals
 that allow them to enter orders directly, si-
 multaneously improving customer service and
 increasing switching costs.

 * Federal Express drivers use hand-held com-
 puters and a sophisticated data management
 system that improve service and reduce costs,
 making overnight delivery services profitable
 and affordable to customers.

 * Merrill Lynch introduced the Cash Management
 Account (CMA), based on an information sys-
 tem that combined customers' checking, sav-
 ings, credit card, and securities accounts into a
 single statement, automatically investing unused
 funds in interest-bearing money market funds.

 * Xerox provides master production schedules on-
 line to suppliers to facilitate just-in-time deliv-
 eries, reduced inventory costs, and improved
 supplier relationships.

 * Large retailers like Toys R Us and Wal-Mart

 use sophisticated inventory management
 technologies, including electronic data inter-
 change with suppliers, to increase operational
 efficiencies and improve services.

 Do ITs produce sustainable competitive advan-
 tages? Until recently, the IT literature seemed
 almost uniformly positive, focusing on case stud-
 ies of spectacular IT successes-e.g., the Amer-
 ican Airlines SABRE reservations system (Buday,
 1986) and Merrill Lynch's CMA (Wiseman,
 1985)-and on conceptual frameworks designed
 to encourage and assist managers in IT implemen-
 tation (King, 1978, 1984; Rockart, 1979; Parsons,
 1983; McFarland, 1984). The case evidence sug-
 gested, for example, that American Airlines had
 not only gained direct strategic advantages over
 late-moving rivals such as Pan Am, but had
 significantly altered industry structure by creating

 switching costs among reservation agents and
 erecting IT-based entry barriers. The conceptual
 works argued for IT innovation and sophistication
 based on its potential for altering a full range of
 strategic and industry structure variables, includ-
 ing cost positions, scale economies and power
 relations with buyers and suppliers (Benjamin et
 al., 1984; Cash and Konsynski, 1985; Porter,
 1985; Clemons, 1986).

 From the outset, IT researchers advocated tight
 IT-strategy linkages, asserting that IT affects firm
 strategies, that strategies have IT implications,
 and that firms must somehow integrate strategic
 thrusts with IT capabilities (Rackoff, Wiseman,
 and Ullrich, 1985; Bakos and Treacy, 1986; Beath
 and Ives, 1986). Porter and Millar (1985), for
 example, related IT to the value chain, concluding
 that the main strategic purpose of IT is to coordi-
 nate activities in the chain; Rackoff et al. (1985)
 concluded that IT should support competitive
 thrusts such as cost leadership, differentiation,
 innovation, growth, and external alliances; and
 Rockart and Short (1989) argued that ITs serve
 primarily to 'manage organizational inter-
 dependence,' i.e., to solve coordination problems
 among departments and strategic business units.

 A number of researchers examined the con-
 ditions under which ITs create sustainable advan-
 tages. Porter (1985), for example, focused on
 first-mover advantages, arguing that technological
 advantage arises when first-mover advantages
 (such as preempting customers through switching
 costs) outweight first-mover disadvantages (such
 as development costs and learning curves). Cle-
 mons (1986) distinguished between externally
 focused applications-i.e., those that connect the
 firm with customers or suppliers (such as ATMs,
 SABRE and the McKesson system)-and inter-
 nally focused applications, i.e., those that improve
 internal efficiencies (such as factory automation
 systems). Citing the familiar case examples, the
 author suggested that external applications tended
 to produce advantages based on switching costs,
 whereas internal applications tended to produce
 advantages based on scale economies, managerial
 expertise and efficiencies. Neo (1988), analyzing
 14 well-known IT cases, concluded that the most
 successful IT implementers were those that had
 already implemented similar systems, having built
 an infrastructure of IT experience and learning.
 In sum, the pre-1990 IT literature focused on
 the strategic importance of IT adoption and inno-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 377

 vation, and reflected a general optimism concern-
 ing IT's potential for creating competitive advan-
 tage. But there were a few significant caveats. In
 the ominously titled 'Information technology as
 a competitive burden,' Warer (1987) focused on
 the risks and costs of IT investments, and on the
 difficulties of integrating IT with strategy.
 Clemons (1986) also acknowledged that, although
 IT had clearly produced advantages in a few
 spectacular cases, researchers still knew relatively
 little about IT's impacts on most firms. According
 to Clemons (1986: 131): 'Surely much is media
 hype or current business fad ... There is now a
 large, and largely anecdotal, literature, most of
 it referencing similar stories of technologically
 directed competitive triumphs. How much do we
 understand? ... How many of the stories are true,
 or accurately reported?'

 Recently, challenges to the earlier optimism

 for strategy research (Mahoney and Pandian,
 1992; Peteraf, 1993). Resource-based theory
 begins with the notion of resource heterogeneity,
 arguing that firms hold heterogeneous resource
 portfolios-whether by history, accident, or
 design-and that this resource heterogeneity is
 responsible for observed variability in financial
 returns across firms (Peteraf, 1993). If a firm
 produces consistently superior returns, competi-
 tors will seek causal connections among resources
 and performance, and will attempt either to imi-
 tate high-performing resources, acquire them in
 factor markets, or to develop alternative resources
 that produce similar benefits (Dierickx and Cool,
 1989). As such, firms achieve sustained perform-
 ance advantages by accumulating resource port-
 folios that produce economic value, are relatively
 scarce, and can sustain competitive attempts at
 imitation, acquisition, or substitution (Barney,
 1986a).

 have arisen from two additional sources. First,
 the emerging empirical evidence, though scant, is
 telling a different story. In a retail banking indus-
 try study, Banker and Kauffman (1988) found
 little or no significant connection between ATM
 adoption and performance and, in a follow-up
 study, Floyd and Wooldridge (1990) found no
 overall connection between ATM adoption and
 performance, with a positive correlation between
 performance and product IT offset by a negative
 correlation with process IT. Moreover, in a retro-
 spective examination of 30 well-known IT cases
 from the 1970s and early 1980s, Kettinger et al.
 (1994) found that, within 5 years of IT
 implementation, 21 of the 30 firms had experi-
 enced competitive declines either in market share,
 profits, or both. In a study involving 31 IT
 executives, Mahmood and Soon (1991) reported
 that, in most industries, ITs had no discernible
 impact on entry barriers, but that when impacts
 were present they tended toward reducing, not
 increasing, entry barriers. In a study connecting
 technology policy and strategy, Zahra and Covin
 (1993) found no direct technology-performance
 connection. And in Neo's (1988) study, ITs per
 se had little to do with IT performance, which
 was driven more by IT-oriented strategic planning
 and management vision and support.

 Aside from recent empirical findings, another
 major challenge to earlier optimism has arisen
 out of resource-based theory (Rumelt, 1987;
 Teece, 1987; Barney, 1991), which has emerged
 in recent years as a potential integrating paradigm

 Valuable, scarce resources may survive com-

 petitive imitation if protected by imitation bar-
 riers, or 'isolating mechanisms' (Rumelt, 1984),
 such as: (1) time compression diseconomies-a
 resource may require accumulation over time
 through learning, experience, firm-specific knowl-
 edge, or trained proficiency in a skill; (2) histori-
 cal uniqueness (first-mover advantages)-some
 resources are inherently unique or were originally
 acquired under nonreplicable conditions, such as
 a distinctive location, the cooptation of a sole
 raw material source, or first-mover advantages
 such as reputation, brand loyalty, or the power
 to establish industry standards; (3) embeddedness
 of resources-the value of a resource may be
 inextricably linked to the presence of another
 complementary or cospecialized resource; and (4)
 causal ambiguity-the connection between a
 firm's resource portfolio and its performance may
 be unclear, such as when a firm's success results
 from cultural or social phenomena too complex
 for managers to understand or manage
 (Lieberman and Montgomery, 1988; Dierickx and
 Cool, 1989; Barney, 1991).

 Whereas traditional strategy research has

 focused on advantages derived from industry and
 competitive positioning, the resource-based
 research has focused on advantages stemming
 from firm-specific, intangible resources such as
 organization culture, learning, and capabilities
 (Hall, 1993). Firm specificity (e.g., skills
 developed to operate highly specialized

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 378 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 machinery) enables firms to capture returns to a
 valuable resource by reducing its value in other
 contexts, and intangibility raises impediments to
 competitive observation and interpretation. Unlike
 product attributes and strategic positions, which
 competitors often replicate, or render obsolete,
 firm-specific, intangible resources tend to be tacit,
 idiosyncratic, and deeply embedded in the organi-
 zation's social fabric and history (Winter, 1987).
 Protected by isolating mechanisms such as
 resource connectedness and causal ambiguity,
 these resources may offer more complex and
 sustainable paths to competitive advantage
 (Hansen and Wernerfelt, 1989; Rumelt, 1991;
 Powell, 1996).

 Do ITs meet resource-based criteria for sus-

 tained competitive advantage? In a resource-based
 conceptual analysis of ITs and firm performance,
 Clemons and Row advanced a commodity view
 of IT, arguing that competitive imitation eventu-
 ally erodes most IT-based advantages, that non-
 imitators are eliminated, and that above-normal
 returns to the IT eventually vanish. The authors
 also argued that, not only are ITs unlikely to
 differentiate competitive performance, but they
 may not even improve overall industry returns,
 since customers and suppliers may coopt any
 potential efficiency gains for themselves. The
 authors concluded that 'Examples of using infor-
 mation technology to achieve sustainable advan-
 tage through either barriers to imitation or first
 mover advantages do exist, but they are far less
 common than a trusting first scan of the MIS
 literature would imply' (1991: 278).

 The strategic necessity hypothesis is somewhat
 bleaker than earlier perspectives in its estimate
 of the sustainability of IT-derived performance
 advantages, treating IT decisions more as threats
 than opportunities, i.e., as investments to avoid
 competitive decline, but with little likelihood of
 producing sustainable advantages. According to
 this view, firms would appear to have only three
 feasible paths to IT-based competitive advantage:
 either (1) reinvent IT advantages perpetually
 through continuous, leading-edge IT innovation;
 or (2) move first and erect inassailable first-
 mover advantages; or (3) embed ITs in organi-
 zations in such a way as to produce valuable,
 sustainable resource complementarity. The first
 two paths have proven precarious. Perpetual
 innovation may hypothetically produce advan-
 tages, but these advantages vanish if innovation
 either ceases or stumbles, and are haunted by
 ever-shortening IT development cycles. First-
 mover IT advantages seem more promising,
 particularly those-such as SABRE-involving
 proprietary systems customized to exploit firm-
 specific strengths or opportunities. However,
 such systems typically resolve into resource
 complementarities (i.e., they produce advantage
 by merging with skills, relationships, or strategic
 positions), and even then the empirical data
 (e.g., Kettinger et al., 1994) suggest that such
 advantages rarely endure. For these reasons, the
 resource view has focused on resource comp-
 lementarity as the most feasible path to IT
 advantage.

 The notion that ITs per se do not generate
 sustainable performance advantages has received
 increasing support in recent IT research, and has
 produced a perspective known as the 'strategic
 necessity hypothesis,' to which most IT
 researchers now adhere (Clemons, 1988; Floyd
 and Wooldridge, 1990; Clemons and Row, 1991;
 Kettinger et al., 1994). This hypothesis consists
 of two propositions: (1) ITs provide value to the
 firm by increasing internal and external coordinat-
 ing efficiencies, and firms that do not adopt them
 will have higher cost structures and therefore
 competitive disadvantage; and (2) notwithstand-
 ing (1), firms cannot expect ITs to produce sus-
 tainable advantages because most ITs are readily
 available to all firms-competitors, buyers, sup-
 pliers, and potential new entrants-in competitive
 factor markets.

 Despite its less optimistic view of IT's direct
 performance impacts, the strategic necessity
 hypothesis does appear to fit the emerging empiri-
 cal evidence, and its resource-based origins pro-
 vide a solid theoretical foundation for investigat-
 ing the contexts and conditions under which IT
 may produce competitive advantage. Particularly,
 it points toward a more balanced perspective, one
 that acknowledges the commodity view, while
 allowing the possibility of advantages arising
 from merging ITs with other resources: if ITs
 per se do not provide distinctive advantages, then
 firms must use them to leverage or exploit firm-
 specific, intangible resources such as organi-
 zational leadership, culture, and business proc-
 esses (Clemons and Row, 1991; Henderson and
 Venkatraman, 1993). The following section
 explores these notions further and develops
 hypotheses for empirical testing.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 379

 THEORY AND HYPOTHESES

 organizational flexibility in successful IT
 implementation.

 In its treatment of IT-based advantages, the
 resource-based view has emphasized sustainability
 protected by resource embeddedness, i.e., resource
 complementarity and cospecialization. Com-
 plementarity represents an enhancement of
 resource value, and arises when a resource pro-
 duces greater returns in the presence of another
 resource than it does alone, e.g., an electronic
 data interchange (EDI) system that only mar-
 ginally improves performance under ordinary con-
 ditions, but produces sustainable advantages when
 combined with preexisting supplier trust. Comp-
 lementary resources are cospecialized if one
 resource has little or no value without the other
 (Clemons and Row, 1991), e.g., IT hardware and
 software, neither of which has value without the
 other. Under the resource view, a complementary
 interaction typically enhances the value for both
 (or all) compementary resources, although the
 causality may be ambiguous (Barney, 1991). For
 example, an EDI system may enable a firm to
 enhance its supplier relationships, while the pre-
 existing supplier relationships maximize EDI's
 inherent information-sharing capabilities. An off-
 the-shelf EDI system would be a commodity
 resource, yet it may combine with supplier trust
 to produce an embedded, mutually reinforcing,
 advantage-producing resource bundle.

 Walton (1989) and Benjamin and Levinson
 (1993) classified resources as Organizational,
 Business, and Technological, and argued that IT
 performance depends on the integration of
 resources across these categories. Keen (1993)
 divided resources into Human, Business, and
 Technology resources, and developed a 'fusion'
 framework that strongly parallels resource-based
 theory, arguing that the key to IT success lies in
 the capacity of organizations to fuse IT with
 latent, difficult-to-imitate, firm-specific advantages
 embodied in existing Human and Business
 resources. A variety of alternative resource
 typologies exist (e.g., Grant, 1991; Barney, 1991;
 Black and Boal, 1994), but the Walton and Keen
 typologies arose specifically in the IT context,
 and focused on resources that may interact with
 IT to produce sustainable advantages. For
 example, Keen identified resources such as CEO
 commitment to IT, IT planning, and process rede-
 sign, and, using the Walton framework, Benjamin
 and Levinson (1993) focused on the role of

 According to Keen, 'The wide difference in
 competitive and economic benefits that companies
 gain from information technology rests on a man-
 agement difference and not a technical difference.
 Some business leaders are somewhat better able
 to fit the pieces together than others' (1993: 17).
 The IT literature, contingency approaches, the
 strategic necessity hypothesis, and resource-based
 theory point to the same conclusion: that IT
 advantage depends heavily on 'fitting the pieces
 together,' i.e., on exploiting relationships among
 complementary organizational resources. In the
 following sections, we investigate Human and
 Business resources that may combine with ITs to
 produce competitive advantage through resource
 complementarity. These resources form the basis
 for our hypotheses and empirical test.

 Complementary Human resources
 Reed and DeFillippi (1990) and Fiol (1991)
 argued that organizational cultures offer powerful
 forms of competitive advantage because they are
 difficult to articulate and require the simultaneous
 manipulation of complex relationships and
 technologies. In resource-based empirical studies,
 Hansen and Wernerfelt (1989) found that human
 resource factors (i.e., organizational climate and
 goal directedness) explained greater proportions
 of performance variance than strategy and eco-
 nomic factors, and Powell (1995) found that
 behavioral factors, such as open culture and CEO
 commitment, explained significantly greater TQM
 performance variances than process factors (such
 as defect reduction) and traditional quality control
 methodologies. In the IT literature, Neo (1988)
 concluded that interactions among IT and qualita-
 tive organizational variables strongly influenced
 IT performance, Ginsberg and Venkatraman
 (1992) cited linkages among IT performance and
 CEO attributes, and a variety of practitioner-
 directed studies have prescribed IT complemen-
 tarities with employee participation,
 empowerment, and cultural openness (e.g., Brod-
 erick and Boudreau, 1992; Pfeffer, 1995; Daven-
 port, 1994).

 Though currently popular, the notion that firms

 should merge technology with human dimensions
 is not new, tracing its roots to the 'sociotechnical'
 framework developed at London's Tavistock

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 380 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 Institute over 40 years ago (e.g., Trist and Bam-
 forth, 1951; Rice, 1958; Emery and Trist, 1965).
 Based on earlier empirical studies, Miller and
 Rice (1967) developed the 'sociotechnical' frame-
 work as a reconciliation of human, organizational,
 and technological needs, arguing that maximized
 technological performance requires simultaneous
 optimization of an organization's social and tech-
 nological subsystems. Subsequently, leading
 organizational researchers working in the 1960s
 and 1970s (e.g., Woodward, 1965; Child and
 Mansfield, 1972; Perrow, 1970) showed that
 technologies performed poorly in the absence of
 proper alignments with structures and cultures,
 conclusions that have received consistent support
 throughout the so-called 'human relations' (e.g.,
 Roethlisberger and Dickson, 1939; McGregor,
 1960) and 'contingency' (e.g., Lawrence and
 Lorsch, 1967) schools, as well as in more recent
 research linking organizations and technology
 (e.g., Huber, 1990; Orlikowski and Gash, 1992).

 In this section we discuss relationships between
 IT and six potential complementary resources:
 open organization, open communications, organi-
 zational consensus, CEO commitment, organi-
 zational flexibility, and IT-strategy integration.
 The cultural variables most frequently linked with
 IT performance are open organization and open
 communications. Zuboff (1988), for example,
 argued that the benefits of ITs lay in their
 capacities to release information throughout an
 organization, and that artificial cultural or struc-
 tural constrictions negate their value. As such,
 the author urged firms to embrace an open philo-
 sophy, allowing employees access to operating
 information traditionally controlled by upper man-
 agement, and repudiating traditional hierarchies,
 top-down communications, and autocratic com-
 mand and control. According to Zuboff, the
 'informated' organization must operate lean,
 retraining or eliminating middle managers, and
 fostering frequent, unstructured communications
 across functional and project boundaries. Ulti-
 mately, executives must change from controlling
 authority figures to supporting counselors, relin-
 quishing authority to those best positioned to
 make timely, informed decisions.

 cations (Orlikowski and Gash, 1992). Zuboff sug-
 gested that ITs often fail because managers under-
 estimate the magnitude of the required
 organizational shifts, as well as their own resist-
 ance to implementing the principles of open
 organization. Empirical results in the organi-
 zational ecology literature have shown that inno-
 vations affecting core organizational features
 (such as structures and cultures) produce the most
 powerful resistance to adoption because managers
 perceive them as posing the most significant sur-
 vival risks (Hannan and Freeman, 1984; Singh,
 Tucker, and House, 1986). In resource terms,
 managerial resistance to open organization acts
 as an isolating mechanism that impedes successful
 IT imitation, and protects the performance advan-
 tages of firms that combine IT with open cultures.
 The IT research also suggests that complemen-
 tarities may exist between ITs and organizational
 consensus, i.e., organizational trust, cooperation,
 and the absence of fundamental conflict. In an
 empirical study of 168 Belgian firms, DeWoot,
 Heyvaert, and Martou (1978) found that financial
 performance was not explained by technical inno-
 vations themselves, but rather by innovation proc-
 esses that involved little irrelevant disagreement
 and an attempt to integrate technology with strat-
 egy. Rockart and Short (1989) argued that ITs
 increase mutual dependencies across organi-
 zational functions, enabling more frequent and
 elaborate communications among disparate inter-
 ests, and requiring personnel to interact more
 'seamlessly.' In a retail industry analysis, Cle-
 mons and Row (1993) argued that new retail ITs
 require stores to interact more cooperatively with
 their own home offices and distribution centers,
 as well as with suppliers connected through EDI
 systems. And in her large-scale innovation study,
 Kanter concluded that the most effective inno-
 vators 'reduce rancorous conflict and isolation
 between organizational units; create mechanisms
 for exchange of information and new ideas across
 organizational boundaries; ensure that multiple
 perspectives will be taken into account in
 decisions; and provide coherence and direction to
 the whole organization. In these team-oriented
 cooperative environments, innovation flourishes'
 (1984: 55).

 Although new ITs require extensive adaptations
 from managers, users, and technologists, firms
 often respond sluggishly, unable to execute the
 higher-order changes necessary to merge IT with
 patterns of interpersonal behaviors and communi-

 Although researchers have extensively investi-
 gated the role of consensus in strategic planning
 and firm performance (e.g., Bourgeois, 1980; Hre-
 beniak and Joyce, 1984; Dess, 1983, 1987; Dess

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 381

 and Origer, 1987), the evidence has not shown
 conclusively that consensus alone has intrinsic
 value to the organization. Bourgeois (1980) and
 Hrebeniak and Joyce (1984) did find connections
 between performance and top management con-
 sensus on strategy, but Dess (1987) concluded
 only that consensus on either strategies or objec-
 tives was necessary, and in the Bourgeois study
 performance did not correlate with consensus on
 objectives. On the other hand, intraorganizational
 conflicts affect not only top management, but
 entire organizations, and even small conflicts can
 embed themselves deeply and intractably, misdi-
 recting motivation, decreasing adaptability and
 inhibiting the productivity of people and tech-
 nology (Walton and Dutton, 1969). Whereas
 organizational consensus reinforces IT's capabili-
 ties to expand communications and disseminate
 information, functional area conflicts and terri-
 torialism thwart them, and inhibit IT functionality
 (McCann and Galbraith, 1981; Kanter, 1984).
 Conversely, ITs may enhance the value of a high-
 consensus culture, facilitating communications
 and mutual interdependencies (Rockart and
 Short, 1989).

 In describing linkages among IT, strategy, and
 organizational infrastructures, Henderson and Venk-
 atraman (1993) emphasized the role of the CEO
 commitment to the success of IT implementation.
 According to the authors, successful IT requires a
 top executive who acts as 'business visionary' and
 'prioritizer,' clearly supporting and articulating the
 need for IT, and communicating its functionality
 within the context of the organization's strategy,
 structure, and systems. Neo's (1988) analysis pro-
 duced a similar result, the author reporting that
 'management vision and support' differentiated suc-
 cessful from unsuccessful IT implementers. The
 same notion arises in Quinn's (1979) concept of
 'top level risk-taking support,' in Maidique and
 Hayes' (1984) 'field general,' and in Benjamin et
 al.'s (1984) concept of the 'senior management
 entrepreneur' who is willing to view IT as a central
 part of business thinking, to examine how strategic
 decisions are affected by ITs, and to examine cross-
 functional IT applications.

 CEO commitment enhances IT success by mak-
 ing resources available for implementation, inte-
 grating IT with business strategy and processes,
 and ensuring continuity in IT investments over
 time (Kettinger et al., 1994). The evidence sug-
 gests that many CEOs find ITs threatening, and

 that CEOs' verbalized commitments are fre-
 quently perceived as shallow, uninformed and
 unsupported by resource deployments (Kanter,
 1984). In a study of IT systems in 24 companies,
 Benjamin et al. found that 'Only a handful of
 companies demonstrated that managerial attention
 was focused on the potential impact of infor-
 mation technology' (1984: 28), and CEOs have
 well-documented tendencies to perpetuate com-
 mitments to the status quo (Hambrick, Gelet-
 kanycz, and Fredrickson, 1993), and to develop
 successors who share their own repertoires and
 frames of reference (Smith and White, 1987).
 These CEO biases and rigidities may create inad-
 equate or inconsistent IT deployments, and com-
 bine with IT obsolescence to inhibit performance.
 According to Benjamin and Levinson (1993),
 IT change processes affect every function and
 organizational stakeholder, and therefore require
 fluidity of coordination, or organizational flexi-
 bility. If ITs require significant alterations in
 organizational structures (Barley, 1990), com-
 munication patterns (Huber, 1990), and power
 relations (Pettigrew, 1973), then first-order
 change-i.e., incremental modification of existing
 behaviors-is inadequate. Nonetheless, inertial
 forces protect the status quo, often making even
 first-order change unattainable (Bartunek and
 Moch, 1987). Orlikowski and Gash assert that
 ITs typically require second-order change, i.e., 'a
 shift to radically different frames and processes,
 with the shift representing a replacement of the
 status quo' (1992: 8); and in the longer run
 require third-order change, i.e., the creation of a
 capability to change. According to Orlikowski
 and Gash, ITs require adaptations not only in the
 outward manifestations of IT, but in the frames
 and behavioral repertoires of managers, technol-
 ogists and IT users.

 IT researchers, consultants, and executives have

 universally asserted that firms should integrate IT
 with overall strategic planning efforts (e.g., Porter
 and Millar, 1985; Rackoff et al., 1985; Bakos
 and Treacy, 1986; Beath and Ives, 1986; Clemons
 and Row, 1991; Holland et al., 1992), and we
 therefore include IT-strategy integration as a
 potential advantage-producing complementarity.
 According to Clemons, 'The importance of se-
 lecting strategic opportunities, applications that
 are consistent with and support the firm's strategic
 objectives, requires real links between MIS and
 strategic planning. It also requires the ability to

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 382 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 seek out, to find, and to recognize these strategic
 opportunities' (1986: 135). Rockart and Short
 (1989) made the additional point that not only
 does planning improve IT effectiveness, but IT
 may provide the systems and information that
 can make planning more effective, creating a
 symbiotic IT-planning relationship.

 Complementary business resources

 In this section we discuss the relationships among
 IT and six potential complementary business
 resources: supplier relationships, IT training, busi-
 ness process design, team orientation, bench-
 marking, and IT planning.

 Keen (1993) argued that firms need to integrate
 technologies with business logistics and practices,
 including supplier logistics, business process
 design, and IT planning. Supplier relationships
 occupy a central role, particularly in light of the
 rapid expansion of electronic data interchange
 (EDI) technologies (Holland et al., 1992). EDI
 systems combine intra- and interorganizational
 information processing to facilitate sophisticated
 electronic interactions with suppliers. However,
 in the absence of open and trusting supplier
 relationships, such systems can do little but mag-
 nify existing suspicions, and fracture tenuous
 relationships (Johnston and Vitale, 1988; Holland
 et al., 1992). The capacity to craft and maintain
 trusting and economically viable supplier relation-
 ships, and then to leverage these relationships
 using sophsiticated interorganizational ITs,
 appears to require tacit, complex coordination and
 communications skills that competitors may find
 difficult to replicate (Winter, 1987; Hall, 1993).
 IT researchers consistently advocate IT training
 as an indispensable complement to hardware and
 software investments (e.g., Kanter, 1984; Benja-
 min et al., 1984). On the other hand, IT training
 often has a commodity-like character, and generic
 IT training services are broadly available at a
 market price. As such, the only sustainable value
 to IT training appears to lie in merging firm-
 specific ITs with firm-specific training to produce
 idiosyncratic, causally ambiguous organizational
 capabilities (Barney, 1991). This may be possible
 through a combination of formal and on-the-job
 training methods, such as job rotation, cross-
 training, and mentoring (Landy, 1985), which
 emphasize firm-specific IT applications, and may
 in the long run produce embedded IT skills.

 Keen's (1993) fusion model strongly empha-
 sized the integration of IT with business proc-
 esses, and Boar (1994) proposed a model aligning
 IT with business process redesign, i.e., the com-
 plete reevaluation of existing customer-driven
 business processes, such as order fulfillment and
 new product development, and integration of
 these processes with IT capabilities. This
 approach, better known as 'business process
 reengineering,' has been popularized by Hammer
 and Champy (1993), who suggested that
 implementing new ITs within traditional func-
 tionally driven structures is equivalent to 'paving
 the cow paths.' Process reengineering supporters
 argue that traditional functional structures camou-
 flage value-creating processes, and that managers
 should focus not on ITs, but on business process
 redesign. According to Hammer and Champy
 (1993: 83), 'Technology is an essential enabler
 ... Merely throwing computers at an existing
 business problem does not cause it to be reengine-
 ered. In fact, the misuse of technology can block
 reengineering altogether by reinforcing old ways
 of thinking and old behavior patterns.'

 Boar argues that neither IT nor process rede-
 sign alone is sufficient, but that 'a state of align-
 ment is mandated' (1994: 187). This state of
 alignment would appear to draw upon a variety
 of firm-specific capabilities and practices, involv-
 ing an assessment of current structure and proc-
 esses, diagnosis of IT requirements, and a funda-
 mental realignment of structure and processes in
 conjunction with the introduction of new ITs. Not
 surprisingly, firms have experienced difficulty and
 disillusionment in implementing these dramatic
 realignments, and reengineering author and con-
 sultant Michael Hammer has estimated the reengi-
 neering failure rate at between 50 percent and
 70 percent (Keidel, 1994). Of all the proposed
 complementarities, process reengineering appears
 to demand the most fundamental perspective
 shifts, while the complex, tacit, firm-specific na-
 ture of the integration of ITs and business proc-
 esses may act as a significant impediment to
 competitive imitation.

 Rockart and Short (1989) have argued that a

 powerful IT feature is its capacity for enabling
 people to work effectively in teams. If, as dis-
 cussed earlier, ITs facilitate the move away from
 traditional hierarchy and toward open organi-
 zation, what remains would appear to be the
 team-based structure (Jasinowski and Hamrin,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 383

 1995). According to Rockart and Short, ITs such
 as e-mail, voice-mail, computer conferencing, and
 videoconferencing make it more feasible for
 teams to coordinate asynchronously (across time
 zones) and geographically. Moreover, a growing
 body of increasingly sophisticated, user-friendly
 software products-such as 'groupware' and proj-
 ect management software-have enhanced team
 planning and communications capabilities. As net-
 work-based ITs become more widespread, organi-
 zational performance may become increasingly
 affected by organizations' capacities to manage
 the interaction of teams and ITs (Manz and Sims,
 1993; Nolan and Croson, 1995).

 Some researchers have argued that best-

 practices benchmarking is essential to the devel-
 opment of competitive IT systems (Boar, 1994;
 Hammer and Champy, 1993), and benchmarking
 advocates have claimed that 'benchmarking has
 emerged as a fundamental tool for helping man-
 agers better evaluate the features, functionality,
 benefits, roles and costs of technology' (Bogan
 and English, 1994: 171). However, as a sus-
 tainable source of competitive advantage bench-
 marking is inherently suspect, since it appears to
 emphasize the systematic observation and repli-
 cation of competitive resources, rather than the
 design of firm-specific applications. A firm might
 very well extend its own innovative capacities
 by observing the processes and technologies of
 competitors (or firms in other industries), but it
 is not clear that firms consistently utilize bench-
 marking in that fashion, or that it would be
 reasonable to expect them to do so. We include
 benchmarking in our research because of its wide-
 spread practice (Whiteley, 1992) and its increas-
 ing presence in the IT literature, but we are aware
 of no empirical studies that have demonstrated a
 benchmarking-performance linkage.

 According to Clemons (1986: 132): 'Accidents
 make very good copy, but are a dreadful way to
 create business strategy.' On the other hand, the
 voluminous literature linking strategic planning
 and financial performance has produced equivocal
 results (see Miller and Cardinal, 1994), suggest-
 ing that planning alone does not readily convert
 to superior performance. According to Barney, a
 planning system may conceivably produce advan-
 tages, but only if it 'enables a firm to recognize
 and exploit other of its resources, and some of
 these resources might be sources of sustained
 competitive advantage' (1991: 113). Acknowl-
 edging its pervasiveness, we include IT planning
 in our research, noting that the advantage-
 producing opportunities for IT planning may be
 limited to cases of highly idiosyncratic, firm-
 specific IT planning processes.

 Hypotheses

 Based on the strategic necessity hypothesis, our a
 priori expectation is that Technology resources
 (ITs) behave as commodities, and therefore do not
 explain performance variance across firms. How-
 ever, based on our review of complementary
 Human and Business resources, we would expect
 to find that certain Human and Business resources
 do combine with ITs to explain significant perform-
 ance variance. Although the performance relation-
 ship seemed doubtful for some IT-Business
 complementarities-e.g., benchmarking and IT
 planning-for convenience we present our hypoth-
 eses in positive form, proposing generally that the
 Human and Business resources will produce the
 complementarities claimed for them. The Human
 and Business resources are summarized in Table 1,
 and our hypotheses are presented as follows:

 Of the studies cited thus far, few have failed

 to advance systematic IT planning as the preferred
 alternative to erratic or unplanned development.
 Clemons (1986), for example, lamented that most
 of the spectacular successes were, in fact, acci-
 dents, with managers developing ITs as solutions
 to pressing problems, without recognizing their
 potential strategic impacts. Thus, American Air-
 lines invited competitors to share in the develop-
 ment of an industrywide information system,
 viewing SABRE as a response to personnel short-
 ages and the rising costs of order entry, not as
 an opportunity to manipulate industry structure.

 Hypothesis 1: Human resources complemen-
 tary to IT create embedded advantages that
 explain significant performance variance
 among firms.

 Hypothesis 2: Business resources comple-
 mentary to IT create embedded advantages
 that explain significant performance variance
 among firms.

 Hypothesis 3: Technology (IT) resources do
 not explain significant performance variance
 among firms.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 384 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 Table 1. Human, business, and technology resources

 Human resources
 * Open organization

 * Open communications

 A culture of trusting and open relationships with minimal formalization and bureaucracy

 Free oral and written communications within and across business units, chains of command, and
 functional boundaries

 * Consensus

 Minimal conflict in goal-setting, decision-making and action-taking

 * CEO commitment

 A clear and visible CEO commitment to IT

 * Flexibility

 A culture that embraces and encourages change and experimentation, minimizes fear of failure, and
 welcomes opportunities to apply new IT developments

 * IT/Strategy integration

 Integration of IT planning with the overall goals, strategies, and strategic planning processes of the firm.
 An attempt to fit IT into strategic objectives rather than adopt ITs for their own sake

 Business resources
 * Supplier relationships

 * Supplier-driven IT

 * IT training

 * Process redesign

 * Teams

 Open and trusting relationships with key suppliers

 Encouragement and support by suppliers to adopt new ITs that may create interorganizational efficiencies

 Personnel are well trained on existing applications, and IT training is a visible priority in the firm

 An attempt to reevaluate and reorient traditional activities and structure along process lines, through
 'business process reengineering' or other process-based methods

 Conversion to a team-based structure, or the increased use of cross departmental teams in problem-
 solving

 * Benchmarking

 Actively researching and observing best practices of other firms in activities or processes that need
 improvement

 * IT Planning

 Clearly identified IT priorities and a plan for development and implementation

 Technology resources
 * ITs

 Computer hardware, software, and linkages (see Table 2 for retail-specific ITs)

 DATA AND MEASURES

 Sample

 (e.g., we would not expect CEO commitment to
 IT to have significant performance effects in the
 absence of ITs). To isolate the effects of ITs,
 i.e., to eliminate entanglements with other product
 or process technologies, we rejected high-
 technology industries such as semiconductors
 and biotechnology.

 To test these hypotheses, the researchers sought
 a relatively low-technology industry that had
 undergone significant change as a result of iden-
 tifiable ITs. We assumed that IT performance
 effects, if they existed, would most likely appear
 in an industry where, by common consent of
 experts and participants, the ITs had demonstrated
 profound strategic impacts. Moreover, to test the
 impacts of the complementary Human and Busi-
 ness resources, we required an industry where
 ITs had disseminated sufficiently for these
 resources to demonstrate their potential effects

 After an extensive review of the academic,

 trade and popular journals, and discussions with
 experts and participants in a variety of industries,
 we chose to focus our study in the retail industry.
 Retail is the largest industry in the U.S.A., meas-
 ured both by sales (roughly $500 billion annually)
 and total employment (over four million
 employees). Of the 15 largest employers in the

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 385

 U.S.A., six-Wal-Mart, KMart, Sears, J. C. Pen-
 ney, Kroger, and Dayton-Hudson-are retailers
 (Fortune, 1994). Nonetheless, retail has tradition-
 ally been a fragmented industry, consisting pre-
 dominantly of single-unit local competitors with
 few if any technological capabilities, and little
 perceived need for them. Until the past 15 or 20
 years, even many of the larger, national retailers
 operated with minimal technological capability
 and sophistication.

 among stores, home offices, distribution centers,
 and suppliers in the retail industry. EDI, for
 example, involves transactions between manufac-
 turers, retail distribution centers, and retail stores,
 whereas store-home office communications
 involve ITs such as fax, e-mail, and satellite
 communications. Based on research and inter-
 views, the researchers divided these retail IT
 applications into two broad categories: in-store
 ITs (i.e., those that help administer store oper-
 ations, such as POS scanners, inventory man-
 agement applications, and administrative
 applications); and beyond-store ITs (i.e., every-
 thing else, including ITs physically located in
 distribution centers or home offices, or that con-
 nect stores with suppliers, such as EDI). Table 2
 describes the ITs that fall under these two cate-
 gories.

 All this changed with the introduction of
 increasingly sophisticated point-of-sale (POS)
 scanning technologies, electronic data interchange
 (EDI) with suppliers, and computer-based sys-
 tems for inventory management, administration,
 human resource management, communications,
 and marketing. Leveraging leading-edge techno-
 logical breakthroughs, a few large retailers-most
 notably Wal-Mart and Toys R Us-revolutionized
 retail competition, establishing direct electronic
 linkages among stores, distribution centers, and
 suppliers, and redefining power relationships with
 suppliers and customers. Furthermore, retail ITs
 appear to be disseminating rapidly so that nearly
 all moderately large retailers have now
 implemented, at a minimum, the first-level POS
 scanning and inventory management technologies.
 Wal-Mart took the industry lead in deploying

 The empirical research proceeded in three
 phases. In the first phase, the researchers reviewed
 the existing academic and popular literature, both
 in IT generally and in specific retail applications,
 and conducted on-site interviews with retail
 executives, industry experts, store managers, and
 retail suppliers. Initial Linkert-type measurement
 scales were then developed for the Human, Busi-
 ness, and Technology resources (shown earlier in
 Table 1), the latter consisting of the in-store and
 beyond-store ITs (shown in Table 2). These
 POS scanning and EDI systems to decentralize
 buying and inventory decisions, and to establish
 scales were then pretested and refined by adminis-
 tering the initial survey to small groups of retail
 direct, paperless linkages with manufacturers. In
 the 1980s, Wal-Mart invested in sophisticated
 executives and store managers, and by follow-up
 POS scanners, equipped its distribution centers
 interviews concerning the scope, relevance, clar-
 ity, and form of the survey items. Cronbach
 with laser-guided bar code readers, and bought its
 reliabilities in the initial tests ranged between
 own satellite to transmit data across its network of
 0.50 and 0.90, and construct reliabilities appeared
 stores, distribution centers, and suppliers. These
 high based on variable intercorrelations and par-
 systems, which cost Wal-Mart an estimated $700
 ticipant feedback. Participant suggestions resulted
 million, have facilitated just-in-time replenishment
 and substantial annual savings through distri-
 in minor modifications for form and clarity, ulti-
 bution efficiencies (Reid, 1995). In 1987, Wal-
 mately producing the measures shown in Appen-
 dix 1.
 Mart also established its well-known partnership
 with Proctor & Gamble, which involved both
 data-sharing and active supplier involvement in
 stocking decisions (Zinn et al., 1993). Although
 most larger retailers have made significant
 advances in POS technologies, many still trail in
 these more advanced EDI technologies-as of
 1993, for example, roughly 700 retailers had
 begun to use EDI for purchase orders, but only
 about half of those also used EDI for invoices
 (Clemons, 1993).

 In the second phase, a list of U.S. retailers
 was assembled based on 4-digit SIC code classi-
 fications, and on mailing list and firm size data
 provided in Ward's Business Directory (1994).
 Despite recent industry consolidation, retail
 remains relatively fragmented and the vast
 majority of retailers in the directory had fewer
 than 50 employees, and little IT development. As
 such, the researchers focused on larger retailers,
 while also attempting to secure broad represen-
 tation across retail sectors. Although there were

 Figure 1 depicts the range of IT linkages

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 386 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 Maulracturer

 Dallas store

 In-store ITs

 Boston store
 In-store ITs

 * POS scanning
 * Inv mgt
 * Admin
 * HR mgt
 * Energy mgt
 * Local marketing

 Figure 1. IT linkages in the retail industry

 no hypotheses based on industry sector, 'specialty
 apparel' and 'other specialty retail' far outnum-
 bered other sectors, and these sectors would have
 been underrepresented in a sampling based on
 firm size alone. Thus, the researchers divided 19
 4-digit SIC codes into seven broad retail
 sectors-department stores, mass merchandisers,
 home improvement, supermarket, drug, specialty
 apparel, and other specialty retail (e.g., furniture
 stores, book stores, jewelry stores)-and sampled
 from large firms in each sector, even if they were
 not among the largest in the industry as a whole.
 Using the criteria of firm size and sector represen-
 tation, 250 retailers were chosen for the initial
 mailing, and a survey was mailed to the CEOs
 of these firms.

 Administration of the survey followed guide-

 lines prescribed in Dillman (1978). Before the
 mailing, each of the 250 retailers was phoned to
 verify address, phone and the current CEO, and

 a follow-up postcard and two follow-up letters
 (with surveys) were sent to CEOs who did not
 respond to the initial mailing. The CEOs were
 asked to fill out the surveys personally if they
 had the information being requested but, if not,
 to ask their chief information officer or other
 senior executive to complete the survey. Accord-
 ing to the names and titles provided on the
 surveys, all surveys had been completed either
 by CEOs or other senior executives.

 Of the 250 surveys mailed, 67 were returned,
 65 of which were complete, for a usable response
 rate of 26.0 percent. This compares with a 21
 percent response rate reported by Powell (1992a),
 and 28 percent response rates reported in studies
 by Gomez-Mejia (1992) and Zahra and Covin
 (1993) using comparable survey methodologies.
 Moreover, mean firm sales and employees in the
 sample did not depart significantly from popu-
 lation sizes obtained from Ward's Business Direc-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 387

 Table 2. In-store and beyond-store information technologies

 In-store ITs
 * Scanning ITs

 Scanners that log the receipt of goods; scanners at the point of sale (POS) for recording purchases for
 accounting, marketing and inventory management purposes; scanners for taking physical inventories;
 handheld, portable scanning terminals

 * Inventory management ITs

 System capacities for tracking month-to-date units sold for all SKUs; tracking current inventory for all
 SKUs; connectivity with central home office computer or data base; automatic reordering capability;
 electronic access to inventory data from other stores

 * Administration

 Computer-generated sales forecasting; electronic bookkeeping and reporting

 * Human resource administration

 Electronic labor planning and scheduling; electronic time clocks; electronic payroll; computer software
 and systems for training

 * Energy management

 Automated systems to manage energy consumption such as climate and lighting

 * Store communications

 Electronic mail among stores; in-store fax machines

 * Marketing technology

 Automated direct mail or other in-store electronic marketing capability

 Beyond-store ITs
 * Home office/store communications

 Satellite communications between stores and home office; electronic mail between stores and home office

 * Distribution center inventory management

 Scanners in the distribution center; automated inventory management at the distribution center

 * Distribution center communications

 Automated reordering between stores and distribution center; electronic manifesting with distribution
 center

 * Electronic data interchange (EDI)

 Scanner-driven automatic invoicing of suppliers; continuous replenishment of distribution centers or
 stores; advance shipping notice with suppliers; electronic or paperless funds transfer with suppliers

 * Home office marketing

 Home office computer data base of customers; computer-aided preferred customer target marketing

 tory, supporting the external validity of the sam-
 ple. All seven industry sectors were represented,
 with 'specialty apparel' and 'other specialty retail'
 producing the largest response, consistent with
 their larger numbers in the population. As
 expected based on our use of firm size as a
 sampling criterion, the typical respondent was
 relatively large and well established: mean annual
 sales were $1.5 billion (median = $350 million),
 mean number of employees was 11,540 (median
 = 3000), mean number of retail stores per com-
 pany was 533 (median = 130), and mean firm
 age was 46 years (median = 38 years).

 In the third phase, the researchers prepared
 an abridged version of the original survey for
 administration to retail store managers in stores
 corresponding with the firms that had responded
 in the second phase. The measurement scales are
 shown in Appendix 2. The purposes of this survey

 were, by obtaining two independent responses for
 as many firms as possible, to mitigate the effects
 of single-respondent bias, to measure the inter-
 rater reliability of the scales, and to compare
 home office and store perceptions of IT
 implementation and performance. In order to
 facilitate comparisons with home office responses,
 the abridged survey contained, to the degree pos-
 sible, the same items as the home office survey.
 The In-Store Technology questions were identical,
 as were the Human resource questions, with the
 four exceptions noted in Appendix 2. The
 IT/Strategy integration item was excluded from
 the Human resource section of the abridged sur-
 vey, and the Business resource and Beyond-Store
 Technology sections were excluded in their
 entirety, since the questions did not generally fall
 within the direct experience of store managers.
 In order to give the researchers additional

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 388 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 insights and exposure to IT retail applications, an
 attempt was made, in conjunction with survey
 administration, to obtain personal, on-site inter-
 views with as many store managers as possible.
 The researchers contacted retail store managers
 for those respondent firms that had store locations
 within approximately a 60-mile radius of the
 researchers' home institution, an area that
 included two large cities and numerous suburban
 shopping malls. Fifty of the 65 respondents had
 store locations in this area, and these store man-
 agers were contacted by phone, with a request
 for an on-site personal interview or, in the alter-
 native, to complete the survey either by mail or
 fax. Of the 50 managers contacted, 43 agreed to
 participate, and these managers completed the
 abridged survey. Of these 43, 22 were interviewed
 on-site.

 Measures

 As described above, measures for the variables
 comprising Human, Business, and Technology
 resources were developed through literature
 reviews and interviews in the first phase, and
 were subsequently refined in pretesting. All meas-
 ures are provided in Appendices 1 and 2. Two
 performance measures were used as dependent
 variables in the study: IT Performance and Finan-
 cial Performance. IT Performance consisted of
 five survey items (shown in the first part of
 Appendix 1E) designed to measure executives'
 perceptions about the impacts of IT on financial
 performance. Financial Performance (shown in
 the second part of Appendix lE) was designed
 as a subjective measure of financial performance
 itself, consisting of questions about the firms'
 overall profitability and sales growth over the
 previous 3-year period. The two scales were
 placed in separate parts of the survey to mitigate
 potential autocorrelation effects. Internal Cron-
 bach alphas for the IT and Financial Performance
 measures were quite high (a =0.92 and 0.94,
 respectively), but the variables did not correlate
 significantly with one another (r = 0.16), suggest-
 ing that autocorrelation was minimized.

 In using subjective performance measures, the
 researchers assumed, given the senior executives
 involved, that respondents had sufficient perspec-
 tive and information to assess their firms' per-
 formance relative to competitors. Subjective mea-
 sures have been widely used in organizational

 research (Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967; Dess,
 1987; Powell, 1992a), and are often preferred to
 financial statement data, since firms may adopt
 varying accounting conventions in areas such as
 inventory valuation, depreciation, and officers'
 salaries. Also, this research included many pri-
 vately held firms that would not have provided
 confidential financial information as a matter of
 policy. However, as a test of the convergent
 validity of the Financial Performance measure,
 accounting performance measures were obtained
 for 20 publicly held survey participants for the
 same 3-year period covered by the subjective
 survey items. In this subsample, return on sales,
 a commonly used measure of financial perform-
 ance in strategy research (e.g., Cool and Dierickx,
 1993; Zahra and Covin, 1993), correlated signifi-
 cantly with the subjectively derived Financial Per-
 formance measure (r = 0.58; p - 0.01), suggest-
 ing that, although the accounting and subjective
 measures were not identical, the accounting meas-
 ures did constitute a key element of the respon-
 dents' subjective assessments.

 As shown in Appendix 1, all variables were

 measured using Likert-type scales comprised of
 between one and six items, depending on the
 complexity or multidimensionality of the vari-
 ables. Whenever possible, Cronbach's alpha was
 computed as a measure of scale reliabilities
 (Cronbach, 1951). Although no precise ranges
 exist to evaluate Cronbach's alpha, Van de Ven
 and Ferry (1979) recommended a minimum of
 0.35, with appropriate ranges depending on the
 breadth and complexity of the variable. In the
 home office results, the alphas ranged between
 0.71 and 0.92 for the Human variables, between
 0.71 and 0.83 for the Business variables, and
 between 0.60 and 0.89 for the Technology vari-
 ables. For the store data, the coefficients ranged
 between 0.72 and 0.92 for the Human variables,
 and between 0.54 and 0.78 for the Technology
 variables (the Business variables were not meas-
 ured in the store surveys). Overall, the mean
 alpha for the home office survey scales was 0.77
 and for the store survey scales was 0.76, and the
 coefficients tended to support both the reliability
 of the scales and their robustness across different
 sampling contexts.

 It was possible to measure the interrater

 reliability of the Human, Technology, and Per-
 formance scales by comparing home office
 responses with those obtained from store man-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 389

 agers. For the 29 survey items that appeared in
 identical form on the 43 matching home office
 and store surveys, the average overall correlation
 between home office and store responses was
 r=0.54 (p 0.001), and ranged as high as
 r-=0.75 for some variables, compared with an
 expected value of zero if the surveys had been
 matched randomly. The highly significant corre-
 lations supported the interrater reliability of the
 survey scales, but also showed that some differ-
 ences remained between store managers' and
 home office executives' perceptions of the vari-
 ables examined in this study. Although this is
 probably to be expected given their different geo-
 graphical locations and managerial perspectives,
 the researchers speculated that the differences
 might also reflect communication or conflict prob-
 lems in the firms. Since intrafirm communication
 and consensus pertained to our research objec-
 tives, we examined this possibility when compar-
 ing home office and store results, and will return
 to this issue in the following section.

 Table 3 shows that all three variable sets corre-

 lated significantly with IT Performance, the meas-
 ure of executives' perceptions of IT performance
 in their firms. The data show that retail executives
 attributed IT success in almost equal portions to
 Human (overall r= 0.47), Business (r= 0.44),
 and Technology (r = 0.36) resources. For Overall
 Performance, the table shows a somewhat differ-
 ent result, with a positive and significant zero-
 order correlation with Human resources
 (r= 0.45), a moderate correlation with Business
 resources (r=0.23), and a negative but non-
 significant correlation with Technology resources
 (r=-0.05). In other words, even though retail
 executives attributed IT success to the three vari-
 able sets in more or less equal proportions, the
 data show no zero-order correlation between ITs
 and overall firm performance.

 Table 4 presents the results from the multiple
 regressions for the three variable sets both for IT
 Performance and Overall Performance. Results
 are also given for Profitability and Sales Growth,
 which were subsets (items three through five) of
 the Overall Performance scale shown in Appendix
 1E. Ln emps was included in the regression as
 a control for firm size effects. Table 3 shows that
 the variables combined to explain 34 percent of
 IT Performance variance, and an estimated 29
 percent of variance in the population (using
 adjusted R2, which estimates population effects
 based on sample degrees of freedom). For Overall
 Performance, the variables explained 22 percent
 of variance in the sample, and an estimated 17
 percent of variance in the population.

 DATA ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

 We estimated the following linear regression
 model:

 ZY = HZH + PBZB + PTZT

 where Zy is a standardized Performance measure,
 H is the variable set of Human resource variables,
 B the set of Business variables, T the set of
 Technology variables, fx the standardized partial
 regression coefficients for estimating Zy from
 variable X, and Zx the standardized measure for
 variable set X. Our hypotheses predict that coef-
 ficients pH and lB (i.e., the Human and Business
 variable sets) will be positive and significant, but
 that coefficient fT (i.e., the Technology variable
 set) will not depart significantly from zero.

 Appendix 3 provides an overall correlation

 matrix for 29 variables measured in the home
 office segment of the study, i.e., the 25 inde-
 pendent variables in the three variable sets, plus
 firm size (using the natural logarithm of the
 number of employees), firm age, and the two
 performance dependent variables. Table 3 summa-
 rizes the data according to variable sets, and
 provides descriptive statistics and correlations
 with both performance measures.

 The results in Table 4 tend to support Hypoth-
 esis 3, i.e., that ITs do not, in and of themselves,
 explain significant overall financial performance
 among firms. The standardized regression coef-
 ficients were negative for each of the three Over-
 all Performance measures, though not significant.
 The data also tend to support Hypothesis 1:-i.e.,
 that Human complementary resources account for
 significant Overall Performance variance-with
 the Human resource set yielding large positive
 coefficients for all performance measures. The
 Human resource effect was sufficiently powerful,
 in fact, to eliminate the zero-order performance
 effects of the Business resource set, so that
 Hypothesis 2 was not supported in the data.

 To explore these findings further, the
 researchers ranked all 65 firms on the overall IT
 variable scores and divided them at the midpoint

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 390 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 Table 3. Descriptive statistics and performance correlations: Home office data

 Performance correlations

 (N= 65) a Mean S.D. IT Perf Overall Perf

 Human resources

 Open org 0.71 3.52 0.76 0.40*** 0.33**
 Open comms 0.85 3.53 0.84 0.46*** 0.44***
 Consensus 0.82 3.73 0.89 0.32** 0.36**
 CEO commit 0.92 3.94 0.95 0.33** 0.28*
 Flex 0.85 3.30 0.80 0.37** 0.25*
 IT/Strat na 3.54 1.20 0.2 0.29*

 Overall Human resources 0.82 3.59 0.91 0.47*** 0.45***

 Business resources

 Supplier rels na 3.51 0.87 0.26** 0.20
 Supplier driv na 2.75 0.97 0.08 0.11
 Train 0.77 3.16 0.71 0.50*** 0.26**
 Process 0.83 3.49 0.94 0.00 0.01
 Teams na 3.72 0.96 0.39** 0.22t
 Benchmark na 3.55 0.92 0.46*** 0.05
 IT Planning 0.72 3.32 0.80 0.21 0.18
 Overall Business resources 0.71 3.36 0.88 0.44*** 0.23t

 Technology resources

 In-store ITs 0.67 2.75 1.06 0.21t -0.04
 Scanning 0.81 3.07 1.20 0.29* -0.10
 Inv mgt 0.65 2.89 1.29 0.42*** 0.10
 Admin 0.69 2.25 1.07 0.28** 0.07
 HR admin na 1.46 1.53 0.20 0.01
 Energy na 2.36 1.43 0.08 -0.14
 Store comms na 1.37 1.51 0.17 -0.05
 Marketing 0.75 2.31 1.30 0.37*** -0.04
 Overall In-store

 Beyond-store ITs

 HO/Store comms na 1.91 1.26 0.21t -0.17
 DC inv mgt na 2.36 1.35 0.34*** -0.07
 DC comms 0.60 2.32 1.35 0.16 0.03
 EDI 0.81 1.51 0.94 0.17 -0.03
 HO mktg 0.89 2.06 1.46 0.02 0.01
 Overall Beyond-store 0.66 2.03 1.31 0.28 -0.06
 Overall Tech resources 0.79 2.19 1.30 0.36*** -0.05

 Performance

 IT Perf 0.92 3.61 0.80 1.00 0.16
 Overall Perf 0.94 3.38 0.96 0.16 1.00

 Notes
 'na' refers either to single-item measurement scales, or additive scales for which Cronbach coefficients would be inappropriate
 reliability measures (see Appendices 1 and 2).

 Overall variables are linear combinations of variables in their respective categories.

 Key to significance tests (two-tailed)
 tp 0.010; *p < 0.05; **p 0.01; ***p < 0.001

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 391

 Table 4. Multiple regressions and hypothesis testing

 Dependent variables

 (N= 65) /3 (3 P /3

 IT Perf Overall Perf Profitability Sales Growth

 Human resources 0.33** 0.52*** 0.42** 0.52***
 Business resources 0.17 -0.08 -0.08 -0.12
 Technology resources 0.30* -0.12 -0.18 -0.10
 In emps -0.06 0.09 0.17 0.06
 R 0.58*** 0.47** 0.40** 0.46**
 R2 0.34 0.22 0.16 0.21
 R2, adjusted 0.29 0.17 0.11 0.16

 Key to significance tests
 tp < 0.10; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001

 into two subsamples, labeled IT-Intensive
 (n= 32) and IT-Lagging (n= 33) firms. Table 5
 compares descriptive statistics and correlations for
 these two subsamples. The data suggest that IT
 intensity in the retail industry is driven primarily
 by firm size, as measured by number of
 employees and annual sales, though not by disper-
 sion (i.e., size as measured by number of stores
 or number of geographic regions in which they
 compete). The data also suggest that IT-intensive
 firms tend to employ the Business complementary
 resources more intensively, but not the Human
 resources. The executives of IT-Intensive firms
 rated their IT performance significantly higher
 than those of IT-Lagging firms, but the IT-
 Lagging firms performed slightly better overall
 than the IT-Intensive firms (though not signifi-
 cantly so), consistent with the small, negative
 IT-Overall Performance correlation shown earlier
 in Table 3.

 Table 5 provides additional evidence that ITs
 can produce competitive advantage by leveraging
 or exploiting Human and Business resources.
 Whereas Table 3 had shown a large and highly
 significant zero-order correlation between the
 Human resource set and Overall Performance,
 Table 5 shows that this correlation disguised two
 different effects: a non-significant (though
 positive) effect for IT-Lagging firms (r=0.24),
 and a highly significant effect for IT-Intensive
 firms (r = 0.57, p r 0.001). Similarly, the moder-
 ately significant zero-order correlation between
 Overall Performance and the Business set in
 Table 3 (r=0.23) had disguised the offsetting
 effects of a nonsignificant correlation among IT-

 Lagging firms (r= 0.10) and a significant corre-
 lation among IT-Intense firms (r = 0.50;
 p < 0.01). With the Human and Business
 resources yielding their highest returns in IT-
 intensive firms, these results suggest that ITs do
 have the capacity to leverage preexisting intan-
 gible resources. On the other hand, the lack of
 significant overall performance differences
 between IT-Intensive and IT-Lagging firms sug-
 gests that many IT-Intensive retailers have not
 merged these resources successfully.

 As a supporting hypothesis test, the researchers
 analyzed a subsample of 26 specialty apparel
 retailers. Although all 65 firms in the full sample
 competed in retail, aggregation across hetero-
 geneous retail sectors may have disguised within-
 sector effects. Of the seven original retail catego-
 ries sampled, specialty apparel contained by far
 the largest number of firms, and correspondingly
 produced the largest responding subsample (and
 the only sector subsample large enough to support
 independent analysis). Descriptive statistics and
 standardized regression coefficients for the spe-
 cialty apparel subsample are shown in Table 6,
 and tend to support the results in the overall
 sample-the means did not differ significantly
 from those presented in Table 3, and the signifi-
 cance tests for the standardized regression coef-
 ficients closely paralleled those in Table 4.

 Appendix 4 provides a correlation matrix for
 12 variables measured in the store manager phase
 of the study-i.e., five Human resource variables
 and seven Technology (IT) variables-and
 Table 7 summarizes the data, providing descrip-
 tive statistics and correlations between the store

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 392 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 Table 5. IT-intensive and IT-lagging firms

 Descriptive statistics

 IT-intensive firms (n = 32) IT-lagging firms (n = 33)

 Mean S.D. Mean S.D.

 Firm employees 18,555.2 34,666.6 4,734.1 7,447.5 *
 Sales 2,269.2 4,386.0 841.7 1,508.4 +
 No. of stores 545.5 848.5 521.9 1,105.2 ns
 No. of regions 4.3 2.7 3.4 2.4 ns
 Firm age 48.4 33.6 43.6 40.5 ns
 Overall Human resources 3.64 0.74 3.58 0.58 ns
 Overall Business resources 3.54 0.56 3.23 0.52
 Overall Technology resources 2.91 0.46 1.72 0.45 ***
 IT Perf 3.83 0.69 3.41 0.86 *
 Overall Perf 3.27 1.02 3.48 0.90 ns

 Correlations with performance

 IT-intensive firms IT-lagging firms

 r r A

 r with IT Perf

 Human resources 0.59*** 0.41* ns
 Business resources 0.61*** 0.18 *

 r with Overall Perf

 Human resources 0.57*** 0.24 t
 Business resources 0.50*** 0.10 t

 Notes
 Significance tests for differences between r coefficients were computed using Fisher's
 curve test.

 r to z transformation and a normal

 Key to significance tests
 tp < 0.10; *p < 0.05; **pp 0.01; ***p < 0.001

 Table 6. Specialty apparel subsample data

 Dependent variables

 (N= 26) Mean S.D. Perf/3 /3 growth (3

 Overall Profitability Sales

 Human resources 3.68 0.51 0.65** 0.50** 0.65***
 Business resources 3.35 0.47 0.03 0.13 0.01
 Technology resources 2.08 0.79 -0.05 -0.08 -0.13
 In emps -0.04 0.03 0.00
 R 0.66** 0.57** 0.65**
 R2 0.43 0.32 0.43
 R2, adjusted 0.32 0.19 0.33

 Key to significance tests
 tp < 0.10; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p S 0.001.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 393

 Table 7. Descriptive statistics and performance correlations: Store data

 Performance
 correlations

 (N= 43) a Mean S.D. IT Perf Overall Perf

 Human resources

 Open org 0.72 3.54 0.85 0.23 0.27t
 Open comms 0.73 3.83 0.93 0.35* 0.40**
 Consensus 0.92 4.14 0.85 0.31 * 0.34*
 CEO commit 0.90 3.58 1.07 0.35* 0.06*
 Flex 0.85 3.65 0.92 0.23 0.39**
 Overall Human res 0.82 3.79 0.90 0.28t 0.42**

 Technology resources
 (In-store ITs)

 Scanning 0.78 2.34 1.39 0.05 -0.17
 Inv mgt 0.63 3.16 1.00 0.16 -0.16
 Admin 0.54 2.51 1.46 0.09 -0.13
 HR admin 0.77 2.14 1.25 0.09 -0.06
 Energy na 2.14 1.77 0.15 -0.28t
 Store comms na 2.06 1.40 0.10 -0.21
 Marketing na 1.81 1.74 0.22 -0.24
 Overall Tech res 0.79 2.19 1.35 0.01 -0.28t

 Note
 Overall variables are linear combinations of variables in their respective categories.

 Key to significance tests (two-tailed)
 tp < 0.10; *p 0.05; **p 0.01; ***p < 0.001

 manager independent variables and the perform-
 ance dependent variables obtained in the home
 office surveys. Table 8 provides multiple
 regressions for the Human and Technology
 resource data obtained from store managers.
 In Table 7, none of the means obtained in

 the store surveys differ significantly from those
 obtained from home office executives, and the

 Table 8. Multiple regressions for store data

 Dependent variables

 Overall
 (N = 43) IT Perf 3 Perf f

 Human resources 0.39* 0.53**
 Technology resources 0.04 -0.39*
 No. of store employees 0.07 0.04
 R 0.41* 0.51**
 R2 0.17 0.26
 R2, adjusted 0.10 0.20

 Key to significance tests
 tp < 0.10; *p 0.05; **p 0.01; ***p 0.001

 performance correlations tend to corroborate the
 earlier conclusions. The store managers' assess-
 ments of Human resources correlated positively
 and significantly with Overall Performance
 (r=0.42; p < 0.01), as compared with r=0.45
 (p < 0.001) in the home office data reported
 in Table 3. The In-Store Technology variables
 correlated negatively (r=-0.28; p < 0.10) with
 Overall Performance in store manager surveys,
 compared with r = -0.04 in the home office sur-
 veys. These results are corroborated in Table 8,
 and appear to provide support for the earlier
 hypothesis tests, particularly considering that the
 store responses were obtained at significant physi-
 cal and perceptual distances from the home office
 performance data with which they correlate.

 Though the store data support the home office
 conclusions, the differences are also interesting,
 and deserve comment. Most obvious is the mod-
 erately large, negative Technology-Performance
 correlation in the store data. Since store managers
 work directly with the in-store ITs, one might
 assume that their responses are at least as accurate
 as those obtained from home office executives,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 394 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 and possibly more accurate. As such, one might
 reasonably conclude that, from the perspective of
 store managers, retail ITs simply do not produce
 the expected in-store performance gains. Merging
 the statistical results with anecdotal data, one
 might even conclude that, on the whole, store
 managers regard ITs as intrusive. To the extent
 that ITs have been successful, it appears from
 the IT Performance data in Table 8 that store
 managers attribute that success more to Human
 complementary resources (/3 = 0.35) than to Tech-
 nology ( = 0.07), whereas home office execu-
 tives attribute IT successes to both (see Table 4).
 Again, the responses reflect differences in per-
 spectives, with store managers emphasizing the
 contributions of people who work with in-store
 ITs on a daily basis, and home office executives
 placing equal emphasis on ITs.

 DISCUSSION

 nology resource difference score. In other words,
 the greater the difference in intrafirm assessment
 of resources, especially the IT resources, the
 worse the performance of the firm. This result
 suggests that conflicting perceptions of Human
 and IT resources negatively impact performance,
 and again supports the notion that complementary
 Human resources such as communication and
 consensus play a vital role in the successful
 implementation of IT.

 In another revealing difference, the home office

 responses produced a significant correlation
 between Overall Performance and CEO commit-
 ment to IT (r=0.28; p < 0.05), but the store
 managers' responses did not (r = 0.06). This, per-
 haps, should not surprise us in light of the nega-
 tive IT-Performance correlations at the store
 level-if ITs correlate negatively with perform-
 ance, then commitment to them will not improve
 performance. Of all the variables in the Human
 resource set, CEO commitment is perhaps least
 likely to provide value to the firm independent
 of IT, and this is reflected in the store managers'
 responses. Moreover, field managers may gener-
 ally find themselves less inclined than their home
 office colleagues to attribute firm success to
 CEO attributes.

 The resource-based view asserts that firms gain
 performance advantages by accumulating eco-
 nomically valuable, relatively scarce, and imper-
 fectly imitable resources or resource combinations
 (Barney, 1986a, 1986b). Are ITs economically
 valuable? Toward the end of the 1980s, a decade
 in which U.S. firms invested over a trillion dollars
 in information technology, some economists
 spoke of a 'productivity paradox': despite the
 huge IT investments, over 85 percent of which
 were in service industries, both profits and prod-
 uctivity stagnated (Roach, 1991). Overall U.S.
 productivity rose at an average annual rate of 1
 percent, compared with nearly 5 percent in Japan,
 and some speculated that IT overinvestment had
 contributed to the problem (Gleckman et al.,
 1993). In retail, productivity (i.e., average output
 per hour) rose at an average annual rate of 1.1
 percent between 1973 and 1989, compared with
 2.4 percent in the preceding 25-year period
 (Quinn and Baily, 1994).

 In both the home office and store manager

 data, the communication and consensus variables
 correlated significantly with all performance mea-
 sures. This led the researchers to speculate, as an
 additional measure of consensus effects, that
 overall performance might correlate with the mag-
 nitude of differences between the responses of
 the home office executives and their correspond-
 ing store managers. To test this notion, the
 researchers computed the squared differences
 between the home office and store responses on
 the overall Human resource and Technology
 resource sets, and correlated those difference
 scores with Overall Performance. The result was
 that Overall Performance correlated r=-0.23
 (p < 0.10) with the Human resource difference
 score, and r=-0.31 (p < 0.05) with the Tech-

 IT proponents argue that it takes time, and a

 critical mass of investment, for ITs to yield bene-
 fits, and some suggest that 1990s growth figures
 prove these benefits are finally being realized.
 They also argue that productivity measures ignore
 what would have happened without IT
 investments-productivity gains might have been
 even lower in the 1980s, and entire new industries
 would not have existed, including computer
 software and satellite services (Quinn and Baily,
 1994). Moreover, they claim that productivity
 gains disguise themselves, passing from services
 to manufacturing, as in the case of McKesson
 Drug, which has seen margins fall from 7 percent
 to 3 percent since implementing its pharmacy

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 395

 systems, but whose ITs improved productivity
 both for pharmacists and for drug manufacturers.
 According to Quinn and Baily (1994: 31), 'there
 is little doubt that IT has improved the perform-
 ance of the service sector significantly, although
 macroeconomic measures of productivity may not
 reflect the improvement.' Even economist Stephen
 Roach, who originally proposed the 'economic
 paradox,' believes IT can now drive genuine
 productivity gains (Magnet, 1993).

 But if we stipulate that ITs confer economic
 value, why do they not produce direct competitive
 advantages for firms? Our findings suggest two
 answers. First, we support the general consensus
 that ITs have become pervasive and relatively
 easy to acquire in competitive factor markets.
 Although retail systems varied greatly in their
 specifications, and some were far more advanced
 than others, all larger retailers had committed at
 some level to the basic scanning technologies.
 Second, our data suggest that most retailers have
 not merged IT with the requisite Human and
 Business complementary resources. The Human
 complementary resources, in and of themselves,
 explained performance differences in retail, as
 did, to a far lesser degree, the Business resources.
 IT did not. From this we conclude that, although
 the industry has invested sufficiently in ITs to
 negate direct IT advantages, some firms gained
 IT-related advantages by merging IT with com-
 plementary resources, particularly Human
 resources. Among IT-intensive firms, the payoffs
 to the Human and Business resources were sig-
 nificantly greater than among IT-Lagging firms.

 The magnitude of the Human resource-

 Performance relationship seemed rather striking,
 with Human resource coefficients consistently
 dwarfing the Business and IT coefficients,
 whether obtained from home office or remote
 store data. The results suggest that, of all
 resources in the IT equation, Human resources
 are probably the most neglected and difficult to
 master. They also support the resource-based
 notion that competitive advantages do not arise
 not from replicable resources, no matter how
 pervasive or impressive or economically valuable
 they may be, but from complex, causally ambigu-
 ous, intangible resources.

 Our results do not support the optimistic tone
 that dominated much of the early IT literature,
 but neither do they give cause for despair. They
 affirm Keen's (1993) 'fusion' perspective, which

 finds IT success based on a fusion of People,
 Business, and Technology resources, with the
 'management difference' producing the critical,
 distinctive advantage. They also support the
 premises underlying the sociotechnical systems
 literature (Miller and Rice, 1967), as well as
 Pfeffer's (1995) notions of gaining competitive
 advantage through people. Moreover, they support
 an accumulating body of resource-based empirical
 studies, including those by Hansen and Wernerfelt
 (1989)-in which organizational climate and
 human resource practices explained more per-
 formance variance than industry or market share
 factors-and Powell (1992a, 1992b), in which
 organizational factors proved as important as the
 effects of industry and strategic positioning. They
 also support the Powell (1994, 1995) TQM find-
 ings, in which TQM success resulted from intan-
 gibles such as employee empowerment and CEO
 commitment; the Kettinger et al. (1994) review
 that found few sustainable IT financial impacts;
 and the Zahra and Covin study, which connected
 strategy with technological policies, concluding
 that (1993: 474) 'An emphasis on technology
 alone cannot singularly ensure high performance.'
 According to Porter, 'Not all technological
 change is strategically beneficial; it may worsen
 a firm's competitive position and industry attrac-
 tiveness. High technology does not guarantee
 profitability' (1985: 165). Though we found little
 evidence of direct effects, either positive or nega-
 tive, the frequent negative (though non-
 significant) IT-performance correlations suggest
 that ITs probably did weaken some firms' com-
 petitive positions. To Porter's list of IT costs-
 which included learning costs, vulnerability to
 technology shifts, and the risk of low-cost com-
 petitive imitation-we would add the costs of
 integrating ITs with existing Human and Business
 resources, and note that high-performers appeared
 to focus on strengthening the organization's cul-
 tural, structural, and systems infrastructures, and
 not on adding technologies per se. Our data
 suggest that ITs do not merge themselves auto-
 matically with Human and Business resources,
 and that the more valuable the complementarity,
 the more difficult it is to achieve. We concluded,
 based on both statistical and anecdotal data, that
 the process requires managerial support and fore-
 thought, IT-strategy integration, a flair for organi-
 zational design, and perhaps a bit of luck. We
 agree with Kettinger et al. that 'the information

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 396 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 resources of a firm must be driven by business
 strategy and integrated into the product and proc-
 ess dimensions of the enterprise based on an
 understanding of core competencies' (1994: 50).
 In calling for a more 'human-centered infor-
 mation management,' Davenport made several
 observations that help to explain why human
 resources have such powerful performance
 impacts on IT systems. The core problem, the
 author asserts, is that most executives approach
 the IT decision by examining how people use
 machines instead of how they use information.
 The machines need people to make them prod-
 uctive because, according to the author (1994:
 122): 'Most of the information in organizations-
 and most of the information people really care
 about-isn't on computers. Managers prefer to
 get information from people; people add value to
 raw information by interpreting and adding con-
 text.' Moreover, the author suggests that, although
 most IT users either don't know or don't trust
 those who designed the systems they work on,
 people only want to use ITs to the extent that
 they participated in defining them, or trust those
 who did. Consistent with our own findings, Dav-
 enport recommends that (1994: 122): 'To make
 the most of electronic communications,
 employees must first learn to communicate face-
 to-face.'

 ing, controlling for industry factors, testing for
 interrater reliability using remote store managers,
 on-site interviews and direct observations of ITs
 in context, confirmation of respondent identities,
 sample validation through comparisons with
 population parameters, reliability testing of
 measurement scales, a sector subsample test, and
 testing the convergent validity between subjective
 and objective performance measures.

 Still, we acknowledge that our methodology

 required trade-offs that may limit the use and
 interpretation of the data. First, because our meth-
 odology was cross-sectional, we can only prove
 association, not causality. Although we believe
 the causality from Human complementary
 resources to performance is more plausible than
 the alternatives, it was not strictly demonstrable
 using cross-sectional data. Moreover, the cross-
 sectionality implies that we cannot demonstrate
 the long-term sustainability of advantages. We
 attempted to mitigate the significance of this
 problem by studying an industry where ITs had
 disseminated sufficiently to confer stable advan-
 tages, and by taking multiple-year performance
 measures. Nonetheless, our data do not prove
 sustainability, but only that advantages now exist,
 and that these advantages are associated with
 some resources but not others.

 CONCLUSIONS

 The researchers believe this project contributes
 theory-based conceptual synthesis and empirical
 evidence to an IT literature still dominated by
 anecdotes and consultants' IT implementation
 models. The findings help to explain why some
 firms struggle while others flourish with the same
 ITs, and why IT-based advantages tend to dissi-
 pate so rapidly; and they suggest a solution based
 on an integration of IT with the firm's infrastruc-
 ture of human and business complementary
 resources. We conclude, in sum, that ITs carry
 enormous productivity power but, like other
 powerful weapons, misfire in the wrong hands.
 In the end, we find ourselves supporting the
 seemingly universal intuition that tells managers
 'Technology alone is not enough.'

 In designing the empirical research, the

 researchers instituted a variety of validating pro-
 cedures and controls, including extensive pretest-

 The study's focus in the retail industry enabled

 the researchers to control for extraneous industry
 factors, but may also limit the applicability of
 the results to other contexts. The researchers
 chose this industry in part because it had sus-
 tained clear and profound IT change in the pre-
 ceding 20 years, but we acknowledge that some
 of the specific ITs involved-e.g., POS
 scanning-have greater visibility in retail than in
 other industries, and that some technologies vital
 to other industries may have less importance in
 retail. The researchers would not expect to find
 significant industry-based differences for the overall
 result concerning IT integration with Human and
 Business resources, but the results for specific tech-
 nologies may not apply to other industry settings.
 It should also be noted that, although this study

 relies primarily on resource-based theory, other
 perspectives might also have produced useful
 insights. For IT research, the transaction cost
 approach-which takes the transaction as its unit
 of analysis to explain why firms manage some
 transactions internally and others in markets
 (Williamson, 1975; Robins, 1987)-deserves

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 397

 attention. This approach has been used to investi-
 gate a variety of organizational activities-
 including bureaucracy, vertical integration and
 horizontal diversification (Armour and Teece,
 1978; Klein, Crawford and Alchian, 1978; Teece,
 1980, 1990)-as well as the organizational
 impacts of IT (Malone, Yates and Benjamin,
 1987; Clemons and Row, 1991). This approach
 has considerable merit in investigating IT's
 impacts on organizational governance, particularly
 in retail, where some analysts claim that ITs have
 contributed to ongoing industry consolidation by
 creating scale economies and switching costs, and
 that transaction cost reductions along the value
 chain have revolutionized retail-supplier relation-
 ships. The EDI-enabled Wal-Mart/Proctor &
 Gamble relationship suggests the direction these
 effects are taking, and one industry executive we
 interviewed predicted that large retailers will soon
 resemble flea markets, where manufacturers come
 to display, replace, promote, and sell their goods.
 This trend could fruitfully be examined from a
 transaction cost perspective.

 divisional hypothesis', Bell Journal of Economics,
 9, pp. 106-122.

 Bakos, J. and M. Treacy (1986). 'Information tech-

 nology and corporate strategy: A research perspec-
 tive', MIS Quarterly, 10(2), pp. 107-119.

 Banker, R. and R. Kauffman (1988). 'Strategic contri-
 butions of information technology: An empirical
 study of ATM networks', Proceedings of the Ninth
 International Conference on Information Systems,
 pp. 141-150.

 Barley, S. (1990). 'The alignment of technology and

 structure through roles and networks', Administrative
 Science Quarterly, 35, pp. 78-108.

 Barney, J. (1986a). 'Organizational culture: Can it be
 a source of sustained competitive advantage?', Acad-
 emy of Management Review, 11(3), pp. 656-665.

 Barney, J. (1986b). 'Strategic factor markets: Expec-
 tations, luck, and business strategy', Management
 Science, 32(10), pp. 656-665.

 Barney, J. (1991). 'Firm resources and sustained com-
 petitive advantage', Journal of Management, 17(1),
 pp. 99-120.

 Bartunek, J. and M. Moch (1987). 'First order, second
 order, and third order change and organizational
 development interventions: A cognitive approach',
 Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 23,
 pp. 483-500.

 Beath, C. and B. Ives (1986). 'Competitive information

 We designed this study to fill a rather signifi-

 cant gap in the strategy/IT literature, namely the
 need for a theoretically grounded empirical study
 to reconcile the complex array of existing models,
 cases, and opinions. However, within the vast
 and diffuse IT literature, we regard this as an
 early attempt at such reconciliation, and strongly
 encourage other strategy and IT researchers to
 attempt competing syntheses. The literature would
 benefit particularly from studies in other industry
 contexts, and using alternative theoretical perspec-
 tives and methodologies. Several perspectives
 hold particular promise for contributing to exist-
 ing IT research, notably transaction cost eco-
 nomics (Williamson, 1975), diffusion of inno-
 vation theory (Rogers, 1983), population ecology
 (Hannan and Freeman, 1984; Carroll, 1993), and
 agency theory (Jensen and Meckling, 1976;
 Eisenhardt, 1989). Our results generally support
 resource-based premises, but competition among
 a broader range of theoretical perspectives would,
 in the long run, produce a more complete and
 useful synthesis.

 systems in support of pricing', MIS Quarterly,
 pp. 85-96.

 Benjamin, R. and E. Levinson (1993). 'A framework
 for managing IT-enabled change', Sloan Manage-
 ment Review, Summer, pp. 23-33.

 Benjamin, R., J. Rockart, M. S. Morton and J. Wyman
 (1984). 'Information technology: A strategic oppor-
 tunity', Sloan Management Review, Spring,
 pp. 27-34.

 Black, J. and K. Boal (1994). 'Strategic resources:

 Traits, configurations, and paths to sustainable com-
 petitive advantage', Strategic Management Journal,
 Summer Special Issue, 15, pp. 131-148.

 Boar, B. (1994). 'Information technology and business
 alignment: A strategic assessment'. In B. Voss and
 D. Willey (eds.), Handbook of Business Strategy.
 Faulkner & Gray, New York, pp. 173-188.

 Bogan, C. and M. English (1994). Benchmarking for

 Best Practices. McGraw-Hill, New York.

 Bourgeois, L. (1980). 'Performance and consensus',
 Strategic Management Journal, 1(3), pp. 227-248.
 Broderick, R. and J. Boudreau (1992). 'Human resource
 management, information technology, and the com-
 petitive edge', The Executive, 7(2), pp. 7-17.

 Buday, R. (26 May 1986). 'Sabre gives the edge to
 American Airlines', Information Week, pp. 34-35.
 Carroll, G. (1993). 'A sociological view on why firms

 differ', Strategic Management Journal, 14(4),
 pp. 237-249.

 Cash, J. and B. Konsynski (1985). 'IS redraws competi-

 tive boundaries', Harvard Business Review, 63(2),
 pp. 134-142.

 Child, J. and R. Mansfield (1972). 'Technology, size,
 and organization structure', Sociology, 6, pp. 369-393.

 Clemons, E. (1986). 'Information systems for sus-

 REFERENCES

 Armour, H. and D. Teece (1978). 'Organization struc-
 ture and economic performance: A test of the multi-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 398 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 tainable competitive advantage', Information and
 Management, 11, pp. 131-136.

 Clemons, E. (22 February 1988). 'Strategic necessities',

 diversification, compensation strategy, and firm per-
 formance', Strategic Management Journal, 13(5),
 pp. 381-397.

 Grant, R. (1991). 'The resource-based theory of com-
 petitive advantage', California Management Review,
 33(3), pp. 114-135.

 Hall, R. (1993). 'A framework linking intangible

 resources and capabilities to sustainable competitive
 advantage', Strategic Management Journal, 14(8),
 pp. 607-618.

 Computer World, pp. 79-80.

 Clemons, E. and M. Row (September 1991). 'Sustain-
 ing IT advantage: The role of structural differences',
 MIS Quarterly, pp. 275-292.

 Clemons, E. and M. Row (May 1993). 'Information
 power and the control of the distribution channel,'
 Chief Executive, pp. 64-67.

 Cool, K. and I. Dierickx (1993). 'Rivalry, strategic

 groups, and firm profitability', Strategic Manage-
 ment Journal, 14(1), pp. 237-249.

 Cronbach, L. (1951). 'Coefficient alpha and the internal
 structure of tests', Psychometrica, 16, pp. 297-334.

 Davenport, T. (1994). 'Saving IT's soul: Human-

 centered information management', Harvard Busi-
 ness Review, 72(2), pp. 119-131.

 Dess, G. (1983). 'Consensus in the strategy formulation
 process and firm performance', Academy of Manage-
 ment Proceedings, pp. 22-26.

 Dess, G. (1987). 'Consensus on strategy formulation

 and organizational performance: Competitors in a
 fragmented industry', Strategic Management Jour-
 nal, 8(3), pp. 259-277.

 Dess, G. and N. Origer (1987). 'Environment, structure,
 and consensus in strategy formulation: A conceptual
 integration', Academy of Management Review,
 12(2), pp. 313-330.

 DeWoot, P., H. Heyvaert and F. Martou (1978). 'Stra-
 tegic management: An empirical study of 168
 Belgian firms', International Studies of Management
 and Organization, 7, pp. 60-75.

 Dierickx, I. and K. Cool (1989). 'Asset stock accumu-

 lation and sustainability of competitive advantage',
 Management Science, 35(12), pp. 1504-1513.

 Dillman, D. (1978). Mail and Telephone Surveys: The

 Total Design Method, Wiley, New York.

 and review', Academy of Management Review,
 14(1), pp. 57-74.

 Emery, F. and E. Trist (1965). 'The causal texture of

 organizational environments', Human Relations, 18,
 pp. 21-32.

 Fiol, M. (1991). 'Managing culture as a competitive

 resource: An identity-based view of competitive
 advantage', Journal of Management, 17, pp. 191-
 211.

 Floyd, S. and B. Wooldridge (1990). 'Path analysis
 of the relationship between competitive strategy,
 information technology, and financial performance',
 Journal of Management Information Systems, 7,
 pp. 47-64.

 Fortune (18 April 1994). 'The Fortune 500',

 pp. 210-313.

 Ginsberg, A. and N. Venkatraman (1992). 'Investing in
 new information technology: The role of competitive
 posture and issue diagnosis', Strategic Management
 Journal, Summer Speical Issue, 13, pp. 37-53.

 Gleckman, H., J. Carey, R. Mitchell, T. Smart and C.
 Roush (14 June 1993). 'The technology payoff',
 Business Week, pp. 57-68.

 Gomez-Mejia, L. (1992). 'Structure and process of

 Hambrick, D., M. Geletkanycz and J. Fredrickson

 (1993). 'Top executive commitment to the status
 quo: Some tests of its determinants', Strategic Man-
 agement Journal, 14(6), pp. 401-418.

 Hammer, M. and J. Champy (1993). Reengineering the
 Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution.
 Harper Business, New York.

 Hannan, M. and J. Freeman (1984). 'Structural inertia
 and organizational change', American Sociological
 Review, 49, pp. 149-164.

 Hansen, G. and B. Wererfelt (1989). 'Determinants

 of firm performance: The relative performance of
 economic and organizational factors', Strategic Man-
 agement Journal, 10(5), pp. 399-411.

 Henderson, J. and N. Venkatraman (1993). 'Strategic
 alignment: Leveraging information technology for
 transforming organizations', IBM Systems Journal,
 32, pp. 4-16.

 Holland, C., G. Lockett and I. Blackman (1992). 'Plan-

 ning for electronic data interchange', Strategic Man-
 agement Journal, 13(7), pp. 539-550.

 Hrebeniak, L. and W. Joyce (1984). Implementing

 Strategy. Macmillan, New York.

 Huber, G. (1990). 'A theory of the effects of advanced
 information technologies on organizational design,
 intelligence, and decision-making', Academy of Man-
 agement Review, 15(1), pp. 47-71.

 Jasinowski, J. and R. Hamrin (1995). Making it in

 Jensen, M. and W. Meckling (1976). 'Theory of the
 firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs, and owner-
 ship structure', Journal of Financial Economics, 3,
 pp. 305-360.

 Johnston, H. and M. Vitale (1988). 'Creating advantage
 with interorganizational information systems', MIS
 Quarterly, 12, pp. 153-166.

 Kanter, R. M. (1984). 'Innovation-The only hope for
 times ahead?', Sloan Management Review, repub-
 lished in 1986 Special Issue, pp. 51-55.

 Keen, P. (1993). 'Information technology and the man-
 agement difference: A fusion map', IBM Systems
 Journal, 32, pp. 17-39.

 Keidel, R. (1994). 'Rethinking organizational design',
 Academy of Management Executive, 8(4), pp. 12-28.
 Kettinger, W., V. Grover, S. Guha and A. Segars
 (1994). 'Strategic information systems revisited: A
 study in sustainability and performance', MIS Quar-
 terly, pp. 31-58.

 King, W. R. (1978). 'Strategic planning for management

 information systems', MIS Quarterly, 2, pp. 27-37.

 King, W. R. (1984). 'Exploiting information as a stra-
 tegic business resource', Policy and Information,
 8(1), pp. 1-8.

 Eisenhardt, K. (1989). 'Agency theory: An assessment

 America. Simon & Schuster, New York.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 399

 Klein, B., R. Crawford and A. Alchian (1978). 'Vertical
 integration, appropriable rents, and the competitive
 contracting process', Journal of Law and Economics,
 21, pp. 297-326.

 Landy, F. (1985). Psychology of Work Behavior. Dor-

 sey Press, Homewood, IL.

 Lawrence, P. and J. Lorsch (1967). Organization and

 Environment: Managing Differentiation and Inte-
 gration. Irwin, Homewood, IL.

 Lieberman, M. and D. B. Montgomery (1988). 'First

 mover advantages', Strategic Management Journal,
 Summer Special Issue, 9, pp. 41-58.

 Magnet, M. (3 May 1993). 'Good news for the service

 economy', Fortune, pp. 46-52.

 Mahmood, M. and S. K. Soon (1991). 'A comprehen-

 sive model for measuring the potential impact of
 information technology on organizational strategic
 variables', Decision Sciences, 22, pp. 869-897.

 Mahoney, J. T. and J. Pandian (1992). 'The resource-
 based view within the conversation of strategic man-
 agement', Strategic Management Journal, 13(5),
 pp. 363-380.

 Maidique, M. and R. Hayes (1984). 'The art of high-

 technology management', Sloan Management
 Review, republished in 1986 Special Issue, pp. 35-49.

 Malone, T., J. Yates and R. Benjamin (1987). 'Elec-
 tronic markets and electronic hierarchies', Communi-
 cations of the ACM, 30(6), pp. 484-497.

 Manz, C. and H. Sims (1993). Business without Bosses:
 How Self-managing Teams are Building High-
 performance Companies. Wiley, New York.

 McCann, J. and J. Galbraith (1981). 'Interdepartmental

 relations'. In P. Nystrom and W. Starbuck (eds.),
 Handbook of Organizational Design, Vol. 2. Oxford
 Press, Oxford, pp. 60-84.

 McFarland, F. (1984). 'Informational technology

 changes the way you compete', Harvard Business
 Review, 62(3), pp. 98-103.

 McGregor, D. (1960). The Human Side of Enterprise.

 McGraw-Hill, New York.

 Miller, C. and L. Cardinal (1994). 'Strategic planning
 and firm performance: A synthesis of more than
 two decades of research', Academy of Management
 Journal, 37, pp. 1649-1665.

 Miller, E. and A. Rice (1967). Systems of Organization:
 The Control of Task and Sentient Boundaries. Tavis-
 tock, London.

 Neo, B. S. (1988). 'Factors facilitating the use of

 information technology for competitive advantage:
 An exploratory study', Information and Manage-
 ment, 15, pp. 191-201.

 Nolan, R. and D. Croson (1995). Creative Destruction.

 Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

 Orlikowski, W. and D. Gash (1992). 'Changing frames:
 Understanding technological change in organi-
 zations', Center for Information Systems Research,
 working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
 nology.

 Parsons, G. (1983). 'Information technology: A new
 competitive weapon', Sloan Management Review,
 25(1), pp. 3-14.

 Perrow, C. (1970). Organizational Analysis: A Socio-

 logical View. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.

 Peteraf, M. (1993). 'The cornerstones of competitive
 advantage: A resource-based view', Stratgic Man-
 agement Journal, 14(3), pp. 179-191.

 Pettigrew, A. (1973). The Politics of Organizational

 Decision-Making. Tavistock, London.

 Pfeffer, J. (1995). 'Producing sustainable competitive
 advantage through the effective management of
 people', Academy of Management Executive, 9(1),
 pp. 55-69.

 Porter, M. (1985). Competitive Advantage. Free Press,

 New York.

 Porter, M. and V. Millar (1985). 'How information

 gives you competitive advantage', Harvard Business
 Review, 65(4), pp. 149-160.

 Powell, T. (1992a). 'Organizational alignment as com-
 petitive advantage', Strategic Management Journal,
 13(2), pp. 119-134.

 Powell, T. (1992b). 'Strategic planning as competitive
 advantage', Strategic Management Journal, 13(7),
 pp. 551-558.

 Powell, T. (1994). 'When lemmings learn to sail: Turn-
 ing TQM to competitive advantage'. In B. Voss and
 D. Willey (eds.), Handbook of Business Strategy.
 Faulkner & Gray, New York, pp. 42-54.

 Powell, T. (1995). 'Total quality management as com-
 petitive advantage: A review and empirical study',
 Strategic Management Journal, 16(1), pp. 15-37.
 Powell, T. (1996). 'How much does industry matter?
 An alternative empirical test', Strategic Management
 Journal, 17(4), pp. 323-334.

 Quinn, J. B. (1979). 'Technological innovation,

 entrepreneurship, and strategy', Sloan Management
 Review, republished in 1986 Special Issue, pp. 15-26.
 Quinn, J. and M. Baily (1994). 'Information tech-
 nology: Increasing productivity in services', The
 Academy of Management Executive, 8(3), pp. 28-48.

 Rackoff, N., C. Wiseman and W. Ullrich (1985). 'IS

 is for competitive advantage: Implementation of a
 planning process', MIS Quarterly, 9, pp. 285-294.
 Reed, R. and R. DeFillippi (1990). 'Causal ambiguity,

 barriers to imitation, and sustainable competitive
 advantage', Academy of Management Review, 15,
 pp. 88-102.

 Reid, M. (4 March, 1995). 'Change at the check-out',

 The Economist, pp. 3-18.

 Rice, A. (1958). Productivity and Social Organization:

 The Ahmedabad Experiment. Tavistock, London.

 Roach, S. (1991). 'Services under seige: The restructur-

 ing imperative', Harvard Business Review, 69(5),
 pp. 82-91.

 Robins, J. (1987). 'Organizational economics: Notes
 on the use of transaction cost theory in the study
 of organizations', Administrative Science Quarterly,
 32, pp. 68-86.

 Rockart, J. (1979). 'Chief executives define their own

 data needs', Harvard Business Review, 57(2),
 pp. 81-93.

 Rockart, J. and J. Short (1989). 'IT in the 1990s:

 Managing organizational interdependence', Sloan
 Management Review, Winter, pp. 7-17.

 Roethlisberger, F. and W. Dickson (1939). Management
 and the Worker. Harvard University Press, Cam-
 bridge, MA.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 400 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 Rogers, E. (1983). Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press,

 Zahra, S. and J. Covin (1993). 'Business strategy,

 New York.

 Rumelt, R. (1984). 'Toward a strategic theory of the
 firm'. In R. Lamb (ed.), Competitive Strategic Man-
 agement. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
 pp. 556-570.

 Rumelt, R. (1987). 'Theory, strategy, and

 technology policy, and firm performance', Strategic
 Management Journal, 14(6), pp. 451-478.

 Zinn, L., G. De George, R. Shortez, D. J. Yang and

 S. A. Forest (26 July 1993). 'Retailing will never
 be the same', Business Week, pp. 54-60.

 Zuboff, S. (1988). In the Age of the Smart Machine.

 entrepreneurship'. In D. Teece (ed.), The Competi-
 tive Challenge. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA,
 pp. 137-158.

 Basic Books, New York.

 Rumelt, R. (1991). 'How much does industry matter?',
 Strategic Management Journal, 12(3), pp. 167-185.

 Sabherwal, R. and W. King (1991). 'Toward a theory
 of strategic use of information services', Information
 and Management, 20, pp. 191-212.

 Singh, J., D. Tucker and R. House (1986). 'Organiza-
 tional change and organizational mortality', Adminis-
 trative Science Quarterly, 31, pp. 587-611.

 Smith, M. and M. White (1987). 'Strategy, CEO spec-

 ialization, and succession', Administrative Science
 Quarterly, 32, pp. 163-185.

 Teece, D. (1980). 'Economies of scope and the scope
 of the enterprise', Journal of Economic Behavior
 and Organization, 1(3), pp. 223-247.

 Teece, D. (1987). 'Profiting from technological inno-
 vation: Implications for integration, collaboration,
 licensing, and public policy'. In D. Teece (ed.), The
 Competitive Challenge. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA,
 pp. 185-219.

 Teece, D. (1990). 'Contributions and impediments of
 economic analysis to the study of strategic man-
 agement'. In J. Fredrickson (ed.), Perspectives on
 Strategic Management, Harper Business, Grand Rap-
 ids, MI, pp. 39-80.

 Trist, E. and K. Bamforth (1951). 'Some social and

 psychological consequences of the longwall method
 of coal-getting', Human Relations, 4, pp. 3-38.

 Van de Ven, A. and D. Ferry (1979). Measuring and

 Assessing Organizations, Wiley, New York.

 Walton, R. (1989). Up and Running: Integrating Infor-
 mation Technology and the Organization. Harvard
 Business School Press, Boston, MA.

 Walton, R. and J. Dutton (1969). 'The management of
 interdepartmental conflict: A model and review',
 Administrative Science Quarterly, 14, pp. 73-84.

 Ward's Business Directory of U.S. Private and Public
 Companies, Vol. 5 (1994). Gale Research, Detroit, MI.
 Warner, T. (1987). 'Information technology as competi-
 tive burden', Sloan Management Review, 29(1),
 pp. 55-61.

 Whiteley, R. (1992). The Customer Driven Company.

 Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

 Williamson, 0. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies:

 Analysis and Antitrust Implications. Free Press,
 New York.

 Winter, S. (1987). 'Knowledge and competence as
 strategic assets'. In D. Teece (ed.), The Competitive
 Challenge. Center for Research in Management,
 Berkeley, CA, pp. 159-184.

 Wiseman, C. (May 20, 1985). 'Strategic vision', Com-

 puterworld, pp. 1-17.

 Woodward, J. (1965). Industrial Organization: Theory

 and Practice. Oxford University Press, London.

 APPENDIX 1: HOME OFFICE
 SURVEY MEASUREMENT SCALES

 1A. Human resources

 Respondents were asked to indicate the extent to
 which they agreed or disagreed with the following
 statements, using a 1-5 scale (5 = strongly agree;
 1 = strongly disagree):

 Open organization (Open org)

 1. In the home office, our people are open and

 trusting with one another

 2. We have very little formal bureaucracy in

 3. Our people would say this is a loose, informal

 our company

 place to work

 Open communications (Open comms)

 1. Written and oral communications are very

 open in our home office

 2. Our people communicate widely, not just with

 their own departments

 3. Communications are very open between our

 home office and our stores

 Consensus (Consensus)

 1. There is lots of conflict in our home office

 (reversed)

 2. We have lots of conflict between our home

 office and our stores (reversed)

 CEO commitment to IT (CEO commit)

 1. Our top executives have clearly indicated their

 commitment to information technology

 2. Our top executives have championed infor-

 mation technology within the company

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 401

 Flexibility (Flex)

 Benchmarking (Benchmark)

 1. In general, our people accept change readily
 2. Our people have openly embraced new infor-

 1. We actively research the best information tech-

 nology practices of other retailers

 mation technologies

 3. We have had very few problems fitting infor-
 mation technologies within our company cul-
 ture

 IT/Strategy information (IT/Strat)

 1. Our information technology planning is inte-

 grated with the overall business plan

 1B. Business resources

 IT planning (Planning)

 1. We have a formal, long-term strategic plan

 for information technology

 2. We have clearly identified our information

 technology project priorities

 3. We regularly measure the bottom-line effec-

 tiveness of our IT projects

 1C. Technology resources (In-store)

 Respondents were asked to indicate the extent to
 which they agreed or disagreed with the following
 statements, using a 1-5 scale (5 = strongly agree;
 1 = strongly disagree):

 Respondents were asked to indicate the extent to
 which they had implemented, in their retail stores,
 the information technologies indicated below,
 using a 0-5 scale (5 = highly advanced in
 implementation; 1 = not yet begun; 0 = do not
 intend to implement):

 Supplier relationships (Supplier rels)

 1. We have very open, trusting relationships with

 Scanning devices (Scanning)

 our suppliers

 1. Scanners at the point of sale (POS)
 2. Scanners logging the receipt of goods at the

 Supplier-driven IT (Supplier driv)

 store

 1. Our suppliers strongly urged us to adopt new

 information technologies

 IT training (Train)

 1. Our home office people are well trained in

 the use of new information technologies

 2. Our store personnel are well trained in the use

 of new information technologies

 3. Information technology training is a high pri-

 ority in our company

 Process redesign (Process)

 1. We have an overall business plan to redesign

 our inventory management process

 2. We have an overall business plan to redesign

 our marketing and sales processes

 3. Improving company processes has become a

 key part of our business plan

 Teams (Teams)

 3. Scanners for taking store inventory
 4. Handheld, portable scanning terminals

 Inventory management technologies (Inv mgt)

 1. POS system tracking month-to-date units sold

 for all items

 2. POS system tracking units currently in inven-

 tory for any item

 3. POS terminals linked to company's central

 computer

 4. Electronic manifesting with distribution center
 5. Computer-based automatic reordering at

 predetermined inventory levels

 6. Computerized access to other stores' inven-

 tory levels

 Automated administration (Admin)

 1. Computer-generated sales forecasts
 2. Computer-generated bookkeeping

 and

 reporting

 Automated human resource administration (HR
 admin)

 1. We frequently use cross-departmental teams to

 solve key problems

 1. Electronic labor planning and scheduling

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 402 T. C. Powell and A. Dent-Micallef

 2. Electronic time clocks
 3. Electronic payroll system
 4. Computer software and systems for training

 Electronic data interchange (EDI)

 employees

 Energy management technology (Energy)

 1. Automated energy management system (e.g.,

 lights, climate)

 Store communications (Store comms)

 1. Electronic mail between stores
 2. Fax machine

 Marketing technology (Marketing)

 direct mail)

 1D. Technology resources (Beyond-store)

 Respondents were asked to indicate the extent to
 which they had implemented the beyond-store
 information technologies indicated below, using
 a 0-5 scale (5 = highly advanced in implemen-
 tation; 1 = not yet begun; 0 = do not intend
 to implement)

 Home office/store communications (HO/Store
 comms)

 1. Scanning at distribution center (or stores) to

 invoice suppliers automatically

 2. Electronic data interchange (EDI) with sup-

 pliers

 3. EDI with suppliers to continuously replenish

 distribution center

 4. EDI with suppliers to continuously replenish

 stores

 5. EDI with suppliers for advance shipping notice
 6. Electronic or paperless funds transfer with sup-

 pliers

 Home-office marketing (HO mktg)

 1. Computer-aided marketing (e.g., targeting pre-

 1E. Performance

 Respondents were asked to indicate the extent to
 which they agreed or disagreed with the following
 statements, using a 1-5 scale (5 = strongly agree;
 1 = strongly disagree):

 Information technology performance (IT perf)

 1. New information technologies have dramati-

 cally increased our productivity

 2. New information technologies have improved

 our competitive position

 3. New information technologies have dramati-

 1. In-store computer marketing (e.g., automated

 ferred customers)

 2. Computerized data base of customers

 1. Satellite communications between stores and

 cally increased our sales

 home office

 4. New information technologies have dramati-

 2. Electronic mail between stores and home office

 cally increased our profitability

 5. New information technologies have improved

 Distribution center inventory management (DC
 inv mgt)

 our overall performance

 Overall company performance (Overall perf)

 1. Automated inventory management in the distri-

 bution center

 1. Over the past 3 years, our financial perform-

 2. Scanners for price labeling in the distribution

 ance has been outstanding

 center

 2. Over the past 3 years, our financial perform-

 ance has exceeded our competitors'

 Distribution center communications (DC comms)

 3. Over the past 3 years, our sales growth has

 been outstanding

 1. Automated reordering between stores and dis-

 4. Over the past 3 years, we have been more

 tribution center

 2. Electronic manifest between stores and distri-

 bution center

 profitable than our competitors

 5. Over the past 3 years, our sales growth has

 exceeded our competitors'

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 403

 APPENDIX 2: STORE SURVEY
 MEASUREMENT SCALES

 2A. Human resources

 Consensus (S/Consensus)

 1. There is lots of conflict in our company

 (reversed)

 The survey items for in-store information technol-
 ogies were the same as the home office items
 (see Appendix 1A above). For the Intangibles
 items, the store managers were asked to indicate
 the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with
 the following statements, using a 1-5 scale (5 =
 strongly agree; 1 = strongly disagree):

 2. We have lots of conflict between our home

 office and our stores' (reversed)

 CEO commitment to IT (S/CEO commit)

 1. Our top executives have clearly communicated

 their commitment to information technologyl

 Open organization (S/Open Org)

 2. Our top executives have championed infor-

 mation technology within the company'

 1. Our people are open and trusting with one

 Flexibility (S/Flex)

 another

 2. We have very little formal bureaucracy in

 our company'

 1. In general, our people accept change readily'
 2. Our people have openly embraced new infor-

 3. Our people would say this is a loose, informal

 mation technologies'

 place to work'

 Open communications (S/open comms)

 1. Written and oral communications are very

 open in our company

 2. Communications are very open between our

 home office and our stores'

 3. We have had very few problems fitting infor-
 mation technologies within our company cul-
 ture'

 2B. Technology resources (In-store)
 Same as in Home Office Survey (see Appendix
 1C).

 ' Identical to corresponding item in the home office survey.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 (N = 65)

 XI X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10 XI1 X12 X13 X14 X15 X16 X17 X18 X19 X20 X21 X22 X23 X25 X26 X27 Yl Y2

 Xl Open org
 X2 Open comms
 X3 Consensus

 X4 CEO commit

 X5 Flex

 X6 IT/Strat

 X7 Supplier rels
 X8 Supplier driv
 X9 Train

 X10 Process

 XlI Teams

 X12 Benchmark
 X13 IT Planning
 X14 Scanning
 X15 Inv mgt
 X16 Admin

 X17 HR Admin

 X18 Energy
 X19 Store comms

 X20 Marketing
 X21 HO/Store com
 X22 DC inv mgt
 X23 DC comms

 X24 EDI

 X25 HO mktg
 X26 In emps
 X27 Firm age
 YI IT Perf

 Y2 Overall Perf

 0.64 1

 0.61 0.61 1

 0.40

 0.42

 0.15

 0.45

 0.40 0.46 1

 0.44 0.40 0.60 1

 0.32 0.31 0.52 0.15 1

 0.53 0.40 0.49 0.55 0.18 1

 0.09

 0.00

 0.11

 0.18

 0.21

 0.35

 -0.03

 -0.11

 -0.11

 49 1

 17 1

 -0.07

 -0.26

 29 0.18

 27 0.31 1

 13 -0.22 -0.12 0.

 49 0.27 0.48 1

 45 0.38 0.35 0.

 28-0.10 -0.03 0.

 0.08 0.10 0.14 0.06 0.07 0.23 1
 0.46 0.44 0.54 0.54 0.51 0.52 0.30 1
 0.01 -0.08 0.19 0.05 0.44 0.05 0.19 0.
 0.43 0.32 0.30 0.14 0.48 -0.02 -0.06 0.
 0.23 0.16 0.34 0.31 0.42 0.21 0.10 0.
 0.18 0.14 0.45 0.26 0.65 0.18 0.06 0.
 0.01 -0.06 0.07 0.21 0.08 0.10 -0.04 0.:
 -0.02 -0.13-0.01 0.11 0.05 0.04 -0.03 0.
 0.05 -0.10 0.14 0.19 0.17 0.21 0.05 0.
 0.11 0.09 0.27 0.20 0.32 0.13 -0.07 0.
 0.02 -0.08 0.18 0.14 0.28 -0.05 -0.08 0.
 -0.12 0.03 0.24 0.19 0.30 0.11 0.24 0.
 -0.01 -0.02 0.09 0.00 0.18 -0.11 -0.13 0.
 -0.04-0.01 0.25 0.01 0.24 0.04 0.10 0.
 0.08 0.00 0.00 -0.02 0.17 0.05 -0.09 0.
 -0.16 -0.16 -0.18 -0.07 -0.02 -0.12 0.06 0.(
 0.03 -0.13 0.14 0.09 0.18 0.07 0.19 0.
 -0.01 0.10 0.19 0.04 0.14 0.02 -0.03 0.(
 -0.10 -0.09 0.06 -0.09 0.21 -0.23 0.30 0.O
 -0.14 -0.19 0.12 -0.16 -0.13 0.02 -0.16 0.10 -0.
 0.40 0.46 0.32 0.33 0.37 0.22 0.26 0.08 0.
 0.33 0.44 0.31 0.28 0.25 0.29 0.20 0.11 0.26 0.01 0.22 0.05 0.18 -0.04 -0.10 0.10 0.07 0.01 -0.14 -0.05 -0.17 -0.07 0.03 -0.03 0.01 0.02 -0.11 0.161

 0.00 -0.08 -0.14 -0.04 -0.08 0.14 0.01 0.06 -0.03 0.03 0.14 0.04 0.26 1
 0.21 0.29 0.42 0.28 0.20 0.08 0.17 0.21 0.34 0.16 0.17 0.02 0.08 -0.23 1

 0.25 0.33 0.27 0.48 0.25 0.36

 0.41 0.37 0.35 0.33 0.22 0.07

 -0.05 0.29 0.18 0.11 0.10 0.34

 0.25 -0.04 0.27 0.48 0.46 0.02

 0.11 0.23 0.12 0.14 0.21 0.37

 0.47 0.24 0.43 0.37 0.29 0.28

 0.24 0.67 0.51 0.27 0.07 0.21

 0.23 0.44 0.24 0.13 0.21 1

 0.36 0.11 0.28 0.45 1

 0.51 0.39 0.40 1

 50 0.00 0.39 0.

 10 0.00 0.19 0.

 07 0.00 0.09 -0.i

 21 -0.04 0.08 0.

 21 0.07 -0.04 0.

 33 0.04 0.23 0.

 21 0.05 0.10 0.

 23 -0.03 0.08 0.

 01 -0.25 -0.05 0.

 03 0.12 0.30 0.

 14 0.12 0.12 0.

 15 0.21 0.10 0.

 11 0.17 0.19 0.

 0.39 0.26 0.29

 0.24 -0.01 0.07

 0.38 0.46 0.33

 0.27 0.58 1

 0.51 -0.15 1

 0.33 0.48 1

 21 0.10

 10 0.19

 46 0.37

 06 0.12

 30 0.36

 43 0.23

 18 0.25

 30 0.24

 16 0.05

 46 0.21

 05 -0.01

 34 0.31

 00 -0.01

 19 0.31

 0.10 1

 0.37 1

 0.41 1

 -0.03

 -0.02

 -0.15

 -0.11

 -0.04

 -0.24

 -0.10

 -0.20

 -0.17

 0.01

 0.66

 0.08

 0.02

 0.21

 I

 1

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Information Technology as Competitive Advantage

 405

 APPENDIX 4: CORRELATION
 MATRIX: STORE DATA

 (N = 43)

 XI X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10 X1l X12

 X1 Open org 1
 X2 Open comms 0.74 1
 X3 Consensus 0.36 0.68 1
 X4 CEO commit 0.17 0.35 0.15 1
 X5 Flex 0.46 0.68 0.37 0.42 1
 X6 Scanning 0.01 -0.06 -0.29 0.27 0.09 1
 X7 Inv mgt 0.19 0.25 -0.07 0.39 0.42 0.38 1
 X8 Admin -0.02 0.09 0.08 0.31 0.17 0.31 0.68 1
 X9 HR Admin -0.07 0.07 -0.09 0.33 0.35 0.42 0.56 0.48 1
 X10 Energy -0.02 0.06 -0.02 0.33 0.09 0.47 0.52 0.53 0.30 1
 XII Store comms -0.14 -0.14 -0.06 -0.18 -0.02 -0.07 0.22 0.16 0.20 0.15 1
 X12 Marketing -0.01 0.14 0.09 0.23 0.34 0.16 0.52 0.40 0.49 0.30 0.42

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:56:52 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

