GRAHAM PAGE
Millward Brown
Graham.Page@uk.

millwardbrown.com

HELEN FEARN
Millward Brown
Helen.Fearn@uk.

millwardbrown.com

Corporate Reputation: What Do Consumers
Really Care About?

Do consumers really care about corporate reputation when it comes to purchasing
decisions? This study tests that hypothesis by comparing consumers’ perceptions of
companies to the consumer equity of brands owned by those companies, using
international studies of brand equity and corporate reputation. The results show that
poor corporate reputation makes building strong brands difficult, but a good reputation
is no guarantee of success.

The elements of corporate reputation that seem to matter most to consumers in

practice are perceptions of fairness toward consumers, and perceptions of corporate
success and leadership, rather than public responsibility. Consumers want good
business practice but when it comes to brand strength and purchasing, more
personally relevant factors take precedence. So pushing a corporate social
responsibility agenda to consumers may not reap the strongest rewards. But “ethical”
brands that bring no penalty in cost or quality are likely to be more successful.

Corporate reputation is big business—and
rightly so. The way an organization is perceived
can have a huge impact on its performance. Com-
panies spend a lot of money managing and re-
searching their image among a broad range of
stakeholders. These include financial analysts, jour-
nalists, employees, clients, competitors, sharehold-
ers, suppliers, opinion leaders, and category experts,
all of whom may influence corporate success,
directly or indirectly. This article concerns argu-
ably the most important of the stakeholder groups
for many businesses—the consumer who makes
the final purchasing decision.

It has become accepted wisdom that consumers
are both interested in the behavior of the compa-
nies who make the brands they buy, and that their
opinion of them counts when it comes to buying
decisions. The research that suggests this has been
reviewed extensively elsewhere, so it is not our
intention to do so again here. However, a good
overview is provided by Brønn and Vrioni (2001),
and the general conclusion of such work is that

“the potential [of corporate behavior] to affect
buying behaviour does exist and is credited to [in
part] the value it can add to the brand and thus
brand equity.” Such conclusions seem to have
been widely accepted by CEO’s, according to re-
search by Research International (2001), which
suggests that CEO’s whose companies engage in
cause-related marketing believe it to enhance cor-
porate and brand perceptions. Certainly the growth
of Fairtrade brands seems to bear out consumers’
concerns over the behavior of brand providers
and demonstrate a desire for fairer business prac-
tices (for instance, the number of Fairtrade prod-
ucts accessible in the United Kingdom rose from
150 in 2003 to more than 850 today) (Fairtrade,
2005).

At the same time, attitudes toward large corpo-
rations are cooling and respect is declining. Fig-
ure 1 shows the clear deterioration in the average
favorability rating for 85 different companies in
the United Kingdom over the past seven years.
This suggests that many businesses are under

DOI: 10.1017/S0021849905050361

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361

September 2005 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH 305


CORPORATE REPUTATION

specific perceptions (corporate social re-
sponsibility (CSR), quality of manage-
ment,
innovation, employee treatment,
etc.). The weighting tends to be based on
the relationship between specific dimen-
sions and a measure of overall opinion
(or something similar). The analysis re-
ported here takes a different route. We are
interested in which dimensions of corpo-
rate reputation are most “important” but
will investigate this by relating different
corporate perceptions to in-market brand
equity—thus demonstrating what really
counts to consumers.

METHODOLOGY
Our analysis is based on two large-scale
pieces of survey research.

The ReputationZ study was carried out
at the end of 2004 for WPP by Millward
Brown and comprised interviews with
around 22,000 consumers on their opin-
ions of 111 key corporations in the United
Kingdom and the United States. This was
followed up in May 2005 with a Japa-
nese study in which over 5,800 con-
sumers were asked about 56 different
companies.

Consumers were interviewed over the
internet using a self-completion method-
ology. This methodology helped remove
interviewer bias and encouraged respon-
dents to answer questions on ethics and
social responsibility in a more truthful
manner, rather than in a way they felt to
be socially acceptable. The Kantar online
panel, Lightspeed, was used for interview-
ing in all three countries (a panel partner
was used in Japan) and invitations were
sent out on a nationally representative
basis (adjusted according to known re-
sponse rates).

Although we used a panel for interview-
ing, the sample definition we chose was
broad and representative of the national
population. We intentionally did not quota
on category or brand users as the reputa-

Figure 1 Favorability toward Corporations over Time

threat from an erosion in trust leading to
an increased likelihood of consumer boy-
cott of their brands.

The picture, however, may not be as
simple as this. The vast majority of the
research into this area has looked at con-
sumers’ attitudes toward corporal ethics
and the stated effect it is likely to have on
their purchasing. Very few studies seem
to have related corporate perception to
their actual purchasing or related corpo-
rate perceptions to actual in-market brand
equity. On an emotive topic like this, it is
likely that consumer stated attitudes might
not gel with their actual behavior. The
size of ethical and Fairtrade brands sug-
gests that this might be so—for all their
growth, Fairtrade and other ethical brands
remain niche players. Only 7 percent of
consumers claim that they “always or
nearly always buy or use ethical products
and services” (BMRB/Mintel, 2004).

Furthermore, a qualitative study by
Boulstridge and Carrigan (2000) suggests
that consumers do not find corporate be-
havior particularly important in buying
decisions. Certainly the popular revolt

against brands, based on a collective re-
vulsion at “big business” predicted by
Naomi Klein (2001), seems not to have
materialized. So, this begs the following
questions:

(cid:127) Do consumers really care about corpo-

rate behavior?

(cid:127) If so, what matters to them?
(cid:127) What does this mean for managing cor-

porate image?

This article seeks to answer these ques-
tions by comparing consumers’ percep-
tions of companies to the consumer equity
of brands made by those companies from
different sources, rather than relying on
consumer reports of the likely impact of
corporate perceptions on buying decisions.

A NOTE ON MEASURES OF CORPORATE
REPUTATION
There are many methodologies for mea-
suring corporate reputation. Most accept
that reputation is important, and then pro-
duce composite reputation scores for com-
panies based on the weighted average of

306 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH September 2005
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361


tions of companies are often affected by
nonbrand or noncategory users.

To diminish respondent fatigue each con-
sumer was asked an awareness question
for only 10 of the corporations covered.
We then followed up with detailed rating
questions on three of the corporations the
respondents were aware of. Rotations en-
sured that the sample for each company
was representative.

The questionnaire was split into three

broad areas:

1. overall opinion of the corporation and
an assessment of how the corporation
behaves on 14 aspects of reputation
(these are detailed later in this article);
2. awareness, usage, and consideration of
the branded products or services that
each corporation makes or owns; aware-
ness of the link between each brand
and the corporation was also included
in this section; and

3. attitudes of the respondent toward cor-
porations and corporate responsibility
issues in general to enable us to iden-
tify different groups of respondents and
understand how serious consumers are
about these issues.

The second source of information was the
BRANDZ™ study. This is a global study of
consumer brand equity, which has been con-
ducted by Millward Brown for WPP annu-
ally since 1998. To date it has covered 22,000
brands in 30⫹ countries and is based on
over 640,000 consumer interviews. It as-
sesses brand equity using Millward Brown’s
proprietary BrandDynamics™ methodol-
ogy. This has been described in detail else-
where, but the key measure of in-market
brand equity is the percentage of category
buyers who “bond” with each brand.
This measure has been shown to relate to
in-market sales and actual consumer
purchasing—consumers who bond with

CORPORATE REPUTATION

brands are more loyal, spending signifi-
cantly more on that brand than others in
the category (see Dyson, Farr, and Hollis,
1996 for a detailed description of the meth-
odology and validation).

DO CONSUMERS CARE?
The data suggest that on one level, con-
sumers do care about corporate reputa-
tion. In all three ReputationZ studies, the
vast majority of respondents agreed that
companies should behave in an ethical
manner. This corresponds with other
sources that show similar findings (e.g.,
the Target Group Index survey in the
United Kingdom indicates that 58 percent
of consumers agree that “it is important
that a company acts ethically” (GB TGI,
2005)).

Furthermore, most consumers see the
onus very much on companies rather than

themselves to behave ethically. Figure 2
illustrates this; it shows the difference in
the percentage endorsement of two state-
ments: “people should be prepared to pay
more for goods if that’s what it takes to
ensure they are produced responsibly” ver-
sus “it’s up to companies to find ways of
producing goods in a responsible way
without increasing prices.” In all three
countries, far more people endorsed the
latter statement.

However, does all this concern for cor-
porate behavior have any influence on
brands and purchasing? The answer is
yes, but rather less than we might expect.

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
CORPORATE REPUTATION, BRAND
EQUITY, AND SALES
Figure 3 shows the relationship between
the corporate reputation of the organiza-

Figure 2 Balance of Responsibility

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361

September 2005 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH 307


CORPORATE REPUTATION

Figure 3 How Much Does Reputation Really Count?

looking at companies that have a different
name to one or more of their major brands,
on average only 55 percent of consumers
had heard of that company and went on to
make the link between the company and at
least one of their brands. Interestingly, even
when we filter the relationship between rep-
utation and brand equity based on those
who are aware of the link between com-
pany and brand, the relationship does not
improve substantially.

More importantly, for reputation to count
consumers need to think about it during
the brand decision-making process, and
most of the time they do not. Seventy
percent of consumers in the United King-
dom, 64 percent in the United States, and
65 percent in Japan claim not to think
about corporate responsibility while they
are shopping, or claim that the price and
quality of products are much more impor-
tant to them than any corporate reputa-
tion issues (see Figure 4).

This finding clearly echoes the study by
Boulstridge and Carrigan (2000) mentioned
earlier but puts that finding on a much
firmer quantitative footing. Corporate eth-
ics are important to most consumers, but
many do not really think about it when
shopping. This also puts a different per-
spective on some of the findings cited by
Brønn and Vrioni (2001). They note that “one
third of Americans say that after price and
quality, a company’s business practices are
the most important factor in deciding
whether or not to buy a brand,” and cite
this as evidence for the importance of cor-
porate reputation. Our results suggest the
emphasis should be slightly different—

related to brand perceptions. There are
very few companies with a low ERI that
also have brands with strong equity, while
among companies that score high ERIs
there are both weak and strong brand
equity scores. This suggests that a bad
reputation does make building brand eq-
uity difficult, but a good reputation does
not guarantee strong brands.

If consumers care so much, why isn’t
this relationship stronger? There seem to
be two reasons—ignorance and inertia.

For reputation to count, the consumer
needs to have heard of the company and
be able to link the products they make with
the company. On the ReputationZ study,

tions covered in the ReputationZ study
and the brand equity of the brands man-
ufactured by those organizations, as mea-
sured on the WPP BRANDZ™ study.
Brand equity is measured by the percent-
age of category buyers who “bond” with
the brand. Our measure of corporate rep-
utation is the Effective Reputation Index
(ERI), a composite measure based on a
variety of key corporate perceptions from
the ReputationZ studies. Although the Rep-
utationZ study measures the reputation
of companies among the general popula-
tion, we have based the ERI data on cat-
egory users, to match the brand equity
data.

This evidence, looking across compa-
nies in the United Kingdom, United States,
and Japan, suggests that there is a signif-
icant but modest relationship between cor-
porate reputation and consumer brand
equity (an r 2 of 0.25).

The shape of the relationship helps us
to really understand how reputation is

. . . a bad reputation . . . make[s] building brand equity

difficult, but a good reputation does not guarantee strong

brands.

308 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH September 2005
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361


Seventy percent of consumers in the United Kingdom . . .

claim not to think about corporate responsibility while

they are shopping . . .

price and quality are likely to come before
reputation for most consumers.

Factor analysis showed that these var-
ied areas can be reduced to three broad
corporate reputation basics (Figure 5):

WHICH ASPECTS OF REPUTATION
MATTER MOST?
So consumers care, but this attitude man-
ifests itself in brand perceptions and de-
cisions rather modestly. The question then
becomes: which elements of corporate rep-
utation matter more to consumers than
others?

Within the ReputationZ study, we asked
consumers to rate companies on a num-
ber of different characteristics. These were
designed to cover all facets of corporate
reputation from their assessment of the
companies charitable giving to how suc-
cessful they thought the companies were
at what they do.

(cid:127) Public Responsibility—The traditional
view of CSR: Do companies play a use-
ful role in society, are they charitable,
do they support local communities, are
they environmentally sound or socially
responsible?

(cid:127) Leadership and Success—Are they suc-
cessful at what they do; are they inno-
vative, cutting edge?

(cid:127) Consumer Fairness—Do they treat the
consumers with some respect in terms
of the prices they charge for their prod-
ucts, the way they talk to them, the
quality of the products or services they
produce?

Figure 4 How Responsible Consumers Claim to Be

CORPORATE REPUTATION

In Japan the picture is slightly different
than that of the United Kingdom and
United States: being “socially responsi-
ble” is in the same group as statements
from the consumer fairness factor that
includes treating customers with respect
in the prices companies charge and in the
quality of their offering. “Leadership” is
more strongly associated with being dif-
ferent, cutting edge, and innovative rather
than merely being successful. One hypoth-
esis that could be made is that this is due
to cultural differences. In Japan, offering a
quality product and treating your custom-
ers fairly is how companies should be-
have. Environment, charity, and treating
employees well are less associated with
being a responsible company.

The next stage of our analysis was to
understand which elements of corporate
reputation have the closest relationships
with brand equity. Interestingly, when look-
ing at the correlation between these indi-
vidual aspects and in-market brand equity
“Public Responsibility” has the lowest as-
sociation. The aspects of corporate repu-
tation that are better related to brand equity
are “Leadership and Success” and “Con-
sumer Fairness” (with a correlation r value
of 0.33 and 0.3, respectively; see Figure 6).
It seems that consumers are influenced
more by how a company’s behavior af-
fects them or their families directly—do
they treat them fairly, are they good at
what they do, and do they produce inno-
vative goods?

This finding was reinforced by the rea-
sons consumers gave us for apparently
“ethical” boycotts of companies. A signif-
icant proportion of the reasons given con-
cerns bad service, high prices, and poor
quality products rather than any thought-
through ethical rationale. For instance, in
the United States and United Kingdom, a
third of consumers claim that they have
refused to buy a product from a company
because they did not like the way that the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361

September 2005 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH 309


CORPORATE REPUTATION

ful company (that is, making good prod-
ucts and services) and treating customers
equitably.

VARIATIONS BY COMPANY
The relationships we have seen so far are
generalizations from a cross section of
companies and brands. But of course,
within this overall picture there are a
range of relationships (the correlations
between reputation and consideration
for individual companies in Japan, the
United Kingdom, and United States vary
from r ⫽ 0.06 to r ⫽ 0.82). Our data
clearly show that the impact of reputa-
tion varies by company, and both the
nature of a company’s reputation and
the relationship with brand perceptions
have important implications for business
strategy.

Figure 7 summarizes some potential
strategies depending on the nature of these
variables.

Figure 8 shows the position of four
U.K. companies on these variables.
Amazon.co.uk has a great reputation
among consumers, and this reputation
has a good relationship with brand con-
sideration; for Amazon, their reputation
matters.

Reputation also counts for Royal Mail
but unfortunately its reputation is weak
and probably contributes toward the
poor perceptions they have had in
recent years. For BMW, although their
reputation is strong, the relationship be-
tween reputation and brand consider-
ation is weak. Presumably this is partly
because BMW as a premium brand can-
not be considered by everybody who
appreciates the good reputation of the
company.

Finally, Kingfisher has a poor reputa-
tion, but this poor reputation also has a
low relationship with brand consider-
ation. For the average consumer the re-
tailers that they own are just not closely

Figure 5 Corporate Reputation is Comprised of Three Main
Dimensions

company behaved, and the top reasons
given in both countries are “poor cus-
tomer service” and “products or services
are overpriced.” In Japan even fewer con-
sumers would reject a company because
of its behavior (21 percent). For those that
would, the reasons given are similar to

Figure 6 Correlation with
Brand Equity

that of the United Kingdom and the United
States. The reasons given least for boycott-
ing in all three countries include “discrim-
ination such as racism or sexism,” “tested
on animals,” and “uses child/third world
labor.” One reason for this could be that
consumers are not aware of companies
taking part in these practices, but it is
more likely that these issues are just not
top of mind for consumers while shop-
ping (see again Figure 4).

The overall relationships we found in
the data would indicate that when it comes
to the purchase decision-making process,
consumers are more likely to worry about
the effect that buying the products will
have on them rather than anyone or any-
thing else. The aspects of reputation that
have the closest relationships with brand
equity are about being a strong, success-

310 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH September 2005
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361


CORPORATE REPUTATION

companies need to know whether they
are more like Amazon or BMW.

SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS
Do consumers care about corporate
behavior?
Yes, they do. However, for most con-
sumers it is just not top of the agenda
when shopping. Corporate reputation is
related to brand equity and sales, but
modestly. It is clear that while a weak
reputation has serious implications for
brand perceptions, a good reputation
merely creates the opportunity to develop
stronger brands, not a guarantee.

What matters to them?
For consumers, corporate reputation seems
to consist of three dimensions—Public Re-
sponsibility, Leadership and Success, and
Consumer Fairness. Of these, the latter
seem to be the most important to them in
practice, despite their overt concern for
ethical behavior. The perception that the
company will treat its customers well is
of obvious personal relevance to consum-
ers, but we can also hypothesize that the
sense that the company you are buying
from is innovative, dynamic, and going
places also adds an implicit sense of se-
curity and cachet to the brand purchase.
To put this more simply, most consumers
seem to care more about how fair compa-
nies are to them, and how good their
products and services are, than how fair
they are to workers or the environment.
So in managing corporate reputation, at
least among consumers, these aspects are
going to count for more than the issues
typically associated with CSR.

Implications
None of the forgoing speaks to the moral
imperative all companies have to conduct
their business in an ethically responsible
manner. Nor does it speak to the way to
manage reputation with stakeholders other

Figure 7 Understanding Corporate Priorities

linked to the company itself. Therefore, in
terms of selling products, Kingfisher
should not worry unduly about
their
reputation.

If reputation matters more for some
companies than others, it becomes essen-
tial for individual corporations to find out
how their reputation impacts consumers;

Figure 8 Understanding Corporate Priorities: Examples from
the United Kingdom

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361

September 2005 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH 311


CORPORATE REPUTATION

. . . it is the companies that bring [Fairtrade or ethical]

brands to market at no penalty to consumers in terms of

price or quality that will reap the biggest rewards.

than consumers. However, there are sev-
eral clear implications for business strat-
egy and the dialogue between business
and consumers:

1. The opportunity for “ethical” brands is
huge, because the latent demand for such
products is there. However it is the com-
panies that bring such brands to market
at no penalty to consumers in terms of

2. Companies under pressure on ethical
issues must respond. Consumers do
expect public responsibility, and being
seen as the bad guy, fairly or unfairly,
will cause damage. This is particularly
the case if there are overtly “ethical”
brands in the marketplace, when con-
sumers have the ability to express their
concerns easily. Also the emotional con-
nection with that company’s brands

[Corporate] communications campaigns that push the

ethics of a company to consumers may not yield strong

rewards.

price or quality that will reap the big-
gest rewards, as these prosaic factors are
likely to stay at the top of most consum-
ers’ agenda. An instructive case is Café
Direct coffee in the United Kingdom.
Café Direct markets itself strongly on its
principles as a fair trade brand but is also
a quality, fairly priced product.1 Conse-
quently, in the WPP BRANDZ study,
the brand is classified as “Little Tiger”—
very strong equity given its size and a
strong likelihood of future growth
(BRANDZTM, 2005).

1Source: Tesco Direct (www.tesco.com); Café Direct 100g
£2.57, Carte Noire 100g £2.68, Alta Rica 100g £2.98,
Dowe Egberts 100g £2.32, Kenco Really Smooth 100g
£2.36, Nescafe Gold Blend 100g £2.28.

may be eroded—if consumers feel bad
about buying a brand (if and when
they do think about it), it erodes that
brand’s long-term equity.

3. For companies not under overt pres-
sure on ethical issues, communications
campaigns that push the ethics of a
company to consumers may not yield
strong rewards. Ethical behavior is ex-
pected, and you do not necessarily get
brownie points for doing what you are
supposed to do.

4. Maintaining a strong reputation for lead-
ership, innovation, success, and fair-
ness to customers will have a much
stronger direct effect on brand equity and
sales than ethics. Being seen to fail, or to
rip consumers off, is of much more di-

rect relevance to consumers and will have
strong effects on the business. For many
companies, the budget for consumer
communications on ethics may be bet-
ter spent ensuring the brand experience
delivers, or fair pricing, or marketing the
individual brands themselves.

5. Find out if your reputation counts—for
some companies it’s a bigger deal than
others. If you don’t know, you can’t
act.

................................................................................................

GRAHAM PAGE studied experimental psychology at

Oxford and has worked for Millward Brown in

Warwick, Chicago, and London since 1992. He

worked on a wide variety of brands and categories

as a client service director, prior to becoming a direc-

tor in the R&D unit at the end of 1999. He was ap-

pointed head of the unit in April 2004. His

department is responsible for creating new research

techniques and developing Millward Brown’s existing

suite of brand, advertising, and consumer research

tools for implementation across the company’s 60+

offices worldwide. Mr. Page and his team are also

responsible for furthering Millward Brown’s learning

about successful brand marketing. A frequent plat-

form speaker, he has written and presented on an

extensive range of topics, including building success-

ful brands, consumer segmentation, brand elasticity,

corporate reputation, emotion in advertising, and

neuromarketing.

................................................................................................

HELEN FEARN graduated from the University of Warwick

with a degree in history. After joining Millward Brown

in 2000, she worked in the client service function on

a range of accounts including the WPP study,

BRANDZ™. In July 2004 she moved from client ser-

vice to global research and development where she

has since been involved in a number of different

projects: designing “Cred,” a proprietary tool for mea-

suring the corporate reputation of companies; creat-

ing a set of questions and analysis designed to

measure the emotional response consumers have to

advertising; and working with a neuroscience company

to investigate EEG as a possible data collection

methodology.

312 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH September 2005
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361


CORPORATE REPUTATION

REFERENCES

BMRB/Mintel. “Attitudes towards Ethical
Foods.” Mintel International Group Ltd., Feb-
ruary 2004.

Boulstridge, E., and M. Carrigan. “Do Con-
sumers Really Care about Corporate Responsi-
bility? Highlighting the Attitude-Behaviour
Gap.” Journal of Communication Management 4,
4 (2000): 355–68.

BRANDZTM. Study on U.K. Coffee:
https://insidewpp.com/brandz2/], 2005.

[URL:

Brønn, P. S., and A. B. Vrioni. “Corporate
Social Responsibility and Cause-Related Mar-
keting: An Overview.” International Journal of
Advertising 20, 2 (2001).

GB TGI. Great Britain Target Group Index Sur-
vey (April 2004–March 2005): [URL: http://
www.tgisurveys.com/], Summer 2005.

Dyson, P., A. Farr, and N. Hollis. “Under-
standing, Measuring and Using Brand
Equity.” ESOMAR conference, Berlin, Novem-
ber 1996.

TGI Premier based on opinions of 85 U.K.
companies (BMRB).

Klein, N. No Logo. London: Flamingo, 2001.

Fairtrade. “Sales of Fairtrade Producers in
the UK”: [URL: http://www.fairtrade.org.uk],
2005.

Research International. Survey presented
at Business in the Community Conference: The
power of partnerships, November 2001.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Illinois at Chicago Library, on 02 Aug 2017 at 17:37:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021849905050361

September 2005 JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING RESEARCH 313

