Strategic Management Journal
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)
D01: 10.1002/smj.167

GUANXI AND ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS:
ORGANIZATIONAL NETWORKING IN CHINESE
FIRMS
SEUNG HO PARK1* and YADONG LUO2
1Faculty of Management, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, U.S.A.
2School of Business Administration, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida,
U.S.A.

This paper focuses on the utilization of guanxi, which is an important cultural and social
element in China, and the impact of guanxi on ﬁrm performance. Although guanxi is embedded
in every aspect of Chinese social life, companies demonstrate different needs and capacity for
guanxi cultivation. Chinese ﬁrms develop guanxi as a strategic mechanism to overcome
competitive and resource disadvantages by cooperating and exchanging favors with competitive
forces and government authorities. We develop an integrative framework theorizing guanxi
utilization according to institutional, strategic, and organizational factors, and we explore the
impact of guanxi on ﬁrm performance, primarily sales growth and net profit growth. Our
ﬁndings, based on a survey of 128 ﬁrms in central China, provide strong support
that
institutional, strategic, and organizational
factors are critical determinants of guanxi with
competitive forces. However, only institutional and strategic factors are signiﬁcant for guanxi
utilization with government authorities. In general, guanxi leads to higher ﬁrm performance,
but is limited to increased sales growth, and has little impact on profit growth. Guanxi beneﬁts
market expansion and competitive positioning of ﬁrms, but does not enhance internal operations.
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Guanxi is a cultural characteristic that has strong
implications for
interpersonal and interorgani-
zational dynamics in Chinese society. It refers to
the concept of drawing on a web of connections
to secure favors in personal and organizational
relations. Chinese people and organizations culti-
vate guanxi energetically, subtly, and imagina-
tively, which governs their attitudes toward long-
term social and personal relationships. Guanxi is
an intricate and pervasive relational network that
contains implicit mutual obligations, assurances,
and understanding. It has been pervasive for cen-
turies in every aspect of Chinese social and
organizational activities. Modern Chinese society

Key words: guanxi; organizational networking; ﬁrm
performance; transition economy
*Correspondence to: Seung Ho Park, Faculty of Management,
Rutgers University, Janice H. Levin Building, New Brunswick,
NJ 08903, U.S.A.

Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

still operates within the realm of these countless
social and business guanxi networks. It is thus
critical for businesses in China, whether foreign
or local, to understand and properly utilize guanxi
in order to gain an edge over competitors.
The practice of guanxi stems from Confucian-
ism, which fostered the broad cultural aspects
of collectivism manifested in the importance of
networks of interpersonal relations. Guanxi has
been the lifeblood of personal relationships and
business conduct
in Chinese society (Xin and
Pearce, 1996). In the present-day fast-changing
Chinese environments, guanxi has become even
more entrenched with strong and direct
impli-
cations for social attitudes and business practices.
Guanxi is a critical factor in ﬁrm performance in
China, affecting the ﬂow of resources and a ﬁrm’s
interaction with the task environment. As China
continues its economic reform and property rights
remain ambiguous, guanxi has become more

Received 8 July 1998
Final revision received 15 November 2000


studies

show that

456
S. H. Park and Y. Luo
to manage uncertainties and external
important
dependency. Previous studies show that guanxi
affects ﬁnancial outcomes (Luo and Chen, 1996),
market beneﬁts (Davies et al., 1995), and com-
petitive advantages (Tsang, 1998; Yeung and
Tung, 1996). Other
these
relationships are moderated by organizational
forms (Xin and Pearce, 1996), relational demogra-
phy (Farh et al., 1998), and social processes
(Redding and Ng, 1982). The extent of guanxi
networking is idiosyncratic to the ﬁrm, which
depends on various organizational characteristics,
such as strategic capabilities and orientations,
size, and history (Xin and Pearce, 1996). These
organizational attributes also shape the setting for
interﬁrm transactions that affect the ﬁnancial and
operational synergy of organizational networking
(Ouchi, 1980).
This study presents an integrative framework
of guanxi utilization based on these ﬁrm-speciﬁc
attributes and examines its impact on ﬁrm growth
and internal operation. The underlying premise
is that Chinese ﬁrms utilize guanxi
to manage
organizational
interdependence and to mitigate
institutional disadvantages, structural weaknesses,
and other environmental threats. In particular, we
focus on institutional, strategic, and organizational
contexts of the ﬁrm as antecedents to guanxi
networking. Our empirical ﬁndings support
the
proposition that
the extent and effectiveness of
guanxi utilization depend on such antecedents.
Guanxi cannot be viewed as a panacea even
in network-based Chinese society;
its effective
utilization depends on its ﬁt with institutional,
strategic, and organizational attributes.
Survey data from 128 ﬁrms across various
industries in central China are employed to test
hypotheses derived from this conceptual frame-
work. Considering the hybrid mode of
trans-
actions in China, i.e., a mix of plan and market,
we focus on two distinctive applications of net-
working skills: horizontal connections with the
task environment of suppliers, buyers, and com-
petitors; and vertical connections with various
levels of government and regulatory agencies.
We deﬁne antecedents of guanxi according to
institutional (i.e., ownership and location), stra-
tegic (competitive strategy), and organizational
(size, history, and resources) attributes. Following
a brief description of guanxi,
the next section
introduces a theoretical framework that leads to
hypotheses on guanxi utilization and performance.
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Confucianism is a social philosophy,

CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND
Deﬁning guanxi
Guanxi reﬂects delicate ﬁbers woven into every
person’s social life and every aspect of Chinese
society. It is deeply embedded in China’s culture,
with a history of more than 5000 years. Chinese
society has been functioning as a clan-like net-
work since Confucius codiﬁed societal
rules,
values, and hierarchical structures of authority
during the sixth century BC. Guanxi operates in
concentric circles, with close family members at
the core and with distant relatives, classmates,
friends, and acquaintances arranged on the periph-
ery according to the distance of the relationship
and the degree of trust (Yang, 1994). When a
situation arises which is beyond an individual’s
capacity,
the guanxi network is mobilized to
accomplish desired results (Redding and Ng,
1982).
rather
the main concern of which is
than a religion,
to establish harmony in a complex society of
contentious human beings through a strong and
orderly hierarchy. It is based on the principle that
human beings are fundamentally relation-oriented,
which are predetermined and/or voluntary (Wank,
1996).
In a predetermined relationship, one’s
status and responsibilities within the relationship,
e.g., family, dictate behavioral expectations and
individual desires are heavily downplayed. On
the other hand, the individual plays an active role
in determining the character and tone of each
exchange in an external network beyond the
predetermined relationship. This is a voluntary
relationship where individuals can deﬁne their
own roles.
in a guanxi network
become complex due to the dual roles of each
individual, i.e., as a passive follower of the norm
in a predetermined relationship and as an initiator
of voluntary relationships (Yang, 1994).
stock on the
importance of face (mianzi).1 Guanxi dynamics

Chinese society places great

Interactions

1 In China, face can be interpreted as either lian or mianzi.
However, semantically, we believe only mianzi (or value of
lian) is pertinent to guanxi because it represents the primary
social philosophies and cultural roots of guanxi. Lian philo-
sophically differentiates while mianzi socially differentiates
one from others in the society. A person’s mianzi is often
determined by his or her post, credibility, honesty, reputation,
power, income, or network. Other things being equal, a guanxi
relationship becomes stronger if one’s partner is someone
with superior mianzi.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


is a form of social capital

face and the saving of others’

emphasize the enjoyment of prestige without the
loss of
face
(Hwang, 1987). The Chinese have traditionally
compared ‘losing face’ to the physical mutilation
of an eye, the nose, or the mouth. Mianzi is an
intangible form of social currency and personal
status, which is affected by one’s social position
and material wealth. It is imperative to maintain
a certain level of mianzi in order to cultivate and
expand a viable guanxi network (Yeung and
Tung, 1996). One can also manipulate the dynam-
ics within a guanxi network once one has
strong mianzi.
Renqing is another Chinese philosophy related
to guanxi. It
that
provides leverage in interpersonal exchanges of
favors (Yang, 1994). It represents an informal
social obligation to another party as the result of
invoking a guanxi relationship. It
is a precon-
dition to develop a guanxi network and to use
the network for one’s own advantages. As Chi-
nese people weave a guanxi network,
they are
also bound by renqing obligations (Yeung and
Tung, 1996). In essence, reciprocity—an implicit
ideal of
the guanxi network—originates from
renqing (Tsui and Farh, 1997). When one disre-
gards this reciprocal obligation, he/she loses face,
hurts related parties’ (i.e., friends and families)
feelings, and eventually jeopardizes the guanxi
network.
These philosophical foundations lead to several
principles that characterize the guanxi network.
First, guanxi is transferable among parties (i.e.,
A and C) related through a common connection in
the middle (i.e., B). The extent of transferability
depends upon the strength of the ties of A and
C to B. Second, guanxi is reciprocal. A person
is viewed as untrustworthy when he/she refuses
to return a favor and he/she does not follow the
rules of reciprocity (Alston, 1989). In Western
networks, reciprocity often entails exchanges of
roughly equivalent value (Powell, 1990). But, the
Chinese guanxi network often links people across
uneven ranks, with the weaker party calling for
special favors without an equal level of reciprocal
obligation. Third, guanxi is intangible. The long-
term viability of guanxi depends on the members’
commitment to the guanxi and to one another.
Guanxi does not specify the range or frequency
of exchanging favors. Guanxi members are tied
together through an invisible and unwritten code
of reciprocity and equity. Failure to respect the
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

is

rather

guanxi

utilitarian

457
Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
commitment substantially hurts one’s reputation,
leading to a humiliating loss of prestige or face.
Finally,
than
emotional. It is based entirely on the exchange
of favors, not an emotional attachment. Accord-
ingly,
the guanxi network does not necessarily
involve friendship, although friendship is pre-
ferred.
Organization theory and strategic management
literatures characterize networks as commercial
and impersonal, but guanxi focuses on personal
relations and the exchange of favors. Guanxi is
social capital because it
involves exchanges of
social obligations and determines one’s face in
society (Hwang, 1987; Xin and Pearce, 1996).
The reciprocal exchange of favors, which is not
necessarily equivalent to commercial intents and
may be called upon in the future, is essential to
cultivate and sustain guanxi (Redding and Ng,
1982). Guanxi thus represents a powerful force
to reproduce dense regions of relationships and
to maintain and accumulate the value of inherited
social capital. As Coleman (1990) suggests, the
rules of reciprocity in guanxi establish a structural
constraint
that curtails self-seeking opportunism
and preserves social capital within the existing
network structure. Therefore,
trans-
actions often follow successful guanxi, while in
the West a relationship follows successful trans-
actions. Guanxi is an important resource for indi-
viduals and ﬁrms in China to induce cooperation
and govern relationships efﬁciently. Guanxi
is
also a valuable entrepreneurial
to bridge
gaps in information and resource ﬂows between
unlinked ﬁrms and between ﬁrms and important
outside stakeholders. Given the uncertainty and
confusion in China’s transition economy, ﬁrms
develop guanxi
to broker structural holes and
alter the existing network structure (Burt, 1992).
Firms use guanxi
to mobilize complementary
beneﬁts by arbitraging different networks and
even potentially negotiating between competing
networks.
Guanxi becomes an asset at the organizational
level as personal relationships are dedicated to
and used by the organization. Interorganizational
guanxi, called guanxi hu,
is built upon and
expanded through personal relationships. A viable
organizational-level
strong
guanxi
relationships among key managers in the organi-
zation (Wank, 1996). As China continues its eco-
nomic reform, guanxi utilization has become
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)

in China,

requires

tool


S. H. Park and Y. Luo

458
increasingly pervasive and intensive at the ﬁrm
level. There are substantial rewards, such as com-
missions, bonuses, and promotions, for managers’
personal guanxi utilized for organizational pur-
poses to source key inputs and marketing prod-
ucts.
In this study, we focus on ﬁrm-level guanxi
that reﬂect networks among organizations, or the
links between ﬁrms and the task environment or
government ofﬁcials. Interﬁrm guanxi speciﬁcally
refer to cross-organizational connections among
managers, while guanxi with government authori-
ties refer to personal relationships between ﬁrm
managers and government ofﬁcials. The next sec-
tion reviews the literature on interorganizational
networks as it relates to Chinese guanxi.

thought

transfer of technical knowledge,

Guanxi as interorganizational networks
In recent years, networks and relationship build-
for
ing have become critical
the success and
around the world.
survival of organizations
are
Interorganizational
networks
to
enhance the survival and capabilities of organi-
zations by providing opportunities for shared
learning,
legit-
imacy, and resource exchange (Nohria and Eccles,
1992). Organizations connect with others
to
acquire new technologies and to expand their
product/market reach. Studies have shown that
organizational and technological competency is
often at the nexus of these networks.
The literature on organizational networks has
grown dramatically in the last decade, based on
a number of theoretical approaches. Indeed, Gala-
skiewicz (1985) argues that there is no one theory
of
(1990)
also shows that the decision to initiate relations
with another organization is commonly based on
multiple contingencies. Consistent with the open-
systems perspective, the resource dependence or
exchange models have been the dominant organi-
zational rationale for interorganizational networks
(Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978). This model suggests
that organizations are dependent on their task
environment for inputs that are essential for their
functioning. Since organizations cannot generate
all needed resources internally, they must conduct
exchanges with other organizations
to obtain
those resources. Because such resources are often
scarce and organizations tend to compete for
them, the resource dependence model focuses on
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

interorganizational networks. Oliver

interorganizational efforts to gain power and con-
trol over essential resources, while minimizing
threats to organizational autonomy (Cummings,
1984).
Facing environmental turbulence, organizations
are often not sure what strategic directions to
follow. Sociological
studies have extensively
documented how ideas and know-how spread
throughout a population via networks (Rogers,
1983). Firms use networks to overcome the uncer-
tainty and distrust
that plague economic trans-
actions (Galaskiewicz and Wasserman, 1989).
According to the sociological view, ﬁrms adopt
networks as a mechanism to mimic successful
ﬁrms’ strategies under conditions of uncertainty.
Galaskiewicz and Wasserman (1989: 456) argue
that
‘organizational decision makers see how
other organizations cope with environmental con-
ditions similar to their own and thus get some
idea as to how to behave themselves.’ Organiza-
tional decisions thus reﬂect the result of interﬁrm
contagion within a network (DiMaggio and Pow-
ell, 1983). Organizations avoid uncertainty and
enhance social legitimacy by mimicking others in
the network.
The social problem-solving perspective sug-
gests that when the larger social ﬁeld within
which
embedded
becomes more complex and turbulent, organi-
zations encounter problems and areas of uncer-
tainty with which they cannot
alone
(Cummings, 1984). In general, open-system mod-
els predict
that exchanges occur when two or
more organizations perceive mutual beneﬁts from
interacting, such as gaining necessary resources
(or legitimacy) or negotiating a more stable com-
petitive order. Under the institutional perspective,
organizations experience pressure to conform to
common understandings of effective and efﬁcient
structure
resource-based
approach views legitimacy as a resource for
organizations to obtain and exchange material
resources. However, the institutional perspective
argues that organizations gain legitimacy for their
operations through isomorphism with the environ-
ment, i.e., by conforming to commonly accepted
structures and procedures (Goes and Park, 1997).
Guanxi networks expand information and resource
access by widening the sweep of environmental
scanning of an organization and by linking com-
plementary assets in other organizations.
In contrast, economic studies view the organi-
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)

behavior. The

organizations

relevant

cope

and

are


and

technological

zational network as a connecting and transferring
mechanism of complementary and interdependent
competencies between ﬁrms. Teece (1986) em-
phasizes the importance of networks due to the
wide dispersion and strong interdependency of
organizational
competence
across ﬁrms. The transaction cost theory portrays
networks as an intermediate form of governance
between market and hierarchy, i.e., a speciﬁc type
of bilateral governance based on transactional
reciprocity. The long-term reciprocity in a net-
work is an attribute of hierarchy, but networks
also maintain the beneﬁt of market efﬁciency that
ﬂows from scale and scope economies (Goes and
Park, 1997). China’s recent economic transition
has produced a high degree of institutional uncer-
tainty (Nee, 1992). Accordingly, transaction costs
remain high for ﬁrms to secure necessary inputs
and legitimize their existence. As institutional
uncertainty increases, ﬁrms more eagerly turn to
guanxi networks to lower external dependence
for key resources and to improve their legitimacy.
Thus, a guanxi network helps a ﬁrm overcome
the lack of resources to accommodate growth
while alleviating substantial bureaucratic costs
that would result from internalizing operations.
Furthermore, in China there is a substantial insti-
tutional hurdle in transferring ownership, creating
further needs for sharing through the guanxi net-
work (Boisot and Child, 1988; Peng and Heath,
1996). As a loosely structured network, guanxi
is an efﬁcient mechanism to facilitate economic
exchanges and to overcome administrative inter-
ventions by the Chinese government. Studies have
indicated that a primary concern of Chinese man-
agers and organizations is to engage in extensive
networking activities through guanxi and various
informal agreements to build trust and exchange
favors (Kao, 1993; Tsui and Farh, 1997).
Others have argued that organizational net-
works generate beneﬁts
through synergy and
(Thorelli, 1986). Net-
expanded market power
works provide member organizations greater
access to human and ﬁnancial resources, knowl-
edge, and management expertise (Oliver, 1990).
In a collaborative relationship, member organi-
zations can be conceptualized as chains of distinc-
tive components. By specializing in areas of core
competence, while expanding the scope of the
overall production function to encompass the
competence of partner ﬁrms, each organization
can achieve economies of scope through a recon-
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

459
Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
ﬁgured value chain (Miles and Snow, 1984). By
linking together, organizations expand their prod-
uct and market reach and exercise greater market
power than freestanding competitors. As market
information is greatly distorted in a transition
economy, the guanxi network becomes a reliable
source of necessary information for the making of
strategic decisions. Adopters of network strategies
may also enjoy an ‘early ﬁt’ (Miles and Snow,
1984), providing opportunities to exercise greater
political
inﬂuence, establish standards of legit-
imacy, control valuable information, or broker
new cooperative arrangements. Smaller or newer
organizations can overcome legitimacy barriers
through involvement
thus
gaining wider opportunities to inﬂuence the local,
political, and/or regulatory environments.

in guanxi networks,

stability,
depends

efﬁciency,
utilization

HYPOTHESES
The network literature addresses the diverse moti-
vations for network creation, primarily the eco-
nomic, social, political, and institutional factors.
In a comprehensive review, Oliver (1990) iden-
tiﬁes six organization-speciﬁc contingencies that
are generalizable determinants of networking
among organizations: necessity, asymmetry, reci-
and legitimacy.
procity,
Guanxi
institutional,
on
organizational, and strategic contexts unique to a
ﬁrm. The intensity and nature of
the guanxi
depend on each ﬁrm’s idiosyncratic organizational
and institutional attributes. Managers and ﬁrms
seek out organizational connections and cultivate
personal relationships to meet speciﬁc needs for
resources, political protection, or
legitimacy,
which otherwise would be unavailable (Nee,
1992). Given the lack of a stable legal and regula-
tory environment, such connections are critical to
managers and organizations in China to facilitate
impersonal business activities (Alston, 1989). In
particular, organizations in China receive different
treatment and resource allocations
from the
government depending on their institutional and
organizational orientations, such as ownership,
size, experience, and skills. Therefore, there is a
great deal of variation across Chinese ﬁrms in
terms of their institutional advantages and disad-
vantages (Nee, 1992). These organizational vari-
ations are sustained because they are deeply
embedded in the social, institutional, economic,
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


and

skills,

vulnerability,

S. H. Park and Y. Luo

460
and political systems (Perkins, 1994).
Firms are also idiosyncratic in their ability to
scan information, handle
information uncer-
tainties, and beneﬁt from information exchanges
(Tung, 1979). They thus have different levels of
need and different capacities to utilize and sustain
the guanxi network. Although guanxi is embedded
in intricate and informal personal relationships,
interpartner complementarity in terms of strategic
needs, organizational
and competitive
strengths is still a necessary condition to cultivate
and sustain the guanxi network. Network com-
plementarity depends on the speciﬁc organizational
traits of the member companies. The resource-
based view posits that ﬁrms are heterogeneous
with respect to their resource/capability endow-
ments (Barney, 1991). Further, resource endow-
ments are sticky over any strategically relevant
time frame. Therefore, ﬁrms with heterogeneous
and sticky resources/capabilities perceive differen-
tial opportunities and needs for the guanxi net-
work. The mix of skills, knowledge, resources,
environmental
institutional
legitimacy depends on each member’s organi-
zational and institutional attributes (Shenkar and
Von Glinow, 1994). Firm-speciﬁc settings thus
determine the level of guanxi utilization and its
inﬂuence on performance. In the following sec-
tion, we characterize organizational attributes
according to institutional, strategic, and organi-
zational factors as antecedents to guanxi utili-
zation. In particular, we focus on the ownership
structure,
orientations,
resources, size, and history of Chinese ﬁrms.
The paper delineates the guanxi network in
terms of connections with the task environment
and government ofﬁcials that are two distinctive
applications of networking skills in China. The
guanxi network in China is the lifeblood of the
business community and of the institutional con-
text (Kao, 1993). Therefore, guanxi operates not
only horizontally with other organizations in the
task environment, such as suppliers, buyers, and
competitors, but also vertically with various levels
of government and regulatory authorities (Luo
and Chen, 1996). In the absence of clear property
rights, the extent of guanxi often affects decision
making of government ofﬁcials, who thus exercise
personal preferences
legal
interpretations of rules. Instead of subscribing to
the abstract notion of impartial
justice, organi-
zations may rely on personal contacts with
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

in lieu of

location,

strategic

strict

the

economic
control,

things done. For
government ofﬁcials to get
example, scarce resources are allocated according
to guanxi rather than based on bureaucratic rules.
reform to
ongoing
Despite
decentralize government
central
the
government still controls resource distribution,
investment size,
industry structure, bank loans,
and business formation in strategic sectors. Busi-
ness activities still depend to a large extent on
administrative interference rather than on the mar-
ket mechanism (Rawski, 1994). Accordingly,
government ofﬁcials maintain power
to ratify
projects, allocate resources and materials, arrange
ﬁnancing and distribution, and provide access to
infrastructure. Firms strive to reduce their quotas
speciﬁed in government contracts to generate
extra profits by selling excess supplies in the
market. Firms attempt to secure supplies of key
inputs through government channels at
lower
costs. Guanxi with ofﬁcials also offers protection
against environmental uncertainties (Child, 1994).

Institutional factors
Ownership structure
Institutions regulate economic activities through
formal and informal constraints and by setting
the rules of the game as a basis for production,
exchange, and distribution (North, 1990). Eco-
nomic activities are shaped within the institutional
framework because such a framework dictates
which organizational actions are accepted and
supported (Aldrich and Fiol, 1994). Human and
organizational interactions take place within the
institutional framework. Accordingly,
the insti-
tutional
framework places constraints on the
ﬁrms’ strategic choices (Peng and Heath, 1996).
Firms also react differently in adapting to insti-
tutional pressures (Oliver, 1991). In China’s tran-
sition economy,
impacts are mani-
fested in ownership structure and location of
the ﬁrm.
Despite ongoing attempts to facilitate market
transactions, China’s economic reform remains
incomplete, with a mix of both plan and market
systems operating in the economy. There is a
great deal of ambiguity regarding property rights
and production factor markets are inoperative,
which is why the survival of ﬁrms
largely
depends on their networking with local govern-
ments. Private ﬁrms have grown quickly, while
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)

institutional


control of ﬁnancing and key scarce resources
largely remain with the state. Until
the early
1980s allocations for private ﬁrms were restricted.
The ambiguity of property rights has generated a
new form of opportunism among entrepreneurs
and state and local governments. At least until
the early 1980s, state or local governments main-
tained full control over the redistribution of capi-
tal and important raw materials. Private ﬁrms had
to compete with state-owned ﬁrms for scarce
resources. It is not surprising to ﬁnd that private
ﬁrms were often left out of business opportunities
due to a lack of materials even if their products
were popular in the market. They lacked legit-
imacy and political backing to secure access to
capital, which forced them to turn to private
resources and to pay much higher rates (Nee,
1992). Private ﬁrms also faced a great deal of
political uncertainty. Their survival depended on
the unreliable market rules of the game set by
the government.
Given such institutional uncertainty, private
ﬁrms
nurture
reciprocal
relationship with local governments through vari-
ous formal and informal
ties (i.e., guanxi) to
economize on transaction costs. Guanxi with local
governments also helps ﬁrm settle negotiation
deals (Pye, 1995). China’s transformation has thus
given rise to a distinctive institutional form, called
‘network capitalism’ (Boisot and Child, 1996).
As the number of nonstate-owned ﬁrms exploded
during the 1980s, state-owned ﬁrms started prac-
ticing a ‘contractual liability lever’ in their man-
agement and reward systems (Yeung and Tung,
1996). Facing ineffective factor markets and
ambiguous property rights,
the guanxi network
substitutes
for
formal
resource allocation and dispersal.
channels of
Thus, we hypothesize:

government-instituted,

long-term-based

a

Hypothesis 1: Nonstate-owned ﬁrms are more
likely to form guanxi than state-owned ﬁrms.

Location
Favorable location becomes a source of competi-
tive advantage for incumbents if they can acquire
the location at a price less than its true value
(Barney, 1996). During the economic reform in
the 1980s, the Chinese government set up special
economic zones to lure foreign direct investment
(Park, Li, and Tse, 1997). These areas offer
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

461
Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
various beneﬁts, like low-cost labor, tax exemp-
tions, and duty-free importation of raw materials
and technology. Infrastructure support and invest-
ment
incentives in these areas allow for lower
operating risks and higher efﬁciency and returns.
As centers of market-oriented growth leading to
strong competitive incentives, they are attractive
host locations for foreign ﬁrms.
For these reasons, there are wide variations in
the level of economic development and the stage
of economic reform across regions, especially
between the open and nonopen economic regions.
Accordingly, these regions reﬂect differences in
cultural environments, business atmosphere, and
government policies. Open areas, such as the
special economic zones, generally maintain more
Western-style business facilities and a Western
cultural atmosphere. Therefore, organizations in
open areas tend to rely on arm’s-length relation-
ships for transactions more than those in nonopen
regions due to enhanced market competition
among organizations (Punnett and Yu, 1990). On
the other hand, nonopen regions experience much
lower levels of interﬁrm competition and reﬂect
much stronger collectivistic traditions than open
regions. In nonopen regions, ﬁrms maintain a
much stronger tendency to collaborate with other
ﬁrms and with government ofﬁcials to overcome
potential disadvantages of competing with those
in open regions. Due to less preferential treatment
from the government,
taxation,
ﬁnancing, and resource allocation, ﬁrms in non-
open regions are pressed to rely more on guanxi
connections to compensate for such constraints
and disadvantages in the institutional environ-
ment. This leads to:

in terms of

Hypothesis 2: Firms in less open economic
regions are more likely to develop guanxi net-
works with the business
community and
government authorities.

Strategic orientation
The strategy ﬁeld presents numerous classiﬁcation
schemes to illustrate the dimensions of business
strategies. The conﬁguration approach charac-
terizes ﬁrms according to various sets of organi-
zational and strategic orientations. There are sev-
eral typologies, such as those of Miles and Snow
(1978), Porter
(1985), and Miller and Friesen
(1983), representing the conﬁguration approach.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


S. H. Park and Y. Luo

462
These strategic conﬁgurations all focus on a busi-
ness’s relative emphasis on market effectiveness
vs. operational efﬁciency. For example, the Miles
and Snow framework distinguishes three distinc-
tive types of business strategies, i.e., Defenders,
Prospectors, and Analyzers, while Porter focuses
on Overall Cost Leadership and Differentiation
according to a ﬁrm’s relative focus on market
effectiveness and operational efﬁciency.
The strategic orientation toward market effec-
tiveness (e.g., Prospector or Differentiation) con-
tinually searches for market opportunities and
experiments with emerging trends and technol-
ogies. Firms following the market-oriented strat-
egy concentrate on scanning,
identifying, and
capitalizing on emerging market opportunities and
value being ‘ﬁrst’ in new product and market
areas. They also bear high costs and risks in
maintaining extensive and ﬂexible capabilities to
respond to institutional and economic changes in
a given market. Managers in market-oriented
ﬁrms choose from a wide variety of options and
emphasize exploring novel ideas and strategies to
respond rapidly to early signals of opportunity in
dynamic markets. Therefore, market-oriented
ﬁrms face a much greater probability of failure
and a higher level of outcome uncertainty as they
explore new options (Rajagopalan, 1997). In sum,
the market-oriented strategy reﬂects the avail-
ability of multiple options,
low behavior pro-
grammability, high cause–effect ambiguity, and
outcome uncertainty. Market-oriented ﬁrms may
thus have higher needs for guanxi networks to
mitigate the uncertainty and risk posed by their
innovative and aggressive strategic orientation.
They also emphasize communicating with local
markets and spanning boundaries to accommodate
dynamic changes and needs for expansion as
they strive to identify and capitalize on emerging
market opportunities (Venkatraman and Prescott,
1990). The higher level of uncertainty in the
transition
induces market-
oriented ﬁrms to seek guanxi to deal with com-
petitive forces in the task environment and with
government ofﬁcials. Market-oriented ﬁrms can
minimize uncertainties
and secure necessary
inputs through a guanxi network.
the efﬁciency-oriented strategy
(e.g., Defender or Overall Cost Leadership) is
rigid, short-sighted, nonadaptive, and risk-averse.
Efﬁciency-oriented ﬁrms tend to focus on increas-
ing the efﬁciency of existing operations through
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

In contrast,

economy

further

to

tend

they

efﬁciency,

improvements. These ﬁrms

often
continual
develop cost-efﬁcient single core technologies and
seldom adjust
their internal orientations. While
the market-oriented strategy enacts dynamic
environments and builds the prime capability to
ﬁnd and exploit new product and market oppor-
tunities, the efﬁciency-oriented strategy strives to
serve stable and narrowly deﬁned products or
market domains efﬁciently (Miles and Snow,
1978). As efﬁciency-oriented ﬁrms emphasize
operational
ignore
environmental changes that have little impact on
their current operations. This type of strategic
orientation is basically an internally oriented
approach that pays little attention to external
changes or opportunities. Overall, the efﬁciency-
oriented strategy reﬂects restricted managerial
options, more emphasis on historical precedents
and programmability, less cause–effect ambiguity,
and
uncertainty
(Rajagopalan, 1997). Therefore, these ﬁrms have
little need for guanxi and network building with
external
government
ofﬁcials. Moreover, during the recent economic
transition guanxi cultivation has become very
costly, such as in the paying of ‘management
fees’ to government ofﬁcials to secure political
protection and reliable access to scarce resources.
This further discourages efﬁciency-oriented ﬁrms
from pursuing guanxi. This leads to:

competitive

outcome

forces

less

risk

and

or

Hypothesis 3: Firms are more likely to utilize a
guanxi network as their emphasis on a market-
oriented strategy increases.

Organizational factors
Size
Firm size is an important attribute that shapes
behaviors and decisions in a ﬁrm (Nadler and
Tushman, 1988). As size increases, so do the
bureaucratic structures, thus making it difﬁcult to
have a personal, entrepreneurial style of man-
agement. Shan and Hamilton (1991) present
empirical evidence to show that small ﬁrms are
more likely to cooperate with other ﬁrms than
large ﬁrms. Small ﬁrms look for external support
to enhance environmental scanning and to over-
come the lack of key resources and technologies.
Managers in large organizations are less inclined
to adopt participative managerial attitudes, while
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


In general,

those in smaller organizations are more ﬂexible
in decision making.
size affects
organizational culture, ownership structure, and
agency relationships (Aldrich, 1979). Size also
affects a ﬁrm’s capability to handle the task
environment. Large ﬁrms have more favorable
access to capital. Hall and Weiss (1967) show a
positive relationship between absolute ﬁrm size
and profitability due to enhanced scale and
scope efﬁciencies.
In China, most large ﬁrms are descendants of
the old planning system. Prior to the reform, it
was the state that determined the scale of a ﬁrm.
Size had a direct
link with management perks
and status and there was a precise correspondence
between size and the government hierarchy. In
addition to the lack of support from the govern-
ment, small ﬁrms in China also had little bar-
gaining power with the government, subjecting
them to frequent government
intervention and
hindrance (Perkins, 1994). On the other hand,
large ﬁrms lack competitive and entrepreneurial
mindsets because most of them are under govern-
ment protection. Large ﬁrms in China thus have
few incentives to cultivate guanxi with competi-
tive forces in the task environment or with
government ofﬁcials. Xin and Pearce (1996)
assert that small ﬁrms in China stress the impor-
tance of personal and organizational connections
with external stakeholders to counteract their lia-
bilities due to size. Establishing guanxi with
government ofﬁcials is critical for the survival
and growth of small ﬁrms in China, allowing
them to overcome institutional disadvantages.
The population ecology literature addresses the
direct negative relationship between size (and
age) and organizational survival due to the lack
of external ties and legitimacy (Freeman, Carroll,
and Hannan, 1983). Organizational survival and
performance thus improve as a ﬁrm becomes
larger (Singh, Tucker, and House, 1986). Guanxi
networks are a primary mechanism for small
ﬁrms in China to overcome the liability of their
size
disadvantages.
Although small ﬁrms do not have the necessary
organizational capabilities to compete with large
ﬁrms, they have strategic and operational ﬂexi-
bility. Their entrepreneurial spirit allows them to
cultivate guanxi networks easily and to offset
their institutional and competitive disadvantages.
In sum, while small ﬁrms have more critical
needs for external buffers, their size allows them
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

competitive

other

and

Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
more ﬂexibility to cultivate guanxi. Therefore:

463

Hypothesis 4: Small organizations are more
likely to utilize guanxi networks than are large
organizations in China.

fast economic development

Resources
The resource-based view posits that sustainable
competitive advantage stems from valuable, rare,
and inimitable resources that ﬁrms develop over
time (Barney, 1991). Technological skills and
managerial capabilities are particularly relevant
for guanxi development in Chinese ﬁrms. Techno-
logical skills are important
for organizational
competence (Prahalad and Hamel, 1990). They
allow for the development of new products and
processes and for the potential to adapt to chang-
ing market dynamics. The resource dependence
framework suggests a lower
level of external
dependence for ﬁrms with superior resources and
capabilities. This implies that ﬁrms have fewer
needs for guanxi networks as their technological
skills improve. In a transition economy, superior
skills also allow ﬁrms to have strong bargaining
power with the government, whose primary goal
is
(Child, 1994).
Firms with superior technological skills thus have
little need for connections with government
ofﬁcials and regulatory agencies.
the
building of guanxi represents an overinvestment
for such ﬁrms. Instead of external networking,
Prahalad and Hamel (1990) indicate that ﬁrms
with superior technological skills tend to maintain
a higher
inter-
dependence. Internal networking improves scope-
based economic gains by leveraging the skills
across its own business units while preventing
potential
leakage of capabilities to competitors.
On the other hand, ﬁrms in China with poor
technological skills utilize guanxi as a competitive
instrument to overcome their competitive disad-
vantages by securing deals from suppliers, orders
from buyers, and approvals from the government
(Shenkar, 1996). Given inoperative factor markets
and ambiguous property rights, the guanxi net-
work is an economically and culturally viable
mechanism to offset technological disadvantages.
Thus, we hypothesize:

technological

level of

In fact,

internal

Hypothesis 5: Firms with poor technological
skills are more likely to utilize guanxi networks
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


464

S. H. Park and Y. Luo

they are difﬁcult

skills are important

than those with superior technological skills.
Managerial
for building
organizational competence;
to
imitate because they are scarce, specialized, and
tacitly embedded within the ﬁrm (Amit and
Schoemaker, 1993). As the transition toward the
market system continues, there is an increasing
need for such managerial capabilities even though
they are still rare resources in China. Managerial
skills are embedded in complex social systems
involving various social and cognitive processes
that are not yet well understood (Barney, 1991).
Due to their speciﬁcity, managerial skills are
difﬁcult to transfer to other organizations or to
imitate; thus they bestow considerable competi-
tive advantages on a ﬁrm. Given that the guanxi
network is a substitute for competitive disadvan-
tages, Chinese ﬁrms with superior managerial
capabilities may have relatively fewer reasons to
resort to a guanxi network. Previous studies report
that Chinese ﬁrms lacking managerial skills tend
to pursue more guanxi-based business strategies,
such as sales force marketing and credit liberaliz-
ation in purchasing. In China, direct personnel
marketing is primarily a reﬂection of guanxi con-
tacts. Sellers try not to embarrass customers who
are temporarily unable to pay in a culture where
guanxi is painstakingly nurtured and harmony is
a high priority. On the other hand, organizations
with strong managerial capabilities tend to pursue
guanxi-free business strategies, such as advertis-
ing, internal R&D, pricing, and/or product/service
quality. This leads to:

Hypothesis 6: Organizations with poor mana-
gerial capabilities are more likely to utilize
the guanxi network than those with strong
managerial capabilities.

Length of operations
Organizational history is also an important deter-
minant of
legitimacy, strategic behaviors, and
guanxi cultivation. History shapes the organi-
zational culture by affecting values and beliefs
that have developed over time. Organizational age
reﬂects institutionalized managerial attitudes and
beliefs (Baker and Cullen, 1994). The population
ecology theory assumes that inertia is a prevailing
property of organizational evolution and, conse-
quently, organizations retain basic attributes of
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

their early forms (Freeman et al., 1983). Young
organizations are subject to the liability of new-
ness because routines are rarely perfected and
stabilized, organizational politics are unstable, and
links with key actors in the environment are
irregular. It
takes time for an organization to
acquire institutional legitimacy among its mem-
bers and to become valued in its own right. On
the other hand, older organizations are highly
entrenched with bureaucratic rules and systems,
and lack entrepreneurial values to adapt dynami-
cally to environmental changes.
New organizations, therefore, need to be more
proactive and aggressive in searching for external
resources that are essential for their survival and
growth. Young organizations in China, partic-
ularly those formed during the recent economic
reform, are more entrepreneurial than are older
organizations; they are primarily based on market-
based incentive systems and follow tight budget
constraints (Park et al., 1997). These organi-
zations are more ﬂexible in choosing the right
modes of operations to adapt
to market needs,
and their main goal is maximizing profits instead
of serving society, which is the goal of the older,
state-owned ﬁrms. Therefore, we expect stronger
and more active guanxi utilization by newer
organizations in China to compensate for their
lack of
legitimacy and competitive resources.
Guanxi also provides newer ﬁrms with risk-
reducing capabilities. This leads to:

Hypothesis 7: Newer ﬁrms are more likely to
utilize guanxi networks than older ﬁrms.

Guanxi and ﬁrm performance
In the network literature, there is ample empirical
evidence that interorganizational ties improve per-
formance for the whole group (Van de Ven and
Walker, 1984). Based on several case studies of
hospital networks, Thomas and Trevino (1993)
show that networks are able to improve perfor-
mance by reducing uncertainties and equivocality
in decision making through proper information-
processing mechanisms. Unlike studies that focus
on collective performance at the network level,
several recent studies explore the impact of net-
works on individual ﬁrms (Goes and Park, 1997;
Pennings and Harianto, 1992).
Sociological
focus on
studies of networks
organizational
isomorphism, mortality, and sur-
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


(Miner, Amburgey, and Stearns, 1990).
vival
They suggest organizational ties buffer ﬁrms from
failure and provide survival advantages, even
under
intense levels of competition or during
organizational transformation. Several recent stud-
ies in the strategy literature have addressed the
impact of organizational ties on ﬁrm-level stra-
tegic decisions and outcomes, such as service
development or innovation. Pennings and Hari-
anto (1992) present strong evidence supporting
the enhanced adoption of innovations among net-
worked banks. Goes and Park (1997) also show
wide diffusion of service innovations among hos-
pitals tied together through direct and indirect
networks, by facilitating the sharing of
infor-
mation,
resources, and managerial capabilities.
Miles and Snow (1984) imply that cooperating
ﬁrms also beneﬁt from political inﬂuence, con-
trolling information, and brokering new coopera-
tive arrangements. The guanxi network is more
than merely a symbolic representation of personal
and organizational ties. It is a utilitarian mech-
anism whereby resource exchanges occur inde-
pendently of the active, conscious participation
of the organizations and individuals involved. As
posited by resource dependence theory, resource
transactions among guanxi members show the
degree of inﬂuence on organizational decisions
shared by cooperating ﬁrms. As organizations
continue their interactions with other ﬁrms and
government ofﬁcials through the guanxi network,
there is a deliberate and unintended diffusion of
information and accumulation of resources and
capabilities. Cooperative ﬁrms in the guanxi net-
work basically serve as resources to one another,
contributing toward enhanced survival and growth
through both planned and unplanned exchanges
of personnel, market information, money, facili-
ties, or political favors. Goes and Park (1997)
argue that these exchanges encapsulate technical
learning and competence that enable innovative
capabilities
to cross actively among network
ﬁrms.
impact on the market
expansion and sales growth of Chinese ﬁrms by
affecting resource sharing and social, economic,
and political contexts in interﬁrm transactions
(Kao, 1993). Managers devote time and effort to
develop interpersonal guanxi
that contribute to
the sales growth of their organizations and to their
personal ﬁnancial gains and career promotions.
Guanxi with buyers may spur customer loyalty
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Guanxi has a direct

rather

resource

than bureaucratic rulings.

465
Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
and increase sales by minimizing transaction costs
and business uncertainties. Guanxi with suppliers
help the ﬁrm to acquire quality materials, and to
receive good service and timely deliveries. Also,
guanxi with competitors facilitates possible inter-
ﬁrm collaboration for
sharing and
implicit collusion, which help mitigate competi-
tive costs and operational variability. Overall,
guanxi networks with competitive forces in the
task environment help Chinese ﬁrms boost sales
and growth.
there
Given the legal uncertainties in China,
are also practical beneﬁts to be derived from
rules
personal connections and loyalties. Most
and regulations are still ambiguous and their
enforcement is subject to the personal interpre-
tations of government ofﬁcials. Scarce resources
are
allocated primarily according to guanxi
relations
In
essence, guanxi facilitates business dealings while
the formal bureaucratic rules often inhibit them
(Alston, 1989). Guanxi establishes a balance in
the cumbersome Chinese bureaucracy by com-
plementing ambiguous bureaucratic rules with
personal relations. Chinese ﬁrms can circumvent
bureaucratic hurdles through personal networks.
This makes guanxi vital for the performance and
survival of Chinese ﬁrms.
Although guanxi is based on personal relations
and exchanges of favors, it also entails obligations
and costs, i.e., renqing, to the beneﬁciaries (Yang,
1994). Guanxi
and utilitarian,
whereby favors imply obligations or liabilities
that must be repaid at some point. This is essen-
tial
in the managing of guanxi because the
absence of
reciprocity seriously affects one’s
social status or
In sum, cultivating and
sustaining guanxi can be costly in terms of the
reciprocal and utilitarian demands despite the con-
tribution to sales growth. The obligation to per-
sonal attachments and ties sometimes obstructs
business changes that are necessary to improve
ﬁrm profit (Seabright, Levinthal, and Fichman,
1992). As a result, guanxi networks do not neces-
sarily contribute to profit growth. This problem
is aggravated during economic reform and periods
of structural adjustment because guanxi culti-
vation requires a large amount of monetary
investments. This leads to:

reciprocal

face.

is

Hypothesis 8: Guanxi utilization is likely to
have a positive effect on sales growth but no
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


466

S. H. Park and Y. Luo

effect on profit growth.

the

old

central

planning

METHOD
Sample
This study took place in the People’s Republic
of China between 1996 and 1997. China ofﬁcially
opened its doors to foreign investment in 1979.
Two years after Mao Zedong died, the Commu-
nist Party held the historic Third Plenum of the
Eleventh Party Congress
in December 1978,
embarking on far-reaching economic reforms,
which evolved into the transition from planned
to market economy. The ultimate goal of the
transition is to build a market economy that can
deliver long-term growth in living standards while
shedding
system.
Speciﬁcally, the transition encompasses three sets
of reforms: the freeing of prices, trade, and entry
to markets; the clarifying of property rights and
privatization where necessary; and the reshaping
of social services and the social safety net
to
ease the pain of transition while propelling the
process forward (World Bank, 1996).
The data set includes companies from multiple
industries located in central China, i.e., Shanghai
and Jiangsu.2 Between 1996 and 1997 we mailed
a survey to high-level managers, such as general
managers or deputy general managers. The initial
questionnaire followed earlier studies (e.g., Tan
and Litschert, 1994; Xin and Pearce, 1996) and
was based on our extensive ﬁeldwork in these
areas. We also asked experts on Chinese business,
two management professors in Nanjing University
and one business scholar in Shanghai’s Fudan
University, to review our Chinese questionnaire
translated from the original English version,
which was then revised and subject to a back-
translation procedure to ensure validity in a cross-
cultural setting. Consultation was also sought on
instrument development and in ﬁnalizing the draft
to ensure the validity of the survey. Prior to the
survey, we conducted an informal test to conﬁrm
the face and construct validity of the items on
the questionnaire with 27 managers from 20
organizations in the Nanjing area. In our personal
interviews, we asked them to describe their own
interpretations of guanxi and the type of strategies

2 Shanghai is the most cosmopolitan city in China, and Jiangsu
is a province where Shanghai is located.
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

that are built on guanxi. The results reveal a
high level of correspondence between managers’
perceptions and the descriptions of guanxi in the
literature, mitigating our concern about common
method variance. In particular, the results indicate
more than 90 percent of the managers view sales
force marketing and the granting of credit as
business practices that are most reliant on guanxi.
This result is highly consistent with the ﬁndings
of Luo and Chen (1996).
We sent out the Chinese questionnaire to 400
randomly selected companies from 22,000 busi-
nesses listed in 22,000 Businesses in the P.R.C.
in various counties and cities in Shanghai and
areas of Jiangsu through an independent contrac-
tor. After two rounds of reminders, we had 128
usable responses with complete information, rep-
resenting a 32 percent response rate. We com-
pared the mean values of
the number of
employees, net profit/employee, sales/employee,
and length of operation from two samples of
respondents and nonrespondents with the industry
means as reported in the China Statistical Year-
book to check for any systematic bias between
the two groups. We identiﬁed the information for
the nonrespondents from the 1996 edition of
22,000 Businesses in the P.R.C. According to t-
tests, both samples were not signiﬁcantly differ-
ent, at p < 0.1, from the population mean. The
Kolmogorow–Smirnov D value was also insig-
niﬁcant, which indicates a similar distribution for
both samples. These tests led us to conclude that
there was no signiﬁcant nonresponse bias in our
sample. For the variables with multiple indicators
(e.g., strategic orientation and guanxi), we tested
internal consistency using Spearman–Brown R
values. These values ranged between 0.78 and
0.94, indicating an adequate level of internal con-
sistency.

Measures and analysis
In the questionnaire, the ownership structure was
deﬁned by three groups—state-owned, collec-
tively owned, and privately owned—according to
the ofﬁcial classiﬁcation by the Chinese govern-
ment. In operationalizing the variable, we com-
bined the private and the collective-owned ﬁrms
into a group. It has been indicated that collective-
owned ﬁrms operate like private-owned ﬁrms and,
as nonstated-owned ﬁrms, both types of ﬁrms are
much more institutionally independent than state-
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


include

Nanjing,

owned ﬁrms (Nee, 1992).3 A dummy variable
represented ownership structure, with 1 for non-
state-owned ﬁrms, including both collective and
private ﬁrms; otherwise, 0 for state-owned ﬁrms.
We also created a dummy variable with 1 for
nonopen cities and 0 for open cities. Open regions
are those areas that the central government has
opened to the outside world. In our sample, open
cities
Suzhou, Wuxi,
Changzhou, Nantong, Lianyuangan, and Shang-
hai.
Strategic orientation (i.e., the level of market
effectiveness) represents the mean of a multi-
dimensional construct that includes questions of
innovativeness, adaptability, and proactiveness.
Responses for
these items were on a 7-point
Likert scale (see Appendix). We used total assets
for ﬁrm size and the number of years operating
in China for age. Resource strength (i.e., techno-
logical and managerial skills) was measured by
managers’ perception of these skills vis-a`-vis their
major competitors in the industry. Previous stud-
ies show a strong correlation between subjective
assessment vis-a`-vis competitors and objective
measures of ﬁrm resource strength (Chandler and
Hanks, 1993). Studies have also shown that it is
particularly desirable to apply subjective measures
to study organizational capabilities.
The survey includes a one-paragraph deﬁnition
of guanxi
to avoid
confusion among respondents. Guanxi with the
business community and with the government
authorities constitute a multifaceted construct. The
former consists of horizontal connections with
buyers, suppliers, and competitors, while the latter
includes
political
governments,
industrial departments, and other
regulatory authorities such as taxation bureaus,
banks, and commercial administration bureaus.
Responses were based on a 7-point Likert scale
and we used the mean of these constructs for
each application of networking. We deﬁned per-
formance according to ﬁnancial measures during
the most recent 3 years, i.e., net profit growth

that speciﬁes its construct

connections with

vertical

In a recent

study, Park et al.

467
Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
and sales growth (market expansion), both of
which are widely used in studies of Chinese
businesses (Tan and Litschert, 1994).
We included a composite indicator and a
dummy variable to control for industry and other
external effects on guanxi utilization and ﬁrm
performance. Guanxi utilization may differ across
industries depending on the nature of the busi-
nesses and the extent of market competition and
uncertainties.
Industrial organization literature
indicates that ﬁrm performance depends to a large
extent on industry structure, such as entry bar-
riers, concentration, differentiation, and growth
rate.
(1997)
presented empirical evidence to show that indus-
try structural variables have a substantial impact
on ﬁrm performance in China. These variables
affect ﬁrm behavior, market power, and resource
allocation within an industry, generating different
contexts for guanxi utilization and ﬁrm perfor-
mance. For example, companies in fast-growing
and less competitive industries may not have
much need for guanxi development, as
the
environment is already favorable for superior per-
formance. On the other hand, ﬁrms in a competi-
tive industry may need to focus on guanxi devel-
opment to foster their positions in the market and
overcome market uncertainties. We controlled for
the industry effect by utilizing a dummy variable
to distinguish between manufacturing and service
industries and a composite growth index for each
industry at
level as deﬁned by the
State Statistical Bureau. The dummy variable is
coded 1 for manufacturing industries; 0 otherwise.
The index reﬂects multiple aspects of the industry
structure, including the number of enterprises, net
output value of the industry, sales revenue, net
value of ﬁxed assets, total after-tax profits, and
total operating income. We determine the com-
pound growth rates of these variables according
to the ﬁgures in the China Statistical Yearbooks
for 1992–95, which are then used in the following
formula to calculate the growth index:

the 2-digit

GIj =⌺{((1 + rijt1)(1 + rijt2) (1 + rijt3))1/3 ⫺1}/6

3 Many collective-owned ﬁrms, e.g.,
township and village
enterprises, are in fact de facto private enterprises. They
register as collective-owned ﬁrms because of special beneﬁts
such as low taxation, easier access to bank loans, and other
support from local government. Our empirical
testing also
reveals no substantial difference between these two groups as
they are entered separately into the model. The text has been
rewritten for clariﬁcation on this issue.
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

where GIj is the growth index for industry j, rijti is
the annual growth rate of variable i for industry
j at ti where t1 = 1993, t2 = 1994, and t3 = 1995.
We apply several regression models to test our
hypotheses on guanxi utilization and its impact
on ﬁrm performance. Models 1 and 2 tested
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


S. H. Park and Y. Luo

468
Hypotheses 1–7 for guanxi with the business
community and with government authorities,
respectively. We adopted a hierarchical procedure
to test the relative impact of each construct of
the variables; Models 1a, 1b, and 1c (Models 2a,
2b, and 2c) are compared with the base model,
which includes only control variables for horizon-
tal (vertical) networks with business community
(government authorities). Models 3 (3a, 3b, and
3c) and 4 (4a, 4b, and 4c) test Hypothesis 8 on
sales growth and profit growth, respectively; we
include the antecedent variables on guanxi utili-
zation as control variables. Along with the indus-
try, these variables also affect ﬁrm performance
(Grant, 1996). Variance inﬂation factors (VIF) in
all regression models indicate no signiﬁcant sign
of a multicollinearity problem. VIF values range
from 1.22 to 1.97 for Models 1 and 2 and from
1.28 to 2.10 for Models 3 and 4.

RESULTS
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and
Pearson correlation coefﬁcients for the study vari-
ables. The correlation matrix indicates consis-
tently signiﬁcant correlation between the ante-
cedent variables and the guanxi network with the
business community. Except for the length of
operations, every independent variable is signiﬁ-
cantly correlated with guanxi with the business
community. However, only institutional factors
(i.e., ownership structure and location) and stra-
tegic orientation are signiﬁcantly correlated with
the guanxi network with government authorities.
None of the organizational factors were signiﬁ-
cantly correlated with guanxi with government
authorities. The two applications of networking
skill appear to be closely related to one another,
indicating that as companies build external net-
works, they do so both with forces in the task
environment and with institutional authorities.
Table 1 also supports Hypothesis 8, with a strong
correlation between guanxi and ﬁrm performance.
Guanxi appears to be more strongly related to
sales growth than to improvements in net profit.
Table 2 presents regression results for Models
1 and 2 that
test Hypotheses 1–7 on guanxi
antecedents. Models 1a, 1b, and 1c were all
signiﬁcant at p < 0.05, supporting institutional,
strategic,
as
important antecedents for guanxi development
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

organizational

constructs

and

with the business community. For guanxi with
government authorities, organizational factors in
general, i.e., Model 2c, were not signiﬁcant at p <
0.1 while offering strong support for institutional
factors and strategic orientation, with signiﬁcant
results at p < 0.05 for Models 2a and 2b.
Institutional factors (i.e., ownership structure
and location) were consistently signiﬁcant
for
both horizontally and vertically applied guanxi at
p < 0.1, supporting Hypotheses 1 and 2. Owner-
ship structure showed a stronger relationship with
guanxi with the government, while location shows
a stronger relationship with guanxi with the busi-
ness. These results are consistent with our theo-
retical discussion. Nonstate-owned ﬁrms attempt
to build connections with government authorities
to mitigate transaction costs and uncertainties due
to ambiguous property rights. Nonstate-owned
ﬁrms need institutional support and protection to
secure access to key inputs and buyers. State-
owned ﬁrms already have strong support by the
government and instead need to pay more atten-
tion to the relationship with the business com-
munity. In contrast, guanxi with the government
is the hole that needs to be ﬁlled by the nonstate-
owned ﬁrms. Nonstate-owned ﬁrms have been
institutionally discriminated against
in taxation,
bank loans, and registration. Nonstate-owned
ﬁrms thus are left with no choice but to develop
better relationships with the government that has
control over these regulatory areas.
Firms in nonopen areas commonly have a
weakness (i.e., structural hole) in the relationship
with suppliers, buyers, and distributors. In fact,
the government offers signiﬁcantly more ﬁscal
support and subsidizes more ﬁnancial resources
to ﬁrms in nonopen areas than to those in open
areas. Most ﬁrms (especially state-owned) in non-
open areas know that their operating losses will
be ﬁlled by the central government. In contrast,
ﬁrms in open areas usually have strong networks
with other ﬁrms, but they have more needs for
networking with the government. The
local
government in open regions tends to have more
autonomy and decision-making power than those
in nonopen regions. Closer ties with the govern-
ment in open regions thus imply special favors
and privileges to the ﬁrms, especially in resource
sourcing and/or special rights of doing businesses
in a restricted area.
Strategic orientation (i.e., the level of market
effectiveness) is signiﬁcant for both applications
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


C
o
p
y
r
i
g
h
t


2
0
0
1

J
o
h
n
W

i
l
e
y
&
S
o
n
s
,

L
t
d

.

S
t
r
a
t
.

M
g
m

t
.

J
.
,

2
2
:

4
5
5
–
4
7
7

(
2
0
0
1
)

2

1

Table 1. Descriptive statistics and Pearson correlation coefﬁcients
Variable
3
1. Guanxi-business
community
2.Guanxi-government
authorities
3. Sales growth
4. Proﬁt growth
5. Ownership structure
6. Location
7. Strategy orientation
8. Size
9. Technology skills
10. Managerial skills
11. Length of operation
12. Industry growth
13. Industry type
n = 128
∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001

Mean S.D.
2.62 0.64
0.44∗∗∗
2.37 0.62
0.27∗∗
18.0 13.8
0.21∗
13.4 10.6
0.20∗
0.61 0.40
0.23∗
0.68 0.46
4.42 1.49
0.19∗
7.52 3.06 ⫺0.17∗
3.06 1.91 ⫺0.18∗
2.27 1.42 ⫺0.26∗∗
9.09 7.31
0.03
13.9 6.60 ⫺0.24∗∗ ⫺0.22∗∗
0.06
0.75 0.43

0.29∗∗
0.71∗∗∗
0.20∗
0.21∗
0.23∗
0.20∗ ⫺0.12
0.15
0.20∗
0.07
0.03
0.05
0.33∗∗∗
0.11
0.26∗∗∗
0.02
0.04
0.27∗∗
⫺0.19∗ ⫺0.08

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

0.23∗
⫺0.04
0.09
0.09
0.38∗∗∗ ⫺0.14
0.33∗∗∗
0.04
0.30∗∗
⫺0.25∗∗ ⫺0.36∗∗∗

⫺0.20∗
0.17∗ ⫺0.16
0.12
⫺0.33∗∗∗ ⫺0.06
0.11
0.11
0.19∗ ⫺0.18∗
0.20∗
⫺0.25∗ ⫺0.08 ⫺0.18∗
0.04
0.26∗∗
0.07
0.13 ⫺0.10

0.14
0.02
0.01
0.33∗∗∗
0.21∗
0.05 ⫺0.13
0.25∗∗ ⫺0.03 ⫺0.01 ⫺0.21∗

0.47∗∗∗
0.04
0.10

0.11

G
u
a
n
x
i

a
n
d
O
r
g
a
n
i
z
a
t
i
o
n
a
l

D
y
n
a
m
i
c
s

4
6
9


4
7
0

S

.

H

.

P
a
r
k

a
n
d

Y

.

L
u
o

Model 1

Model 2a

Guanxi-government authorities
Model 2b

Model 2c

0.22†
0.26∗∗
0.23∗

–0.24∗
–0.18∗
–0.16†
0.04

0.18†
0.07
4.08∗∗∗
0.52∗∗

0.31∗
0.17†

–0.08
–0.21∗
2.28∗
0.13∗

0.20∗

–0.14
–0.22∗
2.16+
0.11∗

–0.06
–0.05
–0.10
–0.03

–0.17†
–0.18†
1.95
0.08

Model 2

0.31∗∗
0.18†
0.29∗∗

–0.05
–0.07
–0.07
–0.04

–0.17†
–0.21∗
2.97∗∗
0.29∗

Table 2. Standardized regression results for guanxi utilization
Variables

Guanxi-business community
Model 1b
Model 1c

Model 1a

0.21∗

0.21∗
0.27∗∗

Institutional factors:
Ownership structure
Location
Strategic orientation
Organizational factors:
Size
Technology skills
Management skills
Length of operation
Control variables:
Industry growth
Industry type
Model F
R2a
n = 128
†p < 0.10; ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
a It is compared to the base model that includes only control variables.

–0.15†
0.06
2.44∗
0.16∗∗

–0.11
0.08
2.99∗
0.17∗∗

–0.20∗
–0.18∗
–0.23∗∗
–0.05

–0.19∗
0.07
3.09∗∗
0.19∗∗

C
o
p
y
r
i
g
h
t


2
0
0
1

J
o
h
n
W

i
l
e
y
&
S
o
n
s
,

L
t
d

.

S
t
r
a
t
.

M
g
m

t
.

J
.
,

2
2
:

4
5
5
–
4
7
7

(
2
0
0
1
)


of guanxi at p < 0.05, supporting Hypothesis 3.
These results indicate that companies oriented
toward market effectiveness are more likely to
pursue guanxi networks because their focus is on
market penetration and quick adaptation to
changes in buyer needs or to any other competi-
tive forces.
None of the organizational factors were sig-
niﬁcant for guanxi with government authorities,
while most were signiﬁcant for guanxi with the
business community. These results offer only par-
tial support to Hypotheses 4, 5, and 6, but no
support for Hypothesis 7. This is consistent with
studies in the strategy literature that contend that
companies build networks with competitive forces
in the task environment
to overcome organi-
zational disadvantages. As predicted, size and
resources are negatively related to guanxi with
the business community at p < 0.01 and p < 0.1
respectively. There appear to be no differences
between young and old organizations in terms of
their attempts to develop guanxi networks. This
may indicate that companies in China need to
network actively with the business community
and government authorities both to overcome the
liability of newness or to ensure the survival and
growth of older ﬁrms. In a transition economy
with
decreasing
government protection, older ﬁrms may need to
invest even more in guanxi development to be
able to continue to offer and exchange favors with
numerous constituencies that have been developed
over time. Young ﬁrms may utilize guanxi inten-
sively, while older ﬁrms use it more extensively.
The control variable (i.e., industry growth index)
was signiﬁcant and negatively related to both
applications of guanxi at p < 0.1, indicating that
ﬁrms pursue guanxi in a more adverse environ-
ment such as that of slow-growing industries.
Industry type is insigniﬁcant
in relation with
guanxi with the task environment, but
is
strongly associated with guanxi with the govern-
ment. Speciﬁcally, service ﬁrms tend to use more
guanxi with the government than manufacturing
ﬁrms do, which is consistent with Yeung and
Tung (1996). While manufacturing ﬁrms may
need to pay more attention to develop strengths
in traditional strategy areas, service businesses in
general are more relationship-intensive and rely
resources provided by the
more on external
government. Legal frameworks in the service sec-
tor
transition
economies
less
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

competition

increasing

even

and

are

in

it

Overall,

sustainable

strategic, and organizational

471
Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
developed than those in the manufacturing sector
(Naughton, 1994). In China, many service indus-
tries, such as investment banking, direct market-
ing, and interprovincial transportation, are not yet
fully open for market competition. As a result,
top managers in service-oriented ﬁrms may have
to devote more resources to constructing stronger
and more
ties with government
ofﬁcials in order to coopt sources of environmen-
tal uncertainty.
the results indicate different appli-
cations of guanxi across ﬁrms according to insti-
settings.
tutional,
These ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors also affect the appli-
cation of guanxi networks that ﬁrms will pursue.
The weak support for organizational factors as
antecedents to guanxi utilization with government
authorities, however, does not
imply that man-
agers with strong resources do not use guanxi
with government authorities. Rather, it may imply
that ﬁrms in China develop and maintain good
connections with government authorities regard-
less of their resources. This is consistent with
earlier ﬁndings that show that institutional uncer-
tainties and ambiguous property rights necessitate
networking with various government agencies for
most ﬁrms in China (Peng and Heath, 1996).
Table 3 presents the regression results for Mod-
els 3 and 4 to test
the impact of guanxi on
performance while controlling for industry and
other ﬁrm attributes. The results support our pre-
dictions in Hypothesis 8; both applications of
guanxi networks are signiﬁcant for sales growth
but insigniﬁcant for profit growth. These results
indicate that guanxi networks have a substantial
impact on market expansion efforts, but
less
impact on accounting returns. Guanxi is basically
a mechanism to position a ﬁrm in the market,
not
to improve its own internal operations. As
indicated by previous studies,
industry growth,
ownership structure, and resource strength have
signiﬁcant relationships with ﬁrm performance in
China. Technological skills appear to have the
strongest impact among the various ﬁrm attributes
on market expansion and operational
improve-
ment. The results are also consistent with earlier
ﬁndings about ownership structure, with nonstate-
owned ﬁrms performing signiﬁcantly better than
state-owned ﬁrms (Park et al., 1997; Nee, 1992).
these results indicate the dynamics
between ﬁrm-speciﬁc conditions, guanxi develop-
ment, and performance of Chinese ﬁrms. Guanxi
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)

Overall,


Table 3. Standardized regression results for ﬁrm performance
Sales growth
Variables

Model 3a
0.26∗∗

Guanxi—business
community
Guanxi-government
authorities
Control variables:
Orientation
Size
Technology
Management
Length
Location
Ownership structure
Industry growth
Industry type
Model F
R2
n = 128
†p < 0.10; ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

0.17∗
0.03
6.28∗∗
0.19

Model 3b

0.31∗∗∗

Model 3c
0.20∗
0.24∗∗

0.16†
0.04
8.08∗∗∗
0.21

0.16†
0.04
6.49∗∗∗
0.25

Model 3
0.18†
0.21∗

0.19†
–0.15
0.32∗∗
0.18†
–0.10
0.06
0.27∗
0.18†
0.05
5.21∗∗∗
0.60

4
7
2

S

.

H

.

P
a
r
k

a
n
d

Y

.

L
u
o

Model 4a
0.11

Proﬁt growth

Model 4b

0.20∗

Model 4c
0.10
0.18†

0.15†
–0.19∗
2.83†
0.12

0.08
–0.19∗
2.92∗
0.14

0.15†
–0.20∗
2.67†
0.15

Model 4
0.08
0.15

–0.07
0.09
0.30∗∗
0.21∗
0.12
–0.10
0.20†
0.11
–0.19∗
4.16∗∗∗
0.51

C
o
p
y
r
i
g
h
t


2
0
0
1

J
o
h
n
W

i
l
e
y
&
S
o
n
s
,

L
t
d

.

S
t
r
a
t
.

M
g
m

t
.

J
.
,

2
2
:

4
5
5
–
4
7
7

(
2
0
0
1
)


strategic,

development depends on various ﬁrm attributes,
including institutional,
and organi-
zational factors. Guanxi then subsequently affects
ﬁrm performance along with other ﬁrm-speciﬁc
attributes. These ﬁrm-level settings deﬁne the
antecedents for guanxi cultivation and sustenance,
which then join forces with guanxi
to affect
performance, primarily market expansion. Guanxi
cultivation constitutes an important element for
survival and for market expansion of Chinese
ﬁrms, but
is not a necessary and sufﬁcient
condition for overall performance.

it

is

in China. Guanxi

framework consists of

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
This paper examines organizational practices in
guanxi utilization and the impact of guanxi on
ﬁrm performance
an
important cultural and social element in Chinese
society that has signiﬁcant effects on business
operations, survival, and growth. Despite wide
utilization of guanxi, there is a noticeable differ-
ence among Chinese ﬁrms in the extent of
guanxi utilization. Based on various organi-
zational and strategy theories, we develop an
integrative framework to explain the highly
common, but idiosyncratic to each ﬁrm, practice
of guanxi networking in Chinese organizations.
The theoretical
insti-
tutional, strategic, and organizational
factors,
which characterize the setting for guanxi utili-
zation. These factors determine the extent of
needs and capacity for guanxi utilization. Our
ﬁndings indicate that all
three constructs are
critical antecedents to the use of guanxi
in
China. An exception is the insigniﬁcant result
for organizational factors in guanxi utilization
with government authorities. Guanxi networking
with government authorities seems to depend
primarily on the institutional and strategic fac-
tors of the ﬁrm. Guanxi with competitive forces
can be attributed to institutional, strategic, and
organizational factors.
Our ﬁndings indicate that guanxi contributes to
ﬁrm growth in terms of market expansion, but
not in terms of improving net profit. This implies
that guanxi
in establishing
external relations and legitimacy and positioning
competitively in the market
than in improving
internal operations. This may explain the high
costs to cultivate and maintain guanxi, which
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

is more important

In a

such as

through operational

473
Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
to some extent offset the beneﬁts from market
expansion,
inef-
ﬁciencies. This ﬁnding also supports the law of
reciprocity in terms of guanxi. Firms connected
through guanxi are obligated to return favors in
order to maintain trust and not to lose face. Xin
and Pearce (1996) posit that managers’ percep-
tions about the importance of guanxi are reﬂected
in actual
investment and expenditures for gift
giving and holding banquets. Luo and Chen
(1996) also illustrate that guanxi between sellers
and buyers leads to increased sales for the sellers,
but at the expense of low prices or liberal terms
of payments offered to the buyer. Overall, our
ﬁndings reﬂect potential synergy gains in guanxi
from resource complementarity and lower trans-
action costs.
transition economy with
ambiguous property rights and weak legal con-
straints on market competition, guanxi provides
an opportunity to enhance market share through
improved competitive positioning and other appli-
cations of collaboration with competitors and
government authorities.
In addition to guanxi,
other organizational contexts, such as strategic
orientation and internal resources and capabilities,
also affect ﬁrm performance in China. Guanxi
affects ﬁrm growth directly by manipulating mar-
ket
transactions and competitive positions and
indirectly by facilitating the implementation of
business strategies.
This paper presents empirical evidence of the
key tenet
in resource dependence theory that
maintains that a ﬁrm’s possession and control
of important resources determine the extent of
external dependence
and Salancik,
1978).
organizations with
advanced skills and resources are less dependent
on guanxi connections. This is also consistent
with Burt’s notion of structural holes. Our ﬁnd-
ings indicate that guanxi
is a mechanism for
Chinese ﬁrms not only to exploit and accumu-
late social capital but also to broker structural
gaps with key stakeholders in the environment.
Firms tend to establish guanxi networks to over-
come strategic and institutional weaknesses by
linking with those that are remotely related with
the ﬁrm but have a strong control over key
resources. Our ﬁndings are also in line with
Seabright et al. (1992) regarding the negative
outcome of
time.
Repeated interactions in a guanxi network lead
to
that
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)

individual attachment over
relationship

embedded

example,

socially

(Pfeffer

For

a


S. H. Park and Y. Luo

474
demands continual commitment from all parties.
On one hand,
the personal attachments that
develop over time, mainly among executives,
constitute social assets that enforce the continu-
ation of
the guanxi connection. Such attach-
ments make the guanxi sustainable, transferable,
and intangible and attenuate difﬁculties due to
uncertain changes in the environment. On the
other hand, however, such attachments produce
inertia that operates against implementing inter-
nal changes to spur profit enhancement. Guanxi
emerges over time as social and relational assets
that promote sales growth, but not necessarily
profit growth. Economic motivations for guanxi
networking become diluted or are offset as the
connected parties observe the norm of
reci-
procity and attempt
to sustain the network at
any cost.
This paper conﬁrms and extends conceptual
projects on guanxi in earlier studies (e.g., Xin and
Pearce, 1996). First, this paper provides empirical
evidence to the claim that guanxi utilization is
heterogeneous across ﬁrms and depends on the
institutional, strategic, and organizational settings
of each ﬁrm. Second, it tests the effect of guanxi
on performance,
of
Yeung and Tung (1996) that guanxi
leads to
higher ﬁrm performance, with a stronger impact
on market expansion and sales growth than on
ﬁnancial returns. Lastly, this paper validates the
multiple dimensions of guanxi as pertinent and
promising. Guanxi in China represents two dis-
tinctive applications of a single networking skill:
one horizontally applied with competitive forces
and the other vertically applied with government
study incorporates both net-
authorities. Our
working skills in the development of theory and
empirical
the
pursuit of either or both applications of guanxi
depends on the institutional, strategic, and organi-
zational settings. Guanxi with competitive forces
and with government authorities bring different
beneﬁts and make different demands on member
companies. Future studies need to recognize these
multiple applications of guanxi and to delineate
the differences in order to avoid spurious ﬁndings
and conclusions.
Guanxi has been developed over many cen-
turies in China. It reﬂects highly complex social
phenomena that are embedded in every aspect
of personal and organizational interactions. Our
study illuminates the rich dynamics in such
Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

tests. The ﬁndings indicate that

complementing ﬁndings

setting it

institutional

organizational networking in China. It presents
a snapshot of guanxi dynamics at a critical
point of China’s economic reform. There is a
need for more studies with new theoretical
insights to enrich our understanding of the com-
plexity in guanxi connections.
In particular,
anthropological observations over a long time
period are needed to explore the evolutionary
process of guanxi networks. Such studies will
help us understand how a person or an organi-
zation initiates, cultivates, maintains, and dis-
solves guanxi over time. The nature and impor-
tance of guanxi may also vary depending on
the evolutionary stage of development. It would
also be worthwhile to explore interrelationships
among the antecedents of guanxi utilization. In
particular, given the strong institutional effect
on ﬁrm operations in China’s transition econ-
omy, it is possible that a ﬁrm’s strategic and
organizational settings are constrained by the
speciﬁc
faces. This
requires further theoretical and empirical explo-
ration in future studies. Readers should also be
cautioned about the potential bias in measuring
competitiveness and other industry related mea-
sures. In China, managers are often ill-informed
about competitors outside their locality, which
is more so in small ﬁrms than in large ﬁrms.
They also tend to adopt a narrow deﬁnition of
industries and competitors.
is by no means culturally unique to
China. It exists to some extent in every human
society, at least in terms of the norms of reci-
procity. What varies from culture to culture is
the types of particularistic ties and the intensity
of their application (Tsui and Farh, 1997). Given
the universality of the inﬂuence of guanxi,
it
would be important to conduct comparative stud-
ies to properly assess the importance of guanxi
in China. Future studies need to adopt cross-
cultural research to be able to fully grasp the
role of guanxi
in Chinese society. This study,
however, focuses on the antecedents of guanxi
that may differ across cultures and ﬁrms. Our
ﬁndings thus should be limited to the speciﬁc
social
in China,
especially during the period of economic reform.
This study is also limited in its focus on guanxi
utilization at
is equally
active and important at the individual level, which
may also have a signiﬁcant impact on ﬁrm per-
formance. It
the utilization of
Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)

the ﬁrm level. Guanxi

is possible that

institutional

context

Guanxi

and


types of
intraﬁrm guanxi depends on different
antecedents from those found in this study. This
requires a careful attention in future research to
compare and differentiate bases and roles of
guanxi at the individual and ﬁrm levels. It is also
important that future studies further delineate the
nature of guanxi; for example, pecuniary guanxi
(e.g., holding banquets or gift giving) as opposed
to nonpecuniary guanxi may have different impli-
cations for organizational dynamics and perfor-
mance.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Dan Schendel, Terri A. Scand-
ura, and two anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful comments on earlier versions of this paper.

REFERENCES

Aldrich HE. 1979. Organizations and Environments.
Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Aldrich HE, Fiol CM. 1994. Fools rush in? The insti-
tutional context of industry creation. Academy of
Management Review 19: 645–670.
Alston JP. 1989. Wa, guanxi, and inhwa: managerial
principles in Japan, China, and Korea. Business
Horizons March–April: 26–31.
Amit R, Schoemaker PJH. 1993. Strategic assets and
organizational rent. Strategic Management Journal
14(1): 33–46.
Baker DD, Cullen JB. 1994. Administrative reorgani-
zation and conﬁgurational context:
the contingent
effects of age, size, and change in size. Academy
of Management Journal 36: 1251–1277.
Barney JB. 1991. Firm resources and sustained com-
petitive advantage. Journal of Management 17:
99–120.
Barney JB. 1996. Gaining and Sustaining Competitive
Advantage. Addison-Wesley: Reading, MA.
Boisot MH, Child J. 1988. The iron law of ﬁefs:
bureaucratic failure and the problem of governance
in the Chinese economic reforms. Administrative
Science Quarterly 33: 507–527.
Boisot M, Child J. 1996. From ﬁefs to clans and
network capitalism: explaining China’s emerging
economic order. Administrative Science Quarterly
41: 600–628.
Burt RL. 1992. Structural Holes. Harvard University
Press: Cambridge, MA.
Chandler GN, Hanks SH. 1993. Measuring the perfor-
mance of emerging business: a validation study.
Journal of Business Venturing 8: 391–408.
Child J. 1994. Management in China during the Age
of Reform. Cambridge University Press: Cam-
bridge, U.K.

Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

the value of

Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics
Coleman J. 1990. Social capital

475
in the creation of
human capital. American Journal of Sociology 94:
95–120.
Cummings TG. 1984. Transorganizational development.
In Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 6,
Staw B, Cummings L (eds). JAI Press: Greenwich,
CT; 367–422.
Davies H, Leung TK, Luk S, Wong Y. 1995. The
beneﬁts of guanxi:
relationships in
developing the Chinese market. Industrial Marketing
Management 24: 207–214.
DiMaggio P, Powell W. 1983. The iron cage revisited:
institutional
isomorphism and collective rationality
in organizational ﬁelds. American Sociological
Review 48: 147–160.
Farh JL, Tsui A, Xin K, Cheng BS. 1998. The inﬂuence
of relational demography and guanxi: the Chinese
case. Organization Science 9: 471–489.
Freeman J, Carroll GR, Hannan MT. 1983. The liabili-
ties of newness: age dependence in organizational
death rates. American Sociological Review 48:
692–710.
Galaskiewicz J. 1985.
relations.
Interorganizational
Annual Review of Sociology 11: 281–304.
Galaskiewicz J, Wasserman S. 1989. Mimetic proc-
esses within an interorganizational ﬁeld: an empiri-
test. Administrative Science Quarterly 34:
cal
454–479.
Goes J, Park SH. 1997. Interorganizational links and
innovation: the case of hospital services. Academy
of Management Journal 40: 673–696.
Grant RM. 1996. Toward a knowledge-based theory
of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, Winter
Special Issue 17: 109–122.
Hall M, Weiss L. 1967. Firm size and profitability.
Review of Economics and Statistics 49: 319–331.
Hwang ER. 1987. Face and favor: the Chinese power
game. American Journal of Sociology 92: 35–41.
Kao J. 1993. The worldwide web of Chinese business.
Harvard Business Review 71(2): 24–36.
Luo Y, Chen M. 1996. Managerial
implications of
guanxi-based business strategies. Journal of Inter-
national Management 2: 193–316.
Miles RE, Snow CC. 1978. Organizational Strat-
egy, Structure and Process. McGraw-Hill: New
York.
Miles RE, Snow C. 1984. Fit, failure and the hall of
fame. California Management Review 26: 10–27.
Miller D, Friesen PH. 1983. Strategy-making and
environment: the third link. Strategic Management
Journal 4(3): 221–235.
1990.
Interorganizational linkages and population dynam-
ics: buffering and transformational shields. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly 35: 689–713.
Nadler DA, Tushman ML. 1988. Strategic Organiza-
tional Design. HarperCollins: New York.
Naughton B. 1994. China’s reform: Chinese insti-
tutional
innovation and privatization from below.
AEA Papers and Proceedings 84: 266–270.
Nee V. 1992. Organizational dynamics of market tran-
sition: hybrid forms, property rights, and mixed

Miner AS, Amburgey TL, Stearns TM.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


476

S. H. Park and Y. Luo

Oliver C. 1990. Determinants of

economy in China. Administrative Science Quarterly
37: 1–27.
Nohria N, Eccles RG. 1992. Networks and Organiza-
tions. Harvard Business Press: Cambridge, MA.
North DC. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and
Economic Performance. Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA.
interorganizational
relationships: integration and future directions. Acad-
emy of Management Review 15(2): 241–265.
Oliver C. 1991. Strategic responses to institutional
processes. Academy of Management Review 16:
145–179.
Ouchi WG. 1980. Markets, bureaucracies and clans.
Administrative Science Quarterly 25: 129–141.
Park SH, Li S, Tse D. 1997. Determinants of ﬁrm
performance in China:
institutional vs. economic
factors. Paper presented at
the 1997 AIB Annual
Meetings, Mexico.
Peng M, Heath PS. 1996. The growth of the ﬁrm in
planned economies in transition: institutions, organi-
zations, and strategic choice. Academy of Manage-
ment Review 21: 492–528.
Pennings JM, Harianto F. 1992. The diffusion of tech-
nological
innovation in the commercial banking
industry. Strategic Management Journal 13(1): 29–
46.
Perkins DH. 1994. Completing China’s move to the
market. Journal of Economic Perspective 8: 23–46.
Pfeffer J, Salancik GR. 1978. The External Control of
Organizations: A Resource Dependence Perspective.
Harper & Row: New York.
Porter ME. 1985. Competitive Advantage. Free Press:
New York.
Powell WW. 1990. Neither market nor hierarchy:
network forms of organization.
In Research in
Organizational Behavior, Vol. 12, Staw BM,
Cummings LL (eds). JAI Press: Greenwich, CT;
295–336.
Prahalad CK, Hamel G. 1990. The core competence of
the corporation. Harvard Business Review 68(2):
79–91.
Punnett BJ, Yu P. 1990. Attitudes toward doing busi-
ness with the PRC. International Studies of Manage-
ment and Organization 20: 149–160.
Pye LW. 1995. Factions and the politics of guanxi:
paradoxes in Chinese administrative and political
behavior. China Journal 34: 35–53.
Rajagopalan N. 1997. Strategic orientations, incentive
plan adoptions and ﬁrm performance: evidence from
electric utility ﬁrms. Strategic Management Journal
18(10): 761–786.
reform:
accomplishments, prospects, and implications. Amer-
ican Economic Review 84: 271–275.
Redding SG, Ng M. 1982. The role of face in the
organizational perceptions of Chinese managers.
Organizational Studies 3: 204–209.
Rogers EM. 1983. Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press:
New York.
Seabright MA, Levinthal DA, Fichman M. 1992. Role
of individual attachments in the dissolution of inter-

1994. Chinese

industrial

Rawski

TG.

strategic

implications for

alliance building:

Teece DJ. 1986. Proﬁting from technological

organizational relationships. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 35: 122–160.
Shan W, Hamilton W. 1991. Country-speciﬁc advantage
and international cooperation. Strategic Management
Journal 12(6): 419–432.
Shenkar O. 1996. The ﬁrm as a total institution: reﬂec-
tions on the Chinese state enterprise. Organization
Studies 17: 885–907.
Shenkar O, Von Glinow MA. 1994. Paradoxes of
organization theory and research: using the case of
China to illustrate national contingency. Manage-
ment Science 30: 56–71.
Singh JV, Tucker DJ, House RJ. 1986. Organizational
legitimacy and the liability of newness. Administra-
tive Science Quarterly 31: 171–193.
Tan JJ, Litschert RJ. 1994. Environment–strategy
relationship and its performance implications: an
empirical study of Chinese electronics industry. Stra-
tegic Management Journal 15(1): 1–20.
inno-
vation:
integration, collaboration,
licensing and public policy. Research Policy 15:
785–805.
Thomas JB, Trevino LK. 1993. Information processing
in
a multiple-case
Journal of Management Studies 30:
approach.
779–814.
Thorelli HB. 1986. Networks: between markets and
hierarchies. Strategic Management Journal 7(1):
37–51.
Tsang WK. 1998. Can guanxi be a source of sus-
tained competitive advantage for doing business
in China? Academy of Management Executive 12:
64–73.
Tsui AS, Farh JL. 1997. Where guanxi matters:
relational demography and guanxi
in the Chinese
context. Work and Occupations 24: 56–79.
Tung RL. 1979. Dimensions of organizational environ-
ments: an exploratory study of
impact on
organizational structure. Academy of Management
Journal 22: 672–693.
Van de Ven AH, Walker G. 1984. The dynamics of
interorganizational
Administrative
Science Quarterly 29: 598–621.
Venkatraman N, Prescott JE. 1990. Environment–strat-
egy coalignment: an empirical test of its performance
implications. Strategic Management Journal 11(1):
1–23.
Wank DL. 1996. The institutional process of market
clientelism: guanxi and private business in a south
China city. The China Quarterly 3: 820–838.
World Bank. 1996. World Development Report: From
Plan to Market. World Bank: Washington, DC.
Xin KR, Pearce JL. 1996. Guanxi: connections as
substitutes for formal institutional support. Academy
of Management Journal 39: 1641–1658.
Yang MM. 1994. Gifts, Favors and Banquets: The Art
of Social Relationships in China. Cornell University
Press: New York.
Yeung IY, Tung RL. 1996. Achieving business success
in Confucian societies:
the importance of guanxi.
Organizational Dynamics 3: 54–65.

coordination.

their

Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)


APPENDIX: SUMMARY OF THE SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE

Guanxi and Organizational Dynamics

477

1 General Information

a
b
c

industry):

2 Strategic Orientation (7-point scale, from strongly disagree to strongly agree):

Organizational Form:
state-owned—————————;
collectively-owned—————————;
privately-owned—————————.
Firm Size: Total assets in RMB—————————;
Major product—————————;
Year of ﬁrm formation—————————;
Location: Name of City or County———————;
In making strategic decisions, we constantly seek to introduce new brands or new products
in the market;
In making strategic decisions, we quickly respond to signals of market opportunities;
of their outcome.

a
b
c We search for big market opportunities and favor large, bold decisions despite the uncertainty
3 Technological and Managerial Strengths (5-point scale, from lowest 20% to top 20% in the
To the best of your knowledge, how does your ﬁrm compare to close (direct) competitors in
your industry with respect to technological skills and abilities?
To the best of your knowledge, how does your ﬁrm compare to close (direct) competitors in
your industry with respect to managerial and organizational skills?
Please circle the number best describing the extent to which your ﬁrm has utilized guanxi
connections with buyers;
Please circle the number best describing the extent to which your ﬁrm has utilized guanxi
connections with suppliers;
Please circle the number best describing the extent to which your ﬁrm has utilized guanxi
connections with competitors.
Please circle the number best describing the extent to which you and your ﬁrm have utilized
guanxi connections with various levels of political governments;
Please circle the number best describing the extent to which you and your ﬁrm have utilized
guanxi connections with industrial authorities;
Please circle the number best describing the extent to which you and your ﬁrm have utilized
guanxi connections with other government authorities, such as taxation bureaus, banks,
industrial and commercial administrative bureaus, and the like.
Sales growth rate: <5%———— 5–10%———— 10–15%———— 15–20% —— 20–
30%———— 30–50%———— >50%————
Net profit growth rate: <5%———— 5–10%———— 10–15%———— 15–20%—— 20–
30%———— 30–50%———— >50%————

4 Guanxi with the Business Community (7-point scale, from very little to very much):

5 Guanxi with Government Authorities (7-point scale, from very little to very much):

6 Organizational Performance

a
b
c

a
b
c

Note: The respondents were asked to answer questions 2–6 in terms of the last 3 years.

Copyright  2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Strat. Mgmt. J., 22: 455–477 (2001)

