Journal of Applied Psychology
2006, Vol. 91, No. 1, 156 –165

Copyright 2006 by the American Psychological Association
0021-9010/06/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0021-9010.91.1.156

RESEARCH REPORTS

The Impact of Financial and Nonfinancial Incentives on Business-Unit

Outcomes Over Time

Suzanne J. Peterson

Miami University

Fred Luthans

University of Nebraska—Lincoln

Unlike previous behavior management research, this study used a quasi-experimental, control group
design to examine the impact of financial and nonfinancial incentives on business-unit (21 stores in a
fast-food franchise corporation) outcomes (profit, customer service, and employee turnover) over time.
The results showed that both types of incentives had a significant impact on all measured outcomes. The
financial incentive initially had a greater effect on all 3 outcomes, but over time, the financial and
nonfinancial incentives had an equally significant impact except in terms of employee turnover.

Keywords: financial incentives, nonfinancial incentives, business unit outcomes, performance manage-
ment, fast food industry

Considerable attention has been given to the types of incentives
that are most effective for managing performance behavior at the
individual level (e.g., Ambrose & Kulik, 1999; Heneman & Judge,
1999; Stajkovic & Luthans, 1997, 2001, 2003). However, research
examining the use of incentives to enhance outcomes at
the
business-unit level is lacking, even though this level of analysis is
crucial to an organization’s competitive advantage through out-
comes such as profitability, customer service, and employee re-
tention (Harter, Schmidt, & Hayes, 2002). To date, extensive
research has focused on the business-unit level—for example,
studies have concentrated on the relationship between employee
attitudes (Ashworth, Higgs, Schneider, Shepherd, & Carr, 1995;
Ostroff, 1992; Ryan, Schmit, & Johnson, 1996), leadership (Bass,
Avolio, Jung, & Berson, 2003; Howell & Avolio, 1993), or train-
ing (Shaw, Delery, Jenkins, & Gupta, 1998) and business-unit
outcomes. Yet little or no attention has been paid to evaluating
indicators such as financial or nonfinancial incentives on business-
unit outcomes. In addition, most research on business-unit-level
outcomes has relied on a single indicator of unit performance,
despite general agreement that multiple criteria are needed for a
more comprehensive evaluation of performance impact (Cameron,
1986; Goodman & Pennings, 1980). Finally, to date, incentive
intervention studies have not examined impact over time (Stajk-
ovic & Luthans, 2003). To begin to meet these gaps, our purpose
in this study was to use multiple criteria (business-unit profitabil-
ity, critical customer service, and turnover) over time to investigate
how financial and nonfinancial incentives relate to business-unit
performance.

Suzanne J. Peterson, Department of Management, Richard T. Farmer
School of Business, Miami University; Fred Luthans, Department of Man-
agement, University of Nebraska—Lincoln.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Suzanne
J. Peterson, who is now at the School of Global Management and Lead-
ership, Arizona State University, 4701 West Thunderbird Road, Glendale,
AZ 85306-4908. E-mail: suzanne.peterson@asu.edu

Application of Incentive Motivators to Business-Unit

Outcomes

Previous studies have shown that when properly implemented,
incentive motivators are effective mechanisms for enhancing in-
dividual performance (Kluger & DeNisi, 1996; Komaki, Coombs,
& Schepman, 1996; Stajkovic & Luthans, 1997, 2003). As Ban-
dura (1986) argued, “human behavior . . . cannot be fully under-
stood without considering the regulatory influence of response
consequences” (p. 228). In fact, as much as human agency is
rooted in social systems (Bandura, 1999), individual work perfor-
mance is at least partially determined by organizational reward
systems (Rynes & Gerhart, 1999). However, this does not assume
that different reinforcing contingencies produce uniform effects.
For example, Bandura (1986) has provided theoretical understand-
ing of the nature of different types of reinforcers, and there is
considerable research evidence showing that different reinforcing
contingencies produce different effects on performance (Bandura,
1986; Kluger & DeNisi, 1996; Komaki et al., 1996; Stajkovic &
Luthans, 1997, 2001, 2003). In particular, in the development of
contingent interventions, different types of incentive motivators
may have different effects on workplace outcomes because of their
unique and subsequent (a) outcome utility, (b) informative content,
and (c) mechanisms through which they regulate human action
(Stajkovic & Luthans, 2001).

Recent meta-analyses indicate that both financial and nonfinan-
cial incentive motivators have a positive impact on individual
performance (see Stajkovic & Luthans, 1997, 2003). We seek to
build upon previous research by examining the impact of both
financial and nonfinancial incentive motivators on unit-level out-
comes over time. The underlying theoretical premise for this study,
which recognizes the theoretical, methodological, and longitudinal
implications of multiple levels of analysis (Dansereau, Yam-
marino, & Kohles, 1998; Klein, Dansereau, & Hall, 1994; Klein &
Kozlowski, 2000), is that individual performance has an impact on

156


RESEARCH REPORTS

157

business-unit outcomes. As Guzzo (1988) and colleagues (Guzzo
& Shea, 1992) have pointed out, much of organizational or unit-
level performance is indirectly influenced by the same factors that
affect individual performance. For example, just as it is widely
recognized that incentive systems influence individual employee
behavior, we propose that incentives also affect employees’ col-
lective behavior, resulting in improvements in unit-level outcomes.
This is because the incentive system is a shared experience of a
group of employees, and its impact is likely reflected through
shared behaviors and resulting outcomes produced by those group
members. As Kozlowski and Hattrup (1992) noted, “individuals
within a bounded context are presented with relatively homoge-
nous situational factors and events that lead to collective interpre-
tations and response tendencies” (p. 162).

Although the exact process of how individual outcomes lead to
unit outcomes is not yet entirely understood, there is increasing
evidence that collectively a unit’s employees can provide a unique
source of competitive advantage that is difficult for others to
replicate (Harter et al., 2002; Huselid, 1995; O’Reilly & Pfeffer,
2000; Wright & McMahan, 1992). For example, recent work by
the Gallup Organization in industries as varied as retail, hospital-
ity, health care, and manufacturing has empirically confirmed that
certain human resource management practices can result in a
collectively “engaged” group of employees, and these engaged
employees have a positive impact on performance outcomes such
as productivity, customer satisfaction, employee retention, and
even profits (Harter et al., 2002; Tritch, 2003). Similarly, findings
by Collins and Clark (2003) suggest that a positive relationship
between certain human resource practices and firm performance
can be explained by the influence that such practices have on the
social networks of employees. Results of these studies highlight
the importance of considering the impact that human resource
practices have on the employee group level.

Many years ago, Argyris (1964) suggested that engaging in
practices such as fair compensation, feedback systems, and partic-
ipative management should lead to positive organizational out-
comes. However, Argyris, and more recently Goodman (2000),
also recognized that there are “missing organizational linkages”
between administering incentives and achieving business-unit out-
comes. Because managers are typically charged with both devel-
oping the policies for incentives and implementing the incentives,
the managers’ role may provide some answers to this missing
linkage. As Organ (1977) suggested, whether incentives have a
positive impact on organizational behaviors depends in large part
on how they are treated by supervisors and managers. It follows
that the systematic application of incentive motivators by super-
visors and managers should be reflected in positive-performance-
related behaviors at both the individual level and collectively at the
business-unit level.

The research question addressed in this study is therefore
whether the systematic administration of incentive motivators has
a positive impact on unit-level performance outcomes over time
and whether financial and nonfinancial incentives have a differ-
ential effect on those outcomes. Before describing the methodol-
ogy designed to answer this question, however, we present the
theoretical grounding of the financial and nonfinancial incentives
and the context for the study.

Financial Incentive Motivators

The theoretical basis for money as an effective incentive moti-
vator has been given attention over the years (Mitchell & Mickel,
1999). In the most general sense, money has been shown to attract,
motivate, and retain employees as well as to serve as a reinforcer
of employee performance (Stajkovic & Luthans, 1997, 2003), and
when withheld, money can act as a punisher (Milkovich & New-
man, 1999). Theoretically, money serves as an incentive primarily
because it can be exchanged for other desirable outcomes such as
goods, services, or privileges (Komaki et al., 1996). Although
many forms of financial incentives are available (e.g., vacations,
gift certificates), lump-sum bonuses are becoming a commonly
used pay method to retain and motivate employees (Sturges, 1994;
Sturman & Short, 2000). Lump-sum bonuses are cash payments to
employees that are not added to employees’ base wages and
therefore do not cause larger fixed labor costs in the long run
(Dulebohn & Martocchio, 1998). In addition, lump-sum bonuses
are a part of compensation that is not guaranteed and are usually
paid in recognition of some level of performance attainment or
goal achievement (Milkovich & Newman, 1999).

To make financial incentives more effective, Lawler (2000) has
suggested that administrative or application processes be given
attention. First, the more closely the financial incentives are tied to
performance, the greater the improvement on a variety of out-
comes. For example, recent findings indicate that reward contin-
gencies moderate the performance–turnover relationship in that
higher performers reported more turnover intentions when rewards
were not perceived as contingent on performance (Sturman &
Trevor, 2001; Trevor, Gerhart, & Boudreau, 1997). Gerhart and
Milkovich (1992) explained this phenomenon by suggesting that
high-performer turnover is greater under the condition of low-
reward contingency because the desire to change jobs should
increase as reward inequity increases. Therefore, when a weak
pay-for-performance link exists, turnover of the best people may
occur because they perceive that their high performance will not be
sufficiently rewarded.

A second theoretical consideration relevant to this study of
financial incentives revolves around whether the pay plan is fo-
cused on the individual or on the group. Group-incentive systems
include plans in which payouts are contingent on the achievement
of group or unit goals and often include a formal employee
involvement component. Profit sharing and gain sharing are the
most common, but lump-sum bonuses delivered to a group in
recognition of group performance levels or goal achievement are
quickly supplanting other plans (Milkovich & Newman, 1999).
There is initial evidence that well-designed pay plans based on
group performance can increase productivity (Bowie-McCoy,
Wendt, & Chope, 1993; Kruse, 1993), but to date no research has
shown the impact of financial incentives on business-unit profits,
customer service, or employee turnover.

Nonfinancial Incentive Motivators

Nonfinancial incentives in organizations are most closely asso-
ciated with recognition and performance feedback. Although the
nonfinancial incentive of recognition does not have as extensive a
theoretical foundation as that of money, we argue that the concep-
tual differentiation between recognition and social recognition is


158

RESEARCH REPORTS

important. Recognition in the application literature (e.g., Nelson,
2001) usually refers to formal programs such as employee of the
month or top sales awards. Social recognition, however, refers to
the more informal acknowledgment, attention, praise, approval, or
genuine appreciation for work well done from one individual or
group to another (Haynes, Pine, & Fitch, 1982; Luthans & Stajk-
ovic, 2000).

Although social recognition has been given relatively less at-
tention than formal recognition in the practitioner literature, con-
siderable research has shown that if social recognition is provided
on a contingent basis in managing employee behavior, it can be a
powerful incentive motivator for performance improvement (Sta-
jkovic & Luthans, 1997, 2001, 2003). In addition, practicing
managers do seem to value social recognition as an incentive, even
though this finding has been neglected in the literature. For exam-
ple, according to a survey by Nelson (2001), 90% of managers felt
that informal recognition helped to better motivate employees, and
84% believed providing nonfinancial recognition to employees
when they do good work helps to increase their performance.

As to the nonfinancial incentive of performance feedback, al-
though conceptually and practically closely related to social rec-
ognition, in behavioral performance management it has precise
meaning. Performance feedback is defined as providing quantita-
tive or qualitative information on past performance for the purpose
of changing or maintaining performance in specific ways (Prue &
Fairbank, 1981). Thus, a true feedback intervention in behavioral
management conveys more task-relevant information to employ-
ees than does social recognition. Because social recognition, in-
stead of conveying task-related information (Stajkovic & Luthans,
2001), gains its power primarily from the recipient’s expectation
that receiving acknowledgment or appreciation may lead to more
tangible rewards down the road, it often fails to guide future
performance efforts.

In fact, meta-analysis indicates that feedback interventions have
mixed results on performance; in some conditions performance
increases, and in other conditions no effect is reported (Kluger &
DeNisi, 1996). However, performance feedback as used in behav-
ioral management (Kopelman, 1986) refers to information regard-
ing a level of performance (outcome feedback) and/or the manner
and efficiency with which performance has been executed and how
to improve it in the future (process feedback). Objective feedback
information helps employees know what can be done in the future
to improve performance (Annett, 1969; Bandura, 1986; Kluger &
DeNisi, 1996; Stajkovic & Luthans, 2001) and has been found to
be most effective when it is (a) conveyed in a positive manner; (b)
delivered immediately after observing levels of performance; (c)
represented visually, such as in graph or charted form; and (d)
specific to the behavior that
is being targeted for feedback
(Luthans, 1995; Luthans & Kreitner, 1985).

On the basis of the aforementioned findings, we combined
social recognition and performance feedback into one nonfinancial
intervention condition. The delivery of social recognition allows
the targeted employees to realize that they were noticed, and the
feedback condition enables the target employees to know how they
were doing. Another reason we combined them into one nonfinan-
cial incentive is that social recognition and feedback may be
potentially confounding interventions (i.e., social recognition is a
form of feedback and vice versa).

The Fast-Food Industry Context

Although business-unit outcomes are receiving increasing atten-
tion in all types of settings (e.g., Harter et al., 2002), the need for
research at this level is especially acute in the restaurant industry.
Lynn (2002), editor of the Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Admin-
istration Quarterly, recently made a call for researchers to design
experiments that can identify the causes of outcomes that industry
practitioners care about:

It is the job of every hospitality manager and executive to achieve
various objectives (e.g., reduce turnover, increase customer satisfac-
tion, build market share). Research that identifies the variables under
managers’ control that can produce specified desired outcomes is of
real value to the industry. (p. ii)

The site selected for this study seeks to fill this need in the
fast-food industry.

In the fast-food industry, turnover is recognized as one of the
biggest problems (Ghiselli, La Lopa, & Bai, 2001). Replacing
frequent voluntary turnovers with qualified, motivated employees
has been cited as being managers’ greatest challenge given the
presence of low wages, the physicality of the work, and the
undesirable hours (Dermody & Holloway, 1998; Ghiselli et al.,
2001). Considering the cost and effects of turnover, as well as the
intense competition for the available pool of employees within the
industry, fast-food companies need to find strategies for retaining
their employees to achieve a competitive advantage. Fast-food
industry investigations have found that inadequate compensation
and failure to give recognition were the top reasons for employee
turnover (Dermody & Holloway, 1998; Price, 1997). Thus, in
addition to the important outcomes of business-unit profitability
and customer service, the specific research questions for this study
also include the impact of financial and nonfinancial incentives
(and their differential effects) on employee turnover over time.

Method

The study used all 21 fast-food franchises (business units) owned by one
firm. These units were located in four small-to-medium-sized cities within
about a 100-mile area in the Midwest. Each unit had on average two
managers, with some stores having three (N ⫽ 58). These managers ranged
in age from 32 to 56 years, with a median age of 40.2. They had 15.6 years
of formal education and had worked in their present job for 3.6 years (all
median values). There were no significant differences between the man-
agers in the experimental groups and those in the control group on any of
these demographic variables. Each unit comprised approximately 25 sub-
ordinates. Subordinates ranged in age from 16 to 58 years, with a median
age of 24.7. They had completed 11.4 years of school and had worked in
their present job for 1.7 years (all median values). To control for potential
managerial style differences before the intervention, we asked the subor-
dinates within the units to rate the extent to which their managers already
displayed behavior associated with the nonfinancial intervention. We used
a six-item measure of managerial style (Cronbach’s ␣ ⫽ .89), with items
such as “My manager often gives me a ‘pat on the back’ for doing a good
job.” There were no significant differences between managers in the
experimental groups and those in the control group.

Design and Procedure

The study used a quasi-experimental design (randomization of groups to
treatments but not individuals to groups; Cook & Campbell, 1979). Out of


RESEARCH REPORTS

159

the 21 units, three groups were formed for this study: (a) financial (3
stores); (b) nonfinancial (6 stores); and (c) control (12 stores). Because all
analyses were to be conducted at the unit level, we sought equal numbers
of units in each group. However, the company permitted only 9 units in
total to be subjected to an intervention. Specifically, because of the uncer-
tainty of the financial commitment, they allowed 3 units to receive the
monetary intervention, leaving 6 for the nonfinancial intervention and the
remaining 12 to serve as controls. Given this restraint, we still randomly
placed units in these conditions. As this design indicates, the subordinates
were nested under managers who would administer the incentive interven-
tion. A statistical check indicated that the subordinates did not differ across
the three groups in age, education, or job tenure.

Training

The training was conducted in two separate 3-hr sessions: one for the
managers of the units that were using financial incentives (i.e., contingent
supplemental pay administered at the unit level) in a behavioral manage-
ment approach and one for the managers who were using nonfinancial
incentives (i.e., contingent social recognition and performance feedback
administered at the unit level) in a behavioral management approach. As
with the procedures used in previous research (Stajkovic & Luthans, 1997,
2001), in this study each training session first consisted of a presentation
and discussion regarding principles of behavioral management and a five-
step application behavioral management model (Luthans & Kreitner,
1985). Specifically, both groups of managers were taught how to do the
following:

1.

Identify antecedents and consequences

2. Measure antecedents and consequences

3. Functionally analyze antecedents and consequences

4. Apply interventions (financial or nonfinancial)

5. Evaluate critical performance behaviors

Each group received the identical training program content, conducted by
the same researchers, except for the type of intervention they were to use
in Step 4 (i.e., the financial or nonfinancial incentive).

After this presentation on behavioral management, each training session
involved experiential practice and role-playing to ensure that learning had
occurred. There was enough time for the training participants (i.e., the
managers in the intervention groups) to get a chance to have a “practice
turn.” Trainees were asked to identify critical, observable, and measurable
behaviors that were currently deficient but that could have had a great
impact on improving performance in key areas of their units (Steps 1 and
2). This began with a list of over 60 behaviors, which the management
team as a whole then narrowed down by democratic vote in order of
importance to unit-performance outcomes. Example behaviors included
keeping both hands moving at the drive-through window, working during
idle time, repeating the customer’s order back to him or her, or speed of
service delivery.

Financial incentive treatment group. Because past research (Guthrie,
2000; Milkovich & Newman, 1999) has indicated that group pay system
acceptance requires employee involvement, the managers in the financial
incentive group were told to carefully communicate at the beginning of the
intervention the specifics of the money distribution plan to ensure that the
workers fully understood that the payout process depended on their exhib-
iting specific behaviors. Moreover, in order to encourage behavior that was
aligned with the organization’s interests, there was evidence that the
company must closely link pay to organizational success (Eisenhardt,
1988) and specific performance behaviors (Stajkovic & Luthans, 2001).
Indeed, recent research has indicated that a strong pay-for-performance

link not only contributes to positive employee perceptions (Lawler, 2000)
but also leads to improvement in productivity (Stajkovic & Luthans, 2001)
and curbs turnover of valuable employees (Trevor et al., 1997).

To meet these effective pay-for-performance criteria at the business-unit
level, employees were told that the same lump-sum monetary consequence
would only be forthcoming when members of the unit collectively engaged
in the identified and communicated critical performance behaviors. That is,
money would only be distributed on the basis of pay for contingent group
performance behavior. This meant that rather than increase the individual
employee’s base wages (e.g., from $8.00/hr to $8.50/hr), managers sys-
tematically administered lump-sum bonuses to their workers’ paychecks
only when the group’s critical performance behaviors were observed and
measured. Because it would be impossible for managers to observe all
employees at all times, the managers used the same time sampling method.
Managers systematically marked down at the same number of randomly
spaced times the critical performance behaviors they observed by employ-
ees in the unit and were given tally sheets expressly for this purpose. At the
end of each month, on the basis of the objectively observed data collected
on the critical performance behaviors exhibited by the employees in the
entire unit, the following payouts were given: up to 50 behaviors observed,
$25 added to all the paychecks of the unit’s employees; 50 –100 behaviors,
$50 per paycheck; over 100 behaviors, $75.

Payouts for the financial groups ranged from a $33.07 average per
employee per month during the 3 months posttraining to a $54.61 average
per employee per month during the next 3 months to a $70.55 average per
employee per month during the final 3 months. A potential limitation of
this payout method might have been the employees’ engaging in the
minimum behaviors within the 50-behavior range, but this was not deemed
to be a problem because these behaviors were for the group as a whole and
because of the relative ease of performing these behaviors. Also, on the
basis of company data regarding their previous bonus programs, $25
represented an increment level that would motivate their employees. Spe-
cifically, employees were asked the following: “What amount of money
would motivate you to try to perform your job at a higher level?” Em-
ployees were given the following options: (a) $10 –$15, (b) $15–$20, (c)
$20 –$25, (d) $25–$30, (e) $30 –$35, (f) $35–$40, or (g) above $40.
Sixty-eight percent of employees responded that $25–$30 would motivate
them. On the basis of this objective information and the firm’s ability to
pay, we expected that most of these employees would respond well to the
$25 increments.

Nonfinancial treatment group.

In an attempt to keep levels of analysis
consistent and aligned, we wanted the nonfinancial intervention, like the
financial treatment, to be delivered at the unit level as much as possible. To
accomplish this objective, we trained the managers in the nonfinancial
group to deliver performance feedback and social recognition at the unit
level. Specifically, for the performance feedback, managers developed
charts of the entire group’s quantitative information concerning the fre-
quency of the identified critical performance behaviors. For example,
managers would chart the drive-through times and the cash overshort at the
end of the day. These large poster-sized charts were placed in a prominent
place (e.g., by the time clock) where all members of the unit could readily
see the results. In addition, the managers were trained to administer
positive recognition not only to individuals but also to groups and to the
entire unit for performing the identified behaviors (e.g., “I noticed that
today the drive-through times were really good. That is great since that is
what we’re really focusing on these days”). This contingent social recog-
nition could be heard most of the time by several employees or even by the
whole group because of the close proximity of employees in the unit. Even
if the social recognition was directed to an individual, the proximity was
such that it was deemed to serve as vicarious reinforcement to others. In
addition, to assure social recognition to the unit level, managers gave a
memo to each employee on a weekly basis that summarized (in a positive
way) how the unit was progressing on the identified behaviors. Specific,


160

RESEARCH REPORTS

but anonymous, examples recognizing the critical behaviors being exhib-
ited were used in these weekly memos.

also provided us with anecdotal evidence of the verbal social recognition
they were giving.

Measures of Business-Unit Outcomes

Again, the focus of this study was on unit-level outcomes rather than on
individual performance outcomes, which dominate the behavioral manage-
ment literature (see Dienesch & Liden, 1986, and Rousseau, 1985, for a
discussion regarding the aggregation of individual-level responses to pre-
dict group-level performance). For our study, the company provided, from
currently existing records, unit gross profit data as well as a key customer
service indicator of drive-through times. In addition, the organization
carefully tracked and provided us with employee turnover data. Because all
these data were kept on a monthly basis, we averaged the data for 3-month
periods to prevent potentially misleading short-run fluctuations and to
secure more reliable, stable estimates (Schwab, 1999).

Gross profitability. The corporation provided us with the data on gross
profits (i.e., revenue minus expenses) of each unit measured monthly in
dollars. We averaged these gross profits in each condition in 3-month
intervals: Time 1 ⫽ 3 months prior to intervention; Time 2 ⫽ 3 months
postintervention; Time 3 ⫽ 6 months postintervention; and Time 4 ⫽ 9
months postintervention.

Drive-through time. Drive-through time was measured in minutes it
takes for customers to approach the restaurant, order their food, pay, and
leave the restaurant. Drive-through times in the fast-food industry have
long been considered a key customer service indicator, because they
represent a standard used to benchmark speed and efficiency of operations
to meet customer expectations. In fact, in a relevant study, excessive
drive-through time was ranked second in importance to customers and was
the primary reason for customers’ not coming back (Kelley, Hoffman, &
Davis, 1993). Drive-through times are recorded for every transaction and
then averaged at the end of each shift to determine this measure of the
unit’s customer service performance. The drive-through times are auto-
matically recorded by an in-store computer and were averaged for each
store by aggregating all shifts to derive the average drive-through times per
store across shifts for each of the time periods in the study.

Employee turnover. This franchise corporation has a very high turn-
over rate, averaging over 200% in a 3-month time period (i.e., they only
retain an employee about an average of 1.5 months). However, this figure
is in line with the industry average for geographic locales similar to the
ones in which our study’s units were located. Much of this turnover in the
industry is due to the demographics of the workforce (e.g., students and
older workers who lack long-term commitment to the job), a shortage of
unskilled workers in these locations, as well as tactics whereby competitors
offer hiring bonuses to lure employees from one another. This company
produced monthly turnover reports in percentages. For consistency, we
again averaged turnover at each of the study’s 3-month time periods.

Manipulation Checks

As a manipulation check, the researchers, accompanied by the field
manager who normally made such calls, randomly conducted weekly
follow-up visits to all the units in the experimental treatments; in addition,
the researchers made frequent phone calls and sent e-mails to the unit
managers until the end of the study. The researchers would probe the
managers with questions and comments as to whether he or she remem-
bered and was implementing the training received. Also, for those units in
the financial treatment condition, the company e-mailed us objective data
reports that showed the payouts being distributed at each store, which
allowed us to monitor and confirm that
the intervention was indeed
ongoing. For those in the nonfinancial intervention condition, the managers
sent us (via weekly e-mails) the feedback charts they were creating and
displaying as well as copies of the social recognition memos that were
being distributed to employees. During our site visits and by e-mail, many

Results

Correlations, means, and standard deviations for the study vari-
ables are shown in Table 1. The reported correlations were based
on all the business units/stores in the study (N ⫽ 21) and were
aggregated across conditions (control and financial and nonfinan-
cial treatments) that were reported at the 6-month time period (i.e.,
halfway through the intervention as has been done in previous
studies; see Frayne & Geringer, 2000). As a preliminary step in the
analysis, the equivalence of experimental and control groups on
the three outcomes measures was assessed. This step was accom-
plished by computing t tests for the significance of differences
using the preintervention data. Although visual inspection indi-
cated that the financial intervention group was slightly outperform-
ing the nonfinancial and control groups, statistical analysis re-
vealed that none of the results of the t tests for differences on the
means of the preintervention data was significant.

Intervention Versus Control Groups: A Comparison Over
Time

We modeled our analytical strategy on that of Frayne and
Geringer (2000). To control for the error rate in analyses, we used
multivariate analysis of variance to analyze all measures collected
for the control and intervention groups for all time periods. Results
of sphericity tests indicated that univariate analyses of variance
(ANOVAs) on each of the measures were appropriate. Thus, a
series of contrasts were performed: Mean differences were exam-
ined between the three groups separately within each period of
time. Kieffer, Reece, and Thompson (2001) have suggested that
this is the best strategy when researchers are interested in a priori
planned contrasts.

In this study, two-way interaction contrasts were performed for
each outcome variable (i.e., profitability, drive-through times, and
turnover): Contrast 1 was between the control group (no interven-
tion) and both the financial intervention group and the nonfinancial
intervention group at each period of time (preintervention, 3
months, 6 months, and 9 months). Contrast 2 was between the
financial group and the nonfinancial group at each period of time.
The purpose of these contrasts was to answer analytically the
following questions: (a) Is the difference between the control and

Table 1
Correlations Means, and Standard Deviations for Variables

Variable

1. Gross profits
2. Drive-through times
3. Turnover

M
SD

1

—

73.3
17.2

2

⫺.63*

—

53.2
29.6

3

⫺.47*
.49*
—

211.5
99.4

Note. All correlations were based on n ⫽ 21 (all business units/stores in
the study) on aggregated measures across all conditions (control and
financial and nonfinancial treatments) taken at the 6-month time period.
* p ⱕ .01.


RESEARCH REPORTS

161

the two intervention conditions (financial and nonfinancial) the
same for each period of time? (b) Is the difference between the
financial and nonfinancial conditions the same for each period of
time? The means and standard deviations of the business-unit
profit performance, customer service, and employee turnover mea-
sures are shown in Table 2.

Profit performance. For gross profits, a repeated measures
ANOVA revealed significant main effects for groups, F(2, 18) ⫽
71.23, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .34, and time, F(3, 54) ⫽ 62.17, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .13. The Group ⫻ Time interaction was also significant, F(6,
54) ⫽ 57.63, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .12. We examined this significant
interaction further by exploring some contrasts: the control group
contrasted with both treatment groups (Contrast 1) and the finan-
cial group contrasted with the nonfinancial treatment group (Con-
trast 2). Each contrast was an interaction contrast. At preinterven-
tion, none of the contrasts was significant. However, 3 months
after the intervention, Contrast 1 was significant, F(1, 18) ⫽
189.43, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .05. Contrast 2 was also significant, F(1,
18) ⫽ 91.18, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .01. Overall, results indicated that prior
to the intervention, there were no differences between the three
groups (control, financial, and nonfinancial). Three months after
the intervention, however, both the financial as well as the nonfi-
nancial group outperformed the control group. Also, the financial
group outperformed the nonfinancial group.

Six months postintervention, only Contrast 1 was significant,
F(1, 18) ⫽ 311.27, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .02. In the final 9-month
postintervention analysis, only Contrast 1 was again significant,
F(1, 18) ⫽ 216.12, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .12. These results indicate that
over the course of the 9-month period, both the financial as well as
the nonfinancial interventions continued to have a positive impact
on profits when compared with the control group. Also noteworthy
is that although the financial intervention outperformed the non-
financial intervention initially (i.e., at the 3-month analysis), these
differences disappeared over time. At both 6 and 9 months, there
were no significant differences between the financial and nonfi-
nancial interventions vis-a`-vis profits. In other words, this analysis
indicated that financial and nonfinancial incentive motivators had

an equally effective impact on unit-level profit performance over
time.

Drive-through times. The repeated measures ANOVA on
drive-through timing revealed significant main effects for group,
F(2, 18) ⫽ 1,027, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .47, and time F(3, 54) ⫽ 218.19,
p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .21. The Group ⫻ Time interaction was also
significant, F(6, 54) ⫽ 212.65, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .23. Further analysis
of the interaction by means of the previously mentioned contrasts
revealed no significant difference between the control group and
the two treatment groups at preintervention. However, at 3 months,
both contrasts were significant with Contrast 1 (the control vs. the
two treatments), which explains the largest proportion of the
interaction variance, F(1, 18) ⫽ 727.63, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .14; for
Contrast 2 (financial vs. nonfinancial), F(1, 18) ⫽ 46.24, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .02.

At 6 months postintervention, only Contrast 1 was significant,
F(1, 18) ⫽ 922.89, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .13. Similarly, at 9 months,
Contrast 1 was again significant, F(1, 18) ⫽ 1,127.34, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .12, whereas Contrast 2 was not. Overall, these results
indicate that for the key measurable customer service criterion of
drive-through times, there were no significant differences between
the control and intervention groups prior to the intervention. How-
ever, postintervention, both treatment groups outperformed the
control group in the short- and the long-term. Like the effects on
profit performance at 6 and 9 months, there were no differences
between the financial and nonfinancial incentives on drive-through
times.

Employee turnover. The last outcome variable examined was
employee turnover. A repeated measures ANOVA showed signif-
icant main effects of group, F(2, 18) ⫽ 66.25, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .14,
and time, F(3, 54) ⫽ 44.29, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .17. The Group ⫻ Time
interaction was also significant, F(6, 54) ⫽ 19.56, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽
.14. This significant interaction was also examined further by
looking at the contrasts at each time period. At pretraining, neither
Contrast 1 nor Contrast 2 was significant. However, at 3 months,
both Contrast 1 and 2 were significant, F(1, 54) ⫽ 21.22, p ⬍ .01,
␩2 ⫽ .04, and F(1, 54) ⫽ 16.23, p ⬍ .03, ␩2 ⫽ .03, respectively.

Table 2
Means and Standard Deviations of Performance Measures by Intervention and Control Groups

Time

Gross profitsa

Preintervention
3 months
6 months
9 months

Drive-through timingb

Preintervention
3 months
6 months
9 months

Turnover (%)

Preintervention
3 months
6 months
9 months

Control

Financial

Nonfinancial

M

62.3
65.4
62.7
63.3

63.9
63.5
61.4
61.9

220.3
247.4
239.1
231.7

SD

11.4
22.9
15.7
32.9

24.9
33.1
42.7
31.3

97.2
98.3
94.4
87.8

M

64.7
75.2
79.1
84.1

58.6
54.7
50.6
47.3

209.6
201.9
192.8
181.4

SD

14.7
21.4
23.6
32.8

21.8
24.6
38.8
29.1

88.1
110.2
119.2
88.6

M

61.2
71.2
78.1
83.2

59.4
48.1
47.6
44.3

218.4
216.6
202.5
196.6

SD

16.2
18.1
18.3
32.1

20.2
21.9
31.3
29.1

79.1
103.6
102.6
88.2

a Measured in thousands of dollars.

b Measured in seconds.


162

RESEARCH REPORTS

Unlike the profit and customer service performance analyses,
for turnover at 6 months, both contrasts were again significant:
Contrast 1, F(1, 18) ⫽ 30.34, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .01; Contrast 2, F(1,
18) ⫽ 12.13, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .04. At 9 months both contrasts were
again significant: Contrast 1, F(1, 18) ⫽ 43.29, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .02;
Contrast 2, F(1, 18) ⫽ 9.76, p ⬍ .01, ␩2 ⫽ .04. Overall, results
again demonstrate that there were no significant differences in
turnover between the control and the intervention groups prior to
the intervention. However, postintervention, both treatment groups
had less turnover than did the control group. The difference in
results between turnover and the other unit outcomes (i.e., profits,
drive-through times) is that the financial incentive did have a
significantly greater impact on improving turnover than did the
nonfinancial incentive over time.

Finally, to control for the potential cyclical or seasonal effects of
the unit outcomes, we performed a post hoc cursory examination
of archival data of the intervention groups from the same time
period during the previous year; this survey did not indicate the
improved trends found during the intervention periods of the study.

Discussion

The results indicated that both financial and nonfinancial incen-
tives contingently administered to identified performance behav-
iors exhibited by the work group significantly increased both unit
profit performance and customer service measures and decreased
turnover rates. It is important to note that these improvements were
sustainable over time. In today’s climate of focusing on quick-hit
financial performance improvement for the capital markets (e.g.,
downsizing and Enron-type “creative accounting”), genuine sus-
tainable performance improvement through people would seem to
best contribute to competitive advantage (Luthans & Youssef,
2004; Pfeffer, 1998). Although statistically significant improve-
ments were evidenced in all the measured performance outcomes,
in a very tight margin industry with extremely high customer
service expectations and huge turnover rates, the absolute numbers
are also very meaningful for this firm.

Specifically, the average profits rose 30% from preintervention
to postintervention (9 months) for the financial condition and 36%
for the nonfinancials; drive-through times decreased 19% for the
financials and 25% for the nonfinancials; and turnover improved
13% for the financials and 10% for the nonfinancials. From an
individual employee standpoint, on average, employees in the
financial group made $475 more than their counterpart employees
in the nonfinancial treatment and control groups over the course of
study. Obviously, the top management of this firm felt this money
was well spent and indicated they would be using both the finan-
cial and nonfinancial interventions in all their restaurants.

Another contribution of the study is the finding that although the
financial incentives initially had a greater impact than the nonfi-
nancial incentives on profit and customer service, they became
equally effective over time. This may shed some light on the
missing organizational linkages discussed by Goodman (2000)
indicating that nonfinancial incentives are viewed by employees as
an attempt to increase the positive climate, and hence employees
reciprocate with prosocial, citizenship behaviors (Settoon & Moss-
holder, 2002) and engagement (Harter et al., 2002) and even
effectiveness at the unit level (Harter et al., 2002; Podsakoff &
MacKenzie, 1994) and in the restaurant industry (Walz & Niehoff,

1996). Future research could use structural equation modeling to
directly test if indeed such linkages exist.

For employee turnover, results over time were different and
interesting. Although both the financial and nonfinancial incen-
tives had a significant impact on turnover over time, the financial
incentives had a significantly greater impact than the nonfinancial
incentives over time. Equity theory (Adams, 1963) may offer one
potential explanation for this finding. Equity theory suggests that
one option when determining the equitability of a situation is to
choose a comparative referent outside the organization but within
the same industry. Thus, when financial incentives boosted these
employees’ pay to a level that was a wage higher than comparative
referents in their labor market pool, this may have resulted in a
lower turnover rate over time (see Sturman & Short, 2000; Trevor
et al., 1997). These results also support efficiency wage theory
(Akerlof & Yellen, 1986), which suggests that organizations that
pay at higher levels than competitors will experience increases in
efficiency at both the individual and the organizational levels
because they are more able to retain their best performers (Brown,
Sturman, & Simmering, 2003) as well as reduce employees’ un-
productive behavior (Akerlof & Yellen, 1986).

Another possible reason why the financial incentives had a
greater impact on turnover than the nonfinancial incentives may
have to do with organizational commitment. According to Hrebin-
iak and Alutto (1972), calculative commitment, or what Meyer and
Allen (1991) called “continuance commitment,” that occurs as a
result of individual– organizational transactions may result in bet-
ter retention of employees. That is, individuals may become bound
to an organization because they have certain costs (e.g., seniority,
or in this case a good bonus plan) invested in the organization and
cannot “afford” to separate themselves from it. In this study,
perhaps employees felt that once invested in the new financial
benefits, they had less desire to leave.

Limitations of the Study

A constraint in our study was that the sample size (21 units) may
have affected statistical power. This creates a dilemma, because in
most cases of field research the researcher has little or no flexi-
bility to simply increase the sample size to ensure adequate power
(Sackett & Mullen, 1993). This is especially true when the sample
involves business units rather than individuals. Thus, as Cook and
Campbell (1976, 1979) have discussed, trade-offs between various
forms of validity—namely, internal validity and statistical conclu-
sion validity—must be illuminated. In light of the constraints of
gaining a larger sample of unit-level data, we followed Goldstein’s
(1986) advice to “choose the most rigorous design possible and be
aware of its limitations” (p. 144). In particular, we attempted to
minimize the threats to the internal validity posed by the study’s
design.

Besides sample size, another potential limitation was that the
nonfinancial intervention was, by its nature, less group focused
than the financial condition. Given that analyses were conducted at
the unit level, both interventions were designed and implemented
as much as possible to also be at the group level so that levels were
aligned. Although performance feedback graphs and group recog-
nition memos were indeed delivered to the group as a whole,
recognition-oriented verbal comments (most often overheard by


RESEARCH REPORTS

163

other members of the close proximity unit) still did not always
reach the whole group.

One final limitation that should be noted pertains to the gener-
alizability of results. The research was conducted in a very specific
service setting: a fast-food chain. Although selected because of the
need for such studies in this industry and the excellent controls
available for the field experiment, this setting is somewhat unique
and limits the generalizability of the findings to other service firms
and nonservice sectors. In addition, the relatively young age of
employees and the low complexity of their jobs are not represen-
tative of most organizations. Most of the workers are either in
school and consider this to be a short-term job or they are less
qualified for relatively more complex jobs in other companies.

Conclusions and Implications

This study’s main contribution is twofold. Specifically, this is
the first study to explore and demonstrate that both financial and
nonfinancial incentive motivators contingently administered by
trained managers significantly improved desirable business-unit
outcomes (profitability, customer service, and employee turnover).
This improvement in performance also appeared to be sustained
over time, an issue also not previously examined to date in incen-
tive motivation research. Second, although both had a significant
impact, the financial incentive was found to have a greater initial
impact than the nonfinancial incentive; over time, however, this
discrepancy disappeared for profitability and customer service, but
not
lead to several practical
implications.

turnover. These results

for

First, in a labor-intensive service setting, marked by simple,
routine jobs and a low wage rate, contingent pay-for-performance
behaviors may indeed have the strongest initial impact on unit
performance outcomes. This may be explained by the existing
theory that money is readily perceived as having a high instru-
mental value that makes putting forth extra effort worthwhile
(Mitchell & Mickel, 1999; Stajkovic & Luthans, 2001). Also, the
monetary incentive may have a long-run effect in terms of staying
or leaving (i.e., turnover rates) because of comparative value for
alternative employment (e.g., equity theory). In the case of the
nonfinancials (social recognition and performance feedback), em-
ployees may initially respond positively because they seek feed-
back and desire attention and respect (Luthans & Stajkovic, 2000).
There is also considerable evidence from reinforcement theory and
research that such performance feedback, attention, and respect do
not become satiated (Bandura, 1986; Komaki et al., 1996; Stajk-
ovic & Luthans, 2001). Thus, although the nonfinancials may not
have as great an initial impact as the pragmatics of monetary gain,
as was found in this study, they seem to have a steady, sustainable
impact.

Despite the growing body of literature supporting the use of
social recognition and performance feedback to improve worker
performance, these are still not as widely used today as they should
be, given that there are minimal direct costs (e.g., training) to the
organization. Also, from a practical standpoint, this study indicated
that with very little training and follow-up, managers can indeed
contingently administer at the unit level both financial and nonfi-
nancial incentives to specific performance behaviors that have an
impact on desired unit outcomes. By administering incentive mo-
tivators through a theoretically based yet application-driven

method, managers may be able to overcome some of the process
issues typically associated with administering different types of
incentive motivators.

is difficult

Finally, this study helps to confirm what recent researchers have
claimed (e.g., Huselid, 1995; Huselid, Jackson, & Schuler, 1997;
Pfeffer, 1998)—that employee performance has implications for
work-unit or organizational-level outcomes and that a firm’s em-
ployees collectively provide a unique source of competitive ad-
vantage that
to replicate. In this particular study,
through manager training and the use of a behavioral performance
management incentive system, managers were able to increase
employees’ key performance behaviors, which seemed to be crit-
ical to their work-unit outcomes. By systematically administering
both group-level financial and nonfinancial incentive motivators,
managers could better align the interests of employees with those
of the organization. The results of this study not only reconfirm
past research advocating the use of incentive motivators to in-
crease individual performance but also show the positive impact of
collective effort on work-unit performance over time.

References

Adams, J. S. (1963). Toward an understanding of inequity. Journal of

Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 422– 436.

Akerlof, G. A., & Yellen, J. L. (1986). Efficiency wage models of the labor

market. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Ambrose, M. L., & Kulik, C. T. (1999). Old friends, new faces: Motivation

research in the 1990s. Journal of Management, 25, 231–292.

Annett, J. (1969). Feedback and human behavior. Harmondsworth, En-

gland: Penguin.

Argyris, C. (1964). Integrating the individual and the organization. New

York: Wiley.

Ashworth, S. D., Higgs, C., Schneider, B., Shepherd, W., & Carr, L. S.
(1995, April). The linkage between customer satisfaction and employee-
based measures of a company’s strategic business intent. Paper pre-
sented at the 10th Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and
Organizational Psychology, Orlando, FL.

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action. Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bandura, A. (1999). Social cognitive theory of personality. In L. Pervin &
O. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality (2nd ed., pp. 154 –196). New
York: Guilford Press.

Bass, B. M., Avolio, B. J., Jung, D. I., & Berson, Y. (2003). Predicting unit
performance by assessing transformational and transactional leadership.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 207–218.

Bowie-McCoy, S. W., Wendt, A. C., & Chope, R. (1993). Gainsharing in
public accounting: Working smarter and harder. Industrial Relations, 32,
432– 445.

Brown, M. P., Sturman, M. C., & Simmering, M. J. (2003). Compensation
policy and organizational performance: The efficiency, operational, and
financial implications of pay levels and pay structure. Academy of
Management Journal, 46, 752–762.

Cameron, K. S. (1986). Effectiveness as paradox: Consensus and conflict
in conceptions of organizational effectiveness. Management Science, 32,
539 –553.

Collins, C. J., & Clark, K. D. (2003). Strategic human resource practices,
top management team social networks, and firm performance: The role
of human resource practices in creating organizational level competitive
advantage. Academy of Management Journal, 46, 740 –751.

Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1976). The design and conduct of
quasi-experiments and true experiments in field settings. In M. D.
Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology
(pp. 223–326). Chicago: Rand McNally.


164

RESEARCH REPORTS

Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-experimentation. Boston:

Houghton Mufflin.

Dansereau, F., Yammarino, F. J., & Kohles, J. C. (1998). Multiple levels
of analysis from a longitudinal perspective: Some implications for
theory building. Academy of Management Review, 24, 346 –357.

Dermody, M. B., & Holloway, R. W. (1998). Recruitment and retention of
managers: Developing a management-career package. Cornell Hotel and
Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 39, 20 –25.

Dienesch, R. M., & Liden, R. C. (1986). Leader–member exchange model
of leadership: A critique and further development. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 11, 618 – 634.

Dulebohn, J. H., & Martocchio, J. J. (1998). Employee perceptions of the
fairness of work group incentive pay plans. Journal of Management, 24,
469 – 488.

Eisenhardt, K. M. (1988). Agency and institutional theory explanations:
The case of retail sales compensation. Academy of Management Journal,
31, 488 –512.

Frayne, C. A., & Geringer, M. J. (2000). Self-management training for
improving job performance: A field experiment involving salespeople.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 361–372.

Gerhart, B., & Milkovich, G. T. (1992). Employee compensation: Research
and practice. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Kough (Eds.), Handbook of
industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 3, 2nd ed., pp. 481–569).
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Ghiselli, R. F., La Lopa, J. M., & Bai, B. (2001). Job satisfaction, life
satisfaction, and turnover intent among fast food-service managers.
Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 42, 28 –37.

Goldstein, I. L. (1986). Training in organizations: Needs assessment,

tices on turnover, productivity, and corporate financial performance.
Academy of Management Journal, 38, 635– 672.

Huselid, M. A., Jackson, S. E., & Schuler, R. S. (1997). Technical and
strategic human resource management effectiveness as determinants of
firm performance. Academy of Management Journal, 40, 171–188.

Kelley, S. W., Hoffman, K. D., & Davis, M. A. (1993). A typology of retail

failures and recoveries. Journal of Retailing, 69, 429 – 452.

Kieffer, K. M., Reece, R. J., & Thompson, B. (2001). Statistical techniques
employed in AERJ and JCP articles from 1988 to 1997: A methodolog-
ical review. Journal of Experimental Education, 69, 280 –309.

Klein, K. J., Dansereau, F., & Hall, R. J. (1994). Levels issues in theory
development, data collection, and analysis. Academy of Management
Review, 19, 195–229.

Klein, K. J., & Kozlowski, S. W. J. (Eds.). (2000). Multilevel theory,

research and methods in organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The effects of feedback interventions
on performance: A historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary
feedback intervention theory. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 254 –284.

Komaki, J., Coombs, T., & Schepman, S. (1996). Motivational implica-
tions of reinforcement theory. In R. M. Steers, L. W. Porter, & G. A.
Bigley (Eds.), Motivation and leadership at work (pp. 34 –52). New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Kopelman, R. E. (1986). Objective feedback. In E. A. Locke (Ed.), Gen-
eralizing from laboratory to field settings (pp. 119 –145). Lexington,
MA: Lexington Books.

Kozlowski, S. W., & Hattrup, K. (1992). A disagreement about within-
group agreement: Disentangling issues of consistency versus consensus.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 161–167.

development, and evaluation (2nd ed.). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.

Kruse, D. L. (1993). Profit sharing: Does it make a difference? Kalamazoo,

Goodman, P. S. (2000). Missing organizational linkages: Tools for cross-

MI: W. E. Upjohn Institute.

level research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Goodman, P. S., & Pennings, J. M. (1980). Critical issues in assessing
organizational effectiveness. In E. E. Lawler, III, D. A. Nadler, & C.
Cammann (Eds.), Organizational assessment (pp. 185–215). New York:
Wiley.

Guthrie, J. P. (2000). Alternative pay practices and employee turnover: An
organizational economics perspective. Group and Organization Man-
agement, 25, 419 – 439.

Guzzo, R. A. (1988). Productivity research: Reviewing psychological and
economic perspectives. In J. P. Campbell & R. J. Campbell (Eds.),
Productivity in organizations (pp. 63– 81). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Guzzo, R. A., & Shea, G. P. (1992). Group performance and intergroup
relations in organizations. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.),
Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 3, 2nd ed.,
pp. 269 –313). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Harter, J. K., Schmidt, F. L., & Hayes, T. L. (2002). Business-unit-level
relationships between employee satisfaction, employee engagement, and
business outcomes: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87,
1–12.

Haynes, R. S., Pine, R. C., & Fitch, H. G. (1982). Reducing accident rates
with organizational behavior modification. Academy of Management
Journal, 25, 407– 416.

Heneman, H. G., III., & Judge, T. A. (1999). Compensation attitudes: A
review and recommendations for future research. In S. L. Rynes & B.
Gerhart (Eds.), Compensation in organizations: Progress and prospects
(pp. 61–103). San Francisco: New Lexington Press.

Howell, J. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1993). Transformational leadership, trans-
actional leadership, locus of control, and support for innovation: Key
predictors of consolidated-business-unit performance. Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, 78, 891–902.

Hrebiniak, L. G., & Alutto, J. A. (1972). Personal and role-related factors
in the development of organizational commitment. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 17, 555–573.

Lawler, E. E. (2000). Rewarding excellence. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
(1995). Organizational behavior (7th ed.). New York:
Luthans, F.

McGraw-Hill.

Luthans, F., & Kreitner, R. (1985). Organizational behavior modification

and beyond. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman.

Luthans, F., & Stajkovic, A. D. (2000). Provide recognition for perfor-
mance improvement. In E. A. Locke (Ed.), Principles of organizational
behavior (pp. 166 –180). Oxford, England: Blackwell.

Luthans, F., & Youssef, C. M. (2004). Human, social, and now positive
psychological capital management: Investing in people for competitive
advantage. Organizational Dynamics, 33, 143–160.

Lynn, W. M. (2002). The industry needs less descriptive and more causal
research. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 43, ii.
Meyer, J. P., & Allen, N. J. (1991). A three-component conceptualization
of organizational commitment. Human Resource Management Review,
1, 61– 89.

Milkovich, G. T., & Newman, J. M. (1999). Compensation. Boston: Irwin.
Mitchell, T. R., & Mickel, A. E. (1999). The meaning of money: An
individual difference perspective. Academy of Management Review, 24,
568 –578.

Nelson, B. (2001). Please don’t just do what I tell you, do what needs to
be done: Every employee’s guide to making work more rewarding. New
York: Hyperion.

O’Reilly, C. A., III, & Pfeffer, J. (2000). Hidden value: How great
companies achieve extraordinary results with ordinary people. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.

Organ, D. W. (1977). A reappraisal and reinterpretation of the satisfaction-
causes-performance hypothesis. Academy of Management Review, 2,
46 –53.

Ostroff, C. (1992). The relationship between satisfaction, attitudes, and
performance: An organizational level analysis. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 77, 963–974.

Pfeffer, J. (1998). The human equation: Building profits by putting people

Huselid, M. A. (1995). The impact of human resource management prac-

first. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.


RESEARCH REPORTS

165

Podsakoff, P. M., & MacKenzie, S. B. (1994). Organizational citizenship
behaviors and sales unit effectiveness. Journal of Marketing Research,
31, 351–363.

Price, S. (1997). The new faces of the fast food market? The potential for
consortia in pizza home delivery. International Journal of Contempo-
rary Hospitality Management, 9, 101–109.

Prue, D. M., & Fairbank, J. A. (1981). Performance feedback in organi-
zational behavior management: A review. Journal of Organizational
Behavior Management, 3, 1–16.

Rousseau, D. M. (1985). Issues of level in organizational research: Multi-
level and cross-level perspectives. Research in Organizational Behavior,
7, 1–37.

Ryan, A. M., Schmit, M. J., & Johnson, R. (1996). Attitudes and effec-
tiveness: Examining relations at an organizational level. Personnel Psy-
chology, 49, 853– 882.

Rynes, S. L., & Gerhart, B. (1999). Compensation in organizations:

Progress and prospects. San Francisco: New Lexington Press.

Sackett, P. R., & Mullen, E. J. (1993). Beyond formal experimental design:
Towards an expanded view of the training evaluation process. Personnel
Psychology, 46, 613– 627.

Schwab, D. P. (1999). Research methods for organizational studies. Mah-

wah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Settoon, R. P., & Mossholder, K. W. (2002). Relationship quality and
relationship context as antecedents of person- and task-focused interper-
sonal citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 255–267.
Shaw, J. D., Delery, J. E., Jenkins, D. G., & Gupta, N. (1998). An
organization-level analysis of voluntary and involuntary turnover. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 41, 511–525.

Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (1997). A meta-analysis of the effects of
organizational behavior modification on task performance, 1975–1995.
Academy of Management Journal, 40, 1122–1149.

Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (2001). The differential effects of incentive
motivators on work performance. Academy of Management Journal, 44,
580 –590.

Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. (2003). Behavioral management and task
performance in organizations: Conceptual background, meta-analysis,
and test of alternative models. Personnel Psychology, 56, 155–194.

Sturges, J. (1994). Current compensation trends [White paper]. Alexan-

dria, VA: Strategic Human Resource Management.

Sturman, M. C., & Short, J. C. (2000). Lump-sum bonus satisfaction:
Testing the construct validity of a new pay satisfaction dimension.
Personnel Psychology, 53, 673–700.

Sturman, M. C., & Trevor, C. O. (2001). The implications of linking the
dynamic performance and employee turnover literatures. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 86, 684 – 696.

Trevor, C. O., Gerhart, B., & Boudreau, J. W. (1997). Voluntary turnover
and job performance: Curvilinearity and the moderating influences of
salary growth and promotions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82,
44 – 61.

Tritch, T. (2003, May 8). B&Q boosts employee engagement—and profits.
Gallup Management Journal. Princeton, NJ: The Gallup Organization.
Retrieved from http://gmj.gallup.com/content/default.asp?ci⫽1036

Walz, S. M., & Niehoff, B. P. (1996). Organizational citizenship behaviors
and their effect on organizational effectiveness in limited-menus restau-
rants. Academy of Management Best Papers Proceedings, 307–311.

Wright, P. M., & McMahan, G. C. (1992). Theoretical perspectives for
strategic human resource management. Journal of Management, 18,
295–320.

Received June 13, 2003
Revision received August 19, 2004

Accepted August 23, 2004 䡲

