201

Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology (2003), 76, 201–212
© 2003 The British Psychological Society

www.bps.org.uk

After the fall: Layoff victims’ trust and cynicism
in re-employment

S. Douglas Pugh1*, Daniel P. Skarlicki2 and Brian S. Passell3
1Department of Management, Belk College of Business Administration,
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
2Faculty of Commerce and Business Administration, University of British
Columbia, Canada
3Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, USA

The relationship between an individual’s psychological contract violation by a former
employer and his or her attitudes toward a new employer was examined in a
sample of lay off victims (N=141). Violation was negatively related to trust in the
new employer, and positively related to employee cynicism. The degree that
participants worried about being similarly mistreated by their new employer
mediated the relationship between violation and both trust and cynicism.

Layoffs have become a ubiquitous part of corporate life. A substantial body of research
has documented the effects of layoffs on victims and survivors, including the desire to
initiate lawsuits against one’s former employer (Konovsky & Folger, 1991; Lind,
Greenberg, Scott, & Welchans, 2000; Wanberg, Bunce, & Gavin, 1999), survivor’s
commitment to the organization (Brockner, Tyler, & Cooper-Schneider, 1987), and
perceptions of their employer’s fairness (Wanberg et al., 1999). Research focusing on
reactions toward former employers may, however, be addressing only part of the
picture. Most layoff victims eventually find new employment, yet the relationship
between the layoff experience and victims’ attitudes at their new place of work
remains relatively unexplored. The organizations employing these individuals may face
significant challenges based on the ‘attitudinal baggage’ (see Brief, 1998) carried by
layoff victims into their new employment context.

The objective of the present study is to investigate the relationship between layoff
victims’ perceptions of psychological contract violation by a former employer and
their attitudes
toward their new employer. Research on the psychological
contract—employee beliefs about reciprocal obligations between them and their
organization—provides the theoretical foundation for understanding why a layoff
experience can predict the victim’s attitudes toward his or her subsequent employer.
A breach of the psychological contract occurs when the employee believes that the
organization has failed to meet one or more of its obligations within the psychological
contract (Morrison & Robinson, 1997). Whereas breach represents a cognitive

*Requests for reprints should be addressed to Dr S. Douglas Pugh, Department of Management, Belk College of Business
Administration, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 9201 University City Boulevard, Charlotte, NC 28233–0001,
USA (sdpugh@email.uncc.edu). This research was supported by a grant from SSHRC to the second author.


S. Douglas Pugh et al.

202
awareness that contract obligations have not been fulfilled, violation involves a nega-
tive affective reaction to the breach, which can include feelings of bitterness, anger,
resentment and outrage (Morrison & Robinson, 1997). Psychological contract viol-
ations are related to decreased trust in one’s employer (Robinson, 1996; Robinson &
Rousseau, 1994), a reluctance of the employee to invest in the relationship (Robinson,
1996), and increased employee cynicism (Andersson, 1996). Most of this research
quite naturally focuses on employee attitudes and behaviours toward the party per-
ceived to violate the psychological contract (i.e. the downsizing organization). We
extend this research by asking the question: Is the violation of a psychological contract
experienced in one organization associated with the employee’s attitudes and behav-
iours towards a new employer? Further, we advance the theory by introducing the
concept of worry as a mediator between feelings of violation and attitudes towards the
subsequent employer. Worry is proposed as a link between psychological contract
violation and attitudes toward future employers because violation can make salient the
potential for future negative events in the employment relationship.

Trust and cynicism in the new employment relationship
Trust has been identified as an integral component of the psychological contract
developing from a ‘belief that contributions will be reciprocated and that a relationship
exists where actions of one party are bound to another’ (Rousseau, 1995, p. 95). Trust
has been defined as ‘one’s expectations, assumptions, or beliefs about the likelihood
that another’s future actions will be beneficial, favorable, or at least not detrimental to
one’s interests’ (Robinson, 1996, p. 576). Trust is forward-looking; it involves predic-
tions or expectations regarding another’s behaviour. It is not surprising, therefore, that
psychological contract violation can erode the trust between an employee and his or
her organization (Robinson, 1996; Robinson & Rousseau, 1994). A violation of the
psychological contract calls into question positive expectations about an employer’s
future actions.

The logic for predicting that the effects of psychological contract violation can carry
over to one’s relationship with a new employer is based on the view of the psycho-
logical contract as a schema (Rousseau, 1995, 2001). That is, the psychological con-
tract is a mental model or schema comprising beliefs about the exchange relationship
between employee and employer. Elements of this mental model can include beliefs
about role responsibilities, job security and an employer’s integrity. As a schema, the
psychological contract serves as a device for organizing experiences in meaningful
ways that help people to deal with ambiguity and predict what will happen next.

Most relevant to the present study is that schemas help explain how psychological
contracts form and function for newly hired employees faced with incomplete infor-
mation about the new employment relationship (Rousseau, 2001). The schema serves
an interpretive function—guiding new employees as they fill in the blanks where
there is missing information about their role and relationship with the new employer.
Importantly, while the schema of the employee–employer relationship forms, changes,
and solidifies over time with the new employer, pre-existing employment-related
schemas also influence psychological contract formation. Rousseau proposed that
existing pre-employment schemas are particularly relevant for new employees because
they provide a lens through which workers ‘view employment experiences and
the obligations they create’ (Rousseau, 2001, p. 515). Pre-employment schemas are
acquired through prior employment experiences and socialization.


Lay-off victims and re-employment

203
Experience with previous employers, therefore, affects pre-employment schemas,
which in turn shape one’s schema formation in a new employment relationship. The
negative, affectively charged nature of a psychological contract violation looms large in
shaping the new schema. Empirical evidence on the formation of initial trust in new
organizational relationships, for example, has shown that past experiences are an
important determinant of an individual’s intention to trust another party (McKnight,
Cummings, & Chervany, 1998). Other things being equal, we expected that the greater
the perceived violation in one’s prior employment experiences, the greater its
influence on the interpretation of subsequent employment relationships.

H1: Psychological contract violation by a former employer is negatively related to trust in one’s
new employer.
Like trust, organizational cynicism can be affected by the employee’s prior organiz-
ational experiences, and has important implications for organizations (Dean, Brandes,
& Dharwadkar, 1998). Cynicism has been defined as an attitude associated with disil-
lusionment and negative feelings toward and distrust of another person or an organiz-
ation (Andersson & Bateman, 1997). Employees develop cynical attitudes through their
experiences with organizations, particularly the failure of the organization to fulfil
expectations (Andersson, 1996). Cynicism carries with it a host of negative impli-
cations for organizational functioning: a lack of willingness to engage in citizenship
behaviours (Andersson & Bateman, 1997) and resistance to change (Reichers, Wanous,
& Austin, 1997). Andersson and Bateman (1997) found that harsh and immediate
layoffs led to employee cynicism. Psychological contract violation has been proposed
as a primary determinant of employee cynicism (Andersson, 1996).

Similar to the studies on contract violation cited above, cynicism research has
focused on the actions of a focal organization or the individuals within an organization.
However, research shows that cynical attitudes can generalize to organizations beyond
that in which the violation occurred. After watching the mistreatment of layoff victims
in the film Roger and Me, for example, people from the USA and Japan were found to
be more cynical about General Motors (the focal company in the film) and about
US businesses in general (Bateman, Sakano, & Fujita, 1992). The logic for predict-
ing that violation by a prior employer will be related to cynicism towards a future
employer parallels our earlier discussion of a violation’s association with trusting a
new employer. Specifically, violation by one’s previous employer serves as a pre-
employment schema that can affect employee expectations and beliefs about their
new employment relationship.

H2: Psychological contract violation by a former employer is positively related to cynicism
toward one’s new employer.

Worry
Worry has been defined as an individual’s preoccupation that things will go wrong
(Eysenck, 1984). Although worry is a central feature of many anxiety-based disorders
(see Brown, Antony, & Barlow, 1992, for a review), in the present study we focused on
non-pathological occasions of worry. Specifically, worry is a concern about potentially
negative future events and experiences, which can also be associated with anxiety and
emotional discomfort. Worry consists of a chain of thoughts and images that are often
negatively affect-laden and relatively uncontrollable. Worry represents an attempt to


S. Douglas Pugh et al.

204
engage in mental problem solving on an issue whose outcome is uncertain but which
contains the possibility of one or more negative outcomes; consequently, worry relates
closely to the fear process (Borkovec, Robinson, Pruzinsky, & Depree, 1983).

Worry is relevant to understanding how people form job attitudes (e.g. trust and
cynicism) because, like the idea of pre-employment schemas introduced above, worry
affects the way that people process information. Worry is triggered by cognitive
interpretations and emotional experiences of a life event—in the present case, the
psychological contract violation. Subsequently, the individual’s sensitivity to negative
outcomes and information concerning the likelihood of negative future events looms
large. Morrison and Robinson (1997), for example, noted a tendency toward rumi-
nation and possibly escalation, as violation often involves the ‘inability to stop thinking
about the issue that gave rise to the emotion’ (Morrison & Robinson, 1997, p. 231).
Under conditions of worry, new information that might normally offset the perceived
threat tends to be discounted, and the individual’s probability estimates tend to favour
negative over positive outcomes and experiences. In the present study, we focused on
lay off victims’ worry that they will have the same negative experience (i.e. loss of job)
with their new employer. Previous research suggests that worrying about such things
as future job insecurity leads to negative work attitudes and lower trust in the organiza-
tion (Andersson & Bateman, 1997; Ashford, Lee, & Bobko, 1989; Roskies & Louis-
Guerin, 1990). We extend this argument by investigating whether worry mediates the
relationship between an event that took place in one work setting and an individual’s
work attitudes at a subsequent organization.

Building on the research on worry, a violation of one’s psychological contract arising
from a layoff can trigger the worry process. For new employees, worry thus becomes
part of the pre-employment schema that affects how new information is interpreted.
Once hired by a new employer, their worry (i.e. will I be laid off?) will focus on the
organization that has the control and ability to lay them off (i.e. their new employer).
Additionally, research has shown a tendency for people to generalize from negative
events specific to one organization to other organizations and businesses in general
(Andersson & Bateman, 1997; Bateman et al., 1992), further increasing the chance that
the worry will generalize to the new employment relationship. Trust involves a willing-
ness to be vulnerable to the actions of another party, based in part on positive
expectations of that party’s behaviour (Mayer & Davis, 1999). Associated with worry-
ing, however, is the tendency for individuals to keep their guard up and resist trusting
the new organization, thus reducing the likelihood that newly presented information
(i.e. the integrity of the new employer) will be effective in allaying concerns about the
possible re-occurrence of a layoff (i.e. future violation). Worry can therefore under-
mine new employees’ expectations of favourable behaviour on the part of the new
employer and, as such, hinder their willingness to trust.

In summary, a psychological contract violation is the type of negative emotional
experience that can trigger distress and worry over the possibility of future negative
outcomes. As such, employees may be less willing to place themselves in a position of
vulnerability with their new organization. Thus:

H3: Worry mediates the relationship between psychological contract violation by a former
employer and trust in a new employer.

The above rationale also holds for the development of cynicism toward one’s new
employer. Cynicism develops through the failure of organizations to meet an employ-
ee’s expectations, and the subsequent disillusionment that results from these failures


205
(Andersson, 1996). Perceptions of hopelessness toward the future are another
attribute typically associated with cynicism (Reichers et al., 1997). Thus, employees’
worry about their future should predict their cynicism toward their new employer, and
worry should mediate the relationship between perceptions of contract violation
and cynicism.

Lay-off victims and re-employment

H4: Worry mediates the relationship between psychological contract violation by a former
employer and cynicism toward a new employer.

Methods

Participants and procedure
The study participants were former clients of an international outplacement services
consulting firm in the south-west region of the USA. All participants had experienced a
layoff and had used the services of the outplacement firm within the 6 months prior to
the study. Surveys were mailed to 730 potential participants, and 173 were returned by
our deadline, giving a 24% response rate. Only those participants who had gained
employment with a new organization were included in this study, resulting in a final
sample size of 141, representing 20% of the total surveys. The respondents had been
with their new employer for just under 6 months, were an average of 46 years of age,
64% male, 87% white, and had been employed by their former organization for an
average of 9 years prior to the layoff.

Due to the potentially sensitive nature of our questions and to ensure participants’
anonymity we did not collect any additional
identifying information. However,
company officials indicated that their typical clients are mid- to upper-level manage-
ment, with salaries ranging from $45,000 to $250,000. Representative industries
included technology, energy, finance, telecommunications and bio-sciences. None of
the individuals were terminated ‘for cause’ (e.g. poor performance, insubordination).
Instead, the layoffs involved groups of employees and were guided by business strat-
egies such as cost-cutting or restructuring.

To assess potential response bias, we examined whether our participants were
somehow different from the population of potential respondents. We compared the
demographic characteristics of our respondents with the characteristics of the firm’s
clients. The management of the consulting company indicated that our participants’
demographic profile mirrored the profile of their clients.

Measures
All measures consisted of a 5–point Likert-type scale ranging from (1) ‘strongly dis-
agree’ to (5) ‘strongly agree’. The items were averaged to form the measures; thus,
larger values signify higher amounts than lower values. The items for all measures are
provided in Table 1.

Psychological contract violation
Following Rousseau (1989) and Morrison and Robinson’s (1997) definition of a viol-
ation as being the negative emotions (e.g. upset, betrayed) associated with a breach,
we developed a 7-item measure to capture an individual’s psychological contract


S. Douglas Pugh et al.

206
Table 1. Principal components analysis of all measured items

Item

Trust
(1) I believe my current employer has high integrity
(2) I can expect my current employer to treat me in a

consistent and predictable fashion

(3) I believe my current employer is not always honest and

truthfulb

(4) In general, I believe my current employer’s motives and

intentions are good

(5) I do not think my current employer treats me fairlyb
(6) My current employer is open and up-front with me
(7) I am not sure I fully trust my current employerb
Violation
(8) I felt outrage toward the company
(9) I felt upset by the way my former company treated me
(10) I felt angry about being laid off
(11) I felt angry about the way I was laid off
(12) I feel offended that my former employer violated its

agreement with me

(13) I feel betrayed by my former company
(14) I have hard feelings toward the company

Cynicism
(15) I believe that my company says one thing and does another
(16) My company’s policies, goals, and practices seem to have

little in common

(17) When my company says it’s going to do something, I

wonder if it will really happen

(18) My company expects one thing of its employees, but

rewards another

(19) I see little similarity between what my company says it will

do and what it actually does

Worry
(20) I worry that I could be laid off by my new company
(21) I worry that the same thing will happen here as happened

at my previous employer

(22) I am anxious about my future with my present company

Eigenvalue (varimax rotation)
% Variance explained
Cumulative variance explained
Cronbach’s a

Component loadingsa

1

2

3

4

.86
.79

.83

.83

.77
.77
.81

.61
.56

.42

.58

.56

.80
.83
.72
.76
.82

.86
.78

.59
.62

.75

.64

.68

.85
.88

.79

8.98
40.82
40.82
.93

4.19
19.05
59.87
.91

1.88
8.53
68.40
.92

1.01
4.59
72.99
.85

aLoadings less than |.40| were omitted from the table for ease of presentation.
bReverse scored.

violation following a layoff. Respondents were asked:
‘The following questions
askabout your overall feelings toward the company after you found out about the
downsizing’. Items are presented in Table 1.

2
2
2
2
2

Lay-off victims and re-employment

207

Worry
Worry was assessed using three items based on Davey (1993) that focused on a
person’s concerns that a traumatic event could re-occur. Because empirical research
(see Molina & Borkovec, 1994, for a review) has found support for the validity of worry
measures created for specific content domains, the worry items were rewritten to be
relevant to a layoff setting.

Trust in employer
An employee’s trust in his or her new employer was assessed with a seven-item trust
scale developed by Gabarro and Athos, 1976.

Cynicism
Employee cynicism towards one’s present employer was measured with five items
from a scale developed by Dean et al., (1998). The items were designed to measure
beliefs that the new organization lacks integrity.

Control variables
We statistically controlled for participants’ age, gender and tenure with the former
organization.

Results

Factor analysis
Table 1 provides the results of principal components analysis. The eigenvalues (>1)
and an examination of the scree plot indicated that the items were best represented by
four factors. All items loaded on their predicted factor except for the cynicism items,
which cross-loaded onto both trust and cynicism factors. This was not surprising, given
that cynicism and trust had theoretical overlap and were expected to be negatively
associated.

Hypothesis testing
Table 2 presents the means, standard deviations, internal consistency reliabilities and
intercorrelations among the study variables. As seen in Table 3, regression analyses
showed that, after controlling for the demographic variables, psychological contract
violation by a previous employer predicted trust (b = ­ .23, p<.01) and cynicism toward
the new employer (b =.23, p<.01). Thus Hypotheses 1 and 2 were supported.

Hypothesis 3 stated that worry mediates the relationship between psychological
contract violation and trust in one’s present employer. Based on Baron and Kenny’s
(1986) research, to establish mediation, the predictor variable (psychological contract
violation) must be related to the mediator (worry). Second, the predictor variable must
be related to the criterion variable (trust and cynicism). Third, when regressing the
criterion on both the mediator and the predictor, the mediator must be significant
while the predictor must become non-significant.

Regression analyses results are given in Table 3. In Step 1, controlling for age, gender
and tenure, psychological contract violation was related to worry (b =.21, p<.05),
supporting the first step of mediation for both H3 and H4. In Step 2, psychological
contract violation was negatively related to trust in present employer (b = ­ .23, p<.01)
and cynicism (b =.23, p<.01) supporting the second condition of mediation for H3 and


S. Douglas Pugh et al.

208
Table 2. Means, standard deviations, and zero-order correlations

M

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

(1) Psychological contract

3.19

1.05

violation

(2) Worry
(3) Trust in present

employer

2.36
3.65

0.89
0.87

(4) Organizational cynicism
(5) Tenure with former

2.46

0.88
110.80 90.67

employera

(6) Age
(7) Genderb

45.42
1.36

8.30
0.49

.19*
.17*

.20*
.14

.06
.01

.39**

.40**
.02

.06
.03

.78**
.03

.02
.16

.02

.02
.01

.39* *
.03

.16

*p<.05, **p<.01.
N=139–141 for correlations except those involving tenure, where N=126–128.
aTenure measured in months.
b1=male, 2=female.

H4. In Step 3 we regressed trust on both psychological contract violation and feelings
of worry, and found that the formerly significant relationship between violation and
trust became non-significant, while the relationship between worry and trust remained
b = ­ .41, p<.001. Thus, worry fully mediated the relationship between
significant,
psychological contract violation and trust in one’s new employer. When cynicism was
regressed on both psychological contract violation and worry the relationship between
psychological contract violation and cynicism became non-significant, while the
relation between violation and worry remained significant (b =.37, p<.001). Thus
Hypotheses 3 and 4 were supported.

Discussion
Layoffs are likely to continue to occur. Despite the fact that most employees who are
laid off eventually find new work, little research has examined the effects of layoffs on
individuals’ job attitudes once they are re-employed. By understanding the long-term
effects of how individuals respond to being laid off, we can better understand people’s
attitudes and behaviour at work.

First, our research shows that the psychological contract violation that arises in the
context of a layoff can predict layoff victims’ attitudes beyond the organization in
which the layoff occurred. Our results show that employees’ perceptions of the
psychological contract violation resulting from the layoff was (a) negatively related to
their trust in their new employer and (b) positively related to their cynicism at their
new place of employment. This suggests that the higher the negative emotional experi-
ence of a layoff, the less that laid-off employees will trust and the more that they will be
cynical of the intentions or the behaviour of their new organization once they are
re-employed. These findings are important because, as has been shown in previous
research, trust and cynicism have implications for organizational outcomes such as
employee cooperation and organizational citizenship behaviour (Dean et al., 1998).

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

209
Table 3. Regression analyses testing relationship between psychological contract violation by
former employer and trust in present organization and organizational cynicism, mediated by worrya

Lay-off victims and re-employment

Predictors

Step 1

Tenure
Age
Gender
Violation
R2
F

Step 2

Tenure
Age
Gender
Psychological contract violation
R2
F

Step 3

Tenure
Age
Gender
Psychological contract violation
Worry
R2
F

Criterion

Worry

.03
.08
.00
.21*
.05
1.63

Trust in present employer

Cynicism

.01
.04
.23**
.23**
.10
3.44*

.00
.07
.23**
.14
.41***
.26
8.47***

.02
.02
.06
.23**
.06
1.82

.01
.01
.06
.15
.37***
.18
5.42***

*p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001.
aStandardized regression coefficients are reported.

Second, our research provides insight into the psychological process involved in the
development of job attitudes of a layoff victim once he or she is re-hired. When an
employee experiences the negative emotions that comprise feelings of violation, those
negative emotions can remain to some degree when starting a new job, in the form of
worry that another violation could re-occur. Note that although all of the participants
in this study had experienced a layoff prior to the study, they did not all worry about
future layoffs. Worry about the future appeared to depend, at least in part, on the
degree to which the layoff was perceived as a psychological contract violation. This
suggests that the shock or mistreatment that gave rise to feelings of violation can also
lead to worry about similar future events. As such, worry can inhibit the development
of positive employee–employer relationships in the new organization.

These findings are important insofar as employers are interested in raising trust
levels and lowering cynicism among their employees. In terms of practical impli-
cations, managers in charge of selection, for example, might find it useful to query
candidates who were formerly laid off regarding their feelings towards their previous
employer. Anger and bitterness towards the former employer are potential markers of

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

S. Douglas Pugh et al.

210
a psychological contract violation, and can serve as a warning sign that a job candidate
may be predisposed to cynicism and distrust in the new employment setting. This does
not mean that applicants who are bitter towards their previous employer should be
screened out of the selection process. As Wanous, Reichers, and Austin (2000) found,
for example, cynicism is affected by organizational experiences. Thus, cynicism may
be amenable to change. We suggest instead that managers should take extra steps to
reduce new employees’ worry that a violation could re-occur. For example, trust-
building could be emphasized (e.g. in the socialization process, and using procedural
and interpersonal fairness) to gain the confidence particularly of those employees who
have experienced a psychological contract violation with their former employer.
Worry could be reduced by maintaining high-quality interactions between the
employee and manager (e.g. high leader visibility and face-to-face exchanges) and by
using transparent decision-making processes. Additionally, during the planning and
implementation of organizational changes, employees should have the opportunity to
engage in dialogue with the decision-makers of the organization. This could increase
the perception of fairness and the integrity of the leadership team, and thus reduce
worry. Although few companies can guarantee that layoffs will never occur, managers
can assure their employees that they will be treated fairly and will never be intention-
ally deceived. What is needed, however, is research on how managers actually attend
to the emotional baggage of their employees.

Because our research was cross-sectional, no claims are made regarding the causal
nature of the relationships among the variables. Also, the possibility of common
method bias cannot be ruled out. Although our use of retrospective accounts of the
layoff makes causal direction difficult to determine, recent research suggests that
retrospective accounts may not be problematic so long as the measures themselves
exhibit acceptable reliability and validity (Miller, Cardinal, & Glick, 1997). The answers
to questions of causality, however, would benefit from longitudinal research.

It has been argued elsewhere that cynicism and trust are related but are conceptually
and empirically distinct. Our exploratory factor analysis and high intercorrelation
between trust and cynicism suggest, however, that the two constructs may instead
comprise dimensions of a higher-order factor, such as reflecting the two ends of a
continuum. Research focusing on their discriminant validity is needed. Additionally,
data in the present study were collected within 6 months of the time that the respond-
ents used the services of the outplacement organization, and the participants in our
study were new employees. It is possible that the effects of a psychological contract
violation on attitudes toward a subsequent employer could subside over time. The
temporal effects of psychological contract violation warrant further study.

Finally, our response rate was low and, despite testing for response bias, it is difficult
to conclude whether there is a systematic bias in our results. On the one hand, it is
possible that respondents with positive attitudes toward their former employer or
toward the replacement firm may have been most likely to respond to our question-
naire. On the other hand, highly disgruntled employees might have used the survey
to vent their anger. Neither of these effects is obvious in our mean distributions.
Second, our respondents may not necessarily be representative of all layoff victims.
First, they resided in southern California, where re-employment opportunities were
abundant. Second, these participants all received the services of a outplacement
agency. That is, the organization was treating employees in a manner that may have
softened some of the negative impact of the layoff and could have increased percep-
tions of fairness in the eyes of the employees. As such, our results may be conservative,


211
because the variance on our measure of violation may be restricted by the provision of
the recruitment services. Future research needs to sample employees with a wider
range of layoff experiences.

Lay-off victims and re-employment

References

Andersson, L. M. (1996). Employee cynicism: An examination using a contract violation

framework. Human Relations, 49, 1395–1418.

Andersson, L. M., & Bateman T. S. (1997). Cynicism in the workplace: Some causes and effects.

Journal of Organizational Behavior, 18, 449–469.

Ashford, S. J., Lee, C., & Bobko, P. (1989). Content, causes, and consequences of job insecurity:
A theory-based measure and substantive test. Academy of Management Journal, 32, 803–
829.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173–1182.

Bateman, T. S., Sakano, T., & Fujita, M. (1992). Roger, me, and my attitude: Film propaganda and

cynicism toward corporate leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 768–771.

Borkovec, T. D., Robinson, E., Pruzinsky, T., & Depree, J. A. (1983). Preliminary exploration of
worry: Some characteristics and processes. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 17, 529–540.

Brief, A. P. (1998). Attitudes in and around organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Brockner, J., Tyler, T. R., & Cooper-Schneider, R. (1992). The influence of prior commitment to
an institution on reactions to perceived unfairness: The higher they are, the harder they fall.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 241–261.

Brown, T. A., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (1992). Psychometric properties of the Penn
State Worry Questionnaire in a clinical anxiety disorders sample. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 30, 33–37.

Davey, G. C. L. (1993). A comparison of three worry questionnaires. Behaviour Research

Therapy, 31, 51–56.

Dean, J., Jr., Brandes, P., & Dharwadkar, R. (1998). Organizational cynicism. Academy of

Management Review, 23, 341–352.

Eysenck, M. W. (1984). Anxiety and the worry process. Bulletin of Psychonomic Society, 22,

545–548.

Gabarro, J. J, & Athos, J. (1976). Interpersonal relations and communications. Englewood Cliffs,

NJ: Prentice Hall.

Konovsky, M. A, & Folger, R. (1991). The effects of procedures, social accounts, and benefits

level on victims’ layoff reactions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 21, 630–650.

Lind, E. A., Greenberg, J., Scott, K. S., & Welchans, T. D. (2000). The winding road from
employee to complainant: Situational and psychological determinants of wrongful-
termination claims. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45, 557–590.

McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust formation in new

organizational relationships. Academy of Management Review, 23, 473–491.

Mayer, R. C., & Davis, J. H. (1999). The effect of the performance appraisal system on trust for

management: A field quasi-experiment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 123–130.

Miller, C. C., Cardinal, L. B., & Glick, W. H. (1997). Retrospective reports in organizational
research: A reexamination of recent evidence. Academy of Management Journal, 40, 189–
204.

Molina, S., & Borkovec, T. D. (1994). The Penn State Worry Questionnaire: Psychometric
In G. Davey & F. Tallis (Eds.), Worrying:

properties and associated characteristics.
Perspectives on theory, assessment and treatment (pp. 5–34). Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Morrison, E. W., & Robinson, S. L. (1997). When employees feel betrayed: A model of how
psychological contract violation develops. Academy of Management Review, 22, 226–256.


212

S. Douglas Pugh et al.

Reichers, A. E., Wanous, J. P., & Austin, J. T. (1997). Understanding and managing cynicism

about organizational change. Academy of Management Executive, 11, 48–59.

Robinson, S. L. (1996). Trust and breach of the psychological contract. Administrative Science

Quarterly, 41, 574–599.

Robinson, S. L., & Morrison, E. W. (2000). The development of psychological contract breach

and violation: A longitudinal study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 525–546.

Robinson, S. L., & Rousseau, D. M. (1994). Violating the psychological contract: Not the

exception but the norm. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 15, 245–259.

Roskies, E., & Louis-Guerin, C.

(1990).

Job insecurity in managers: Antecedents and

consequences. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 11, 345–359.

Rousseau, D. M. (1989). Psychological and implied contracts in organizations. Employee Rights

and Responsibilities Journal, 2, 121–139.

Rousseau, D. M. (1995). Psychological contracts in organizations: Understanding written and

unwritten agreements. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Rousseau, D. M. (2001). Schema, promise, and mutuality: The building blocks of

the
psychological contract. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 74,
511–541.

Wanberg, C. R., Bunce, L. W., & Gavin, M. B. (1999). Perceived fairness of layoffs among

individuals who have been laid off: A longitudinal study. Personnel Psychology, 52, 59–84.

Wanous, J. P., Reichers, A. E., & Austin, J. T. (2000). Cynicism about organizational change:
Measurement, antecedents, and correlates. Group and Organization Management, 25,
132–153.

Received 1 January 2002; revised version received 30 May 2002


The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

