 
 
The Consequences of Human Resource Stocks and Flows: A Longitudinal Examination of
Unit Service Orientation and Unit Effectiveness
Author(s): Robert E. Ployhart, Jeff A. Weekley and  Jase Ramsey
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 52, No. 5 (Oct., 2009), pp. 996-1015
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40390328
Accessed: 01-02-2017 19:54 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
Academy of Management Journal

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 ® Academy of Management Journal
 2009, Vol. 52, No. 5, 996-1015.

 THE CONSEQUENCES OF HUMAN RESOURCE STOCKS AND
 FLOWS: A LONGITUDINAL EXAMINATION OF UNIT SERVICE

 ORIENTATION AND UNIT EFFECTIVENESS

 ROBERT E. PLOYHART

 University of South Carolina

 TEFF A. WEEKLEY

 Kenexa

 TASE RAMSEY

 University of South Carolina

 Drawing from resource-based theory, we argue for a broader interpretation of human
 capital and demonstrate that unit service orientation contributes to unit effectiveness
 over time. Operationalizing unit service orientation as the unit-level (n = 1,255)
 aggregate of individual level (n = 114,198) service employee competencies, we mod-
 eled the data over three quarters and found a positive but decreasing relationship
 between the flow of unit service orientation and changes in unit effectiveness. Al-
 though building a high-quality stock is important, we show that the key driver of
 change in unit effectiveness is the flow of unit service orientation over time.

 In the modern knowledge-based and service-ori-

 ented economy, the success of many firms has
 shifted from acquisition of tangible (physical) re-
 sources to accumulation of intangible (human) re-
 sources. "Human capital," defined as the unit-level
 aggregate of individual knowledge, skills, and abil-
 ities (KSAs), is theorized to be one of the most
 critical resources for unit effectiveness (Barney &
 Wright, 1998). Drawing primarily from the re-
 source-based view of the firm (Barney, 1991) and
 human capital theory (Becker, 1964), strategic hu-
 man resource management (SHRM) scholarship
 suggests that human resource (HR) practices con-
 tribute to unit effectiveness because they build a
 composition of human capital that is valuable, rare,
 inimitable, and nonsubstitutable (Wright, Dunford,
 & Snell, 2001). Human capital is therefore theo-
 rized to create between-unit differences and, ulti-
 mately, unit effectiveness.

 The purpose of this study was to test several key

 We thank Audrey Korsgaard, Ivey MacKenzie, Lynn
 McFarland, Tom Moliterno, Matt Semadeni, and John
 Slocum for helping or commenting on drafts of this arti-
 cle. Several members of the Personnel Human Resources
 Research Group (PHRRG) and SAPs also provided many
 helpful suggestions. Finally, we express our most sincere
 thanks to Sara Rynes and the anonymous reviewers
 whose comments and suggestions resulted in a dramatic
 improvement in this work. Jase Ramsey is now at the
 Fundação Dom Cabral in Brazil.

 predictions in SHRM and resource-based theory by
 demonstrating that changes in the stock and flow of
 human capital contribute to unit effectiveness over
 time. We studied a large retail organization because
 in this context, human capital is expected to influ-
 ence unit effectiveness, yet there is considerable
 variability in the stock and flow of human capital.
 Consequently, our study provides important theo-
 retical advances for the resource-based view,
 SHRM scholarship, and the service literatures, as
 well as new managerial implications for demon-
 strating human resources' financial impact.

 First, we operationalized human capital as unit
 service orientation - the unit-level aggregate of in-
 dividual employee service-orientation KSA scores.
 Most SHRM research has not studied human capi-
 tal directly but inferred its effects through HR prac-
 tices or proxy measures (Gerhart, 2005; Wright &
 Haggerty, 2005). Yet theoretically, it is the aggre-
 gate of employee KSAs that is hypothesized to be
 the source of unit effectiveness (Barney & Wright,
 1998). Within the service literature, research has
 shown that aggregates of employee climate percep-
 tions or job attitudes relate to unit outcomes (see
 Ryan and Ployhart [2003] and Schneider and White
 [2004] for reviews), but these are not KSAs in the
 sense that KSAs represent abilities or traits neces-
 sary for job performance. Climate perceptions and
 job attitudes are more relevant to perceptions of a
 work environment and may or may not be neces-
 sary for individual job performance. Thus, we ar-

 Copyright of the Academy of Management, all rights reserved. Contents may not be copied, emailed, posted to a listserv, or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder's express
 written permission. Users may print, download or email articles for individual use only.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 997

 Second, we provide critical tests of resource-

 gue that studying aggregates of employee KSAs
 helps broaden the definition of human capital to
 also include additional valuable types such as ag-
 gregate employee personality or service orienta-
 tion.

 search has shown that there are positive returns on
 individuals' investments in human capital (Becker,
 1964), we have focused on the unit level; thus,
 human capital is the aggregate of individual forms
 of knowledge and experience and, as such, should
 have unit-level consequences. There has been con-
 siderable research in the economics and education
 literatures supporting a link between aggregate hu-
 man capital (operationalized as literacy rates,
 school enrollment rates, teacher experience, and
 years of education) and a variety of unit-level out-
 comes (e.g., turnover rates, economic growth) (see
 Aaronson, Barrow, & Sander, 2007; Lerner, 1983;
 Sweetland, 1996).

 based theory by demonstrating that changes in the
 flow of unit service orientation relate to changes in
 objective unit effectiveness over time. Past research
 has emphasized stocks of human capital (i.e., the
 relationship between human capital and unit out-
 comes at a single point in time) but neglected con-
 sideration of the flows of human capital (i.e., how
 the stock of human capital changes over time) (Di-
 erickx & Cool, 1989). One reason for the inimitabil-
 ity of a resource is that its prior short- and long-
 term histories make it path dependent, yet a
 longitudinal focus remains largely neglected in the
 SHRM literature. As Wright and Haggerty stated,
 "Current theory exploring the relationship between
 HRM and economic success has not deeply consid-
 ered temporal issues. In most instances time is ei-
 ther assumed as a constant, or considered in a
 relatively shallow way" (2005: 166). This neglect is
 noteworthy, because the flow of human capital is
 necessary to ensure the resource manifests sus-
 tained contributions to unit effectiveness. We pro-
 pose that the longitudinal relationship between
 unit service orientation and unit-level effectiveness
 is positive but decreasing over time and that this
 relationship is heterogeneous across units.

 The resource-based view (Barney, 1991) argu-
 ment is that units are heterogeneous in their re-
 sources; between-unit differences in these re-
 sources contribute to competitive advantage.
 Human capital is one of several internal resources.
 Yet, in contrast to human capital theory, the re-
 source-based view gives more careful consideration
 to different types of human capital. Human capital
 is valuable when it contributes to a unit's core
 capabilities. It contributes to competitive advan-
 tage when it is also rare - that is, not equally held
 by competitors; it may become a basis for sustained
 competitive advantage if it is also inimitable; and it
 may be inimitable because of the unit's path depen-
 dency (performance trajectory over time) and
 unique history (e.g., the business unit has been the
 preferred employer and hence highly attractive to
 applicants), causal ambiguity (uncertainty over
 which specific combination of practices builds the
 stock of human capital), or social complexity (in-
 terpersonal relationships between coworkers, or
 between coworkers and customers). An additional
 requirement for sustainability is that human capital
 may be nonsubstitutable with alternative resources
 (Barney & Wright, 1998). Although there exists the
 possibility of technological or process substitutes
 for human capital exists (e.g., Bamberger & Meshu-
 lam, 2000), there are also limits to the extent to
 which human capital can be replaced. Note that the
 resource-based view places emphasis not on spe-
 Human capital theory comes from economics
 cific HR practices, but on human capital itself. This
 is an important distinction, because human capital
 and articulates the value, consequences, and trans-
 is an intangible resource and more difficult to im-
 ferability of human capital at individual and aggre-
 itate than specific HR practices (Wright et al.,
 gated levels. Its central argument is that the acqui-
 2001).
 sition of both general and unit-specific human
 capital contributes to individual and unit effective-
 ness (Becker, 1964). Organizations that make in-
 vestments in developing unit-specific human cap-
 ital will (with sufficient retention) recover these
 costs through increased productivity as their work-
 forces acquire job-, organizational-, and industry-
 specific knowledge (Strober, 1990). Although re-

 In most SHRM scholarship, HR practices (e.g.,
 staffing, training) are theorized to create a particu-
 lar form of aggregate knowledge, skills, and abili-
 ties (human capital), that in turn contribute to unit-
 level outcomes (e.g., Barney & Wright, 1998).
 Human capital is therefore a key explanatory mech-
 anism from several theoretical perspectives.

 and resource-based theories is that it is the unit
 aggregate of individual KSAs that leads to unit
 effectiveness over time. In contrast, most empirical
 research on strategic human resource management
 infers human capital only from HR practices, proxy
 measures, or informant self-reports (Wright et al.,

 The Structure of Human Capital Resources:
 Putting People Back into Business Units

 Thus, a prediction based on both human capital

 THEORY AND HYPOTHESES

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 998 Academy of Management Journal October

 Human Capital in Service Firms: Unit
 Service Orientation

 1991]). Among others, Gerhart has noted such lim-
 itations of the extant literature and offered an
 alternative:

 [Researchers] need to include data from different
 sources and levels of analysis (Bowen & Ostroff,
 2004), given that HR system policies (often mea-
 sured by asking HR executives) are typically theo-
 rized to operate through individual level employee
 reactions such as motivation, ability, and opportu-
 nity. . . . Yet this multi-level/multi-source data (and
 thus corresponding tests of intervening processes) is
 largely absent. (2005: 177)

 2001). 1 For example, Takeuchi et al. (2007) used
 manager self-reports of their perceptions of em-
 ployee performance as an index of human capital.
 Informant or proxy measures are often necessary,
 but they have two important limitations: First, be-
 cause they are often based on a single manager's
 perceptions, their construct validity is questionable
 (in that common method bias, rater bias, and/or
 inaccuracy may be present), and they may have low
 reliability (Gerhart, 2005; Gerhart, Wright, Mc-
 Mahan, & Snell, 2000). Second, HR practices and
 proxy or informant measures prohibit an examina-
 tion of within-unit variability and change over
 time. When a single individual responds for an
 entire business unit (e.g., a single HR manager re-
 porting on employee skills), the assumption is that
 One benefit of focusing directly on aggregate
 all employees in the unit are equal on the charac-
 KSAs is that it becomes possible to extend and
 teristics being rated. However, HR practices will
 refine the conceptualization of human capital.
 not create complete agreement in employee atti-
 tudes or behaviors over time. For example, Bowen
 Prior applications of human capital theory and re-
 search have almost universally emphasized knowl-
 and Ostroff (2004) argued that HR practices are
 edge, education, and experience (Strober, 1990).
 means of communicating an organization's goals in
 These constructs are clearly important, but re-
 order to change individual cognitions and behav-
 source-based view and SHRM scholarship has sug-
 ior. Because HR practices are forms of communica-
 gested that other aggregate KSAs may also be im-
 tion, employees vary in how well they understand,
 portant, because they are linked to specific types of
 perceive, and respond (i.e., within-unit variability
 unit effectiveness in particular contexts. Indeed,
 is present). Wright and Haggerty argued that "em-
 recent suggestions for improving resource-based
 ployee reactions are actually individual-level vari-
 view research have proposed thinking first about
 ables that are central to the proposed causal pro-
 unit performance and then "working backwards" to
 cess, yet are currently ignored in unit-level theories
 of strategic HRM" (2005: 170).
 identify the relevant sources of unit effectiveness
 (Rouse & Daellenbach, 2002). Such suggestions are
 consistent with HR scholarship showing that per-
 they directly address the validity of empirical sup-
 sonality and service orientation may be particularly
 port for SHRM scholarship and the resource-based
 valuable when major parts of a job involve social
 view. Demonstrating that human resource practices
 interaction, collaboration, and communication
 contribute to firm performance provides only mod-
 (e.g., Hough & Schneider, 1996). It is worth noting
 est support for the resource-based view, according
 that the resource-based view offers no predictions
 to which human capital resources - -not practices -
 comprise the source of competitive advantage
 about which types of resources are important; it
 (Wright et al., 2001). HR practices may be easily
 specifies only the conditions under which a partic-
 copied, but the quality of human capital is more
 ular resource will contribute to sustained compet-
 itive advantage. For example, if employees from
 likely to be inimitable because it is socially com-
 plex, causally ambiguous, and uniquely developed,
 one firm deliver higher-quality service than com-
 petitors, service orientation can be a determinant of
 on the basis of a given firm's history (Barney, 1991;
 Barney & Wright, 1998). If correct, then informant
 unit effectiveness (Barney, 1991), even though ag-
 self-report measures must be deficient because, by
 gregate "service orientation" does not fit neatly into
 definition, managers should not be able to ade-
 the traditional definition of human capital. Wright
 et al. (2001) emphasized the role of both aggre-
 quately describe the human capital (i.e., it is caus-
 ally ambiguous and socially complex [Barney,
 gate ability and motivation as important determi-
 nants of firm effectiveness, yet motivational con-
 structs are typically excluded from human capital
 definitions.

 These limitations are not simply methodological;

 1 It is also interesting to note that in many SHRM
 studies, unit performance is likewise assessed with
 proxy measures or informant self-reports (Carmeli &
 Schaubroeck, 2005; Takeuchi, Lepak, Heli, & Takeuchi,
 2007).

 In keeping with this expanded perspective, Ploy-
 hart, Weekley, and Baughman (2006) recently pre-
 sented an alternative, broader operationalization of
 human capital in service firms that is based on

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 999

 Thus, in our conceptualization the meaning of

 to deliver service (Ployhart et al., 2006; Schneider
 et al., 1998).

 aggregate personality. Drawing from multilevel the-
 ory (Kozlowski & Klein, 2000), Ployhart et al.
 (2006) demonstrated that job and organizational-
 level personality were forms of human capital and
 represented by the unit aggregate of individual per-
 sonality KSA scores. They further showed how unit
 differences in personality predicted individual ser-
 vice performance and job satisfaction (see also
 Schneider, Smith, Taylor, and Fleenor [1998]).

 However, not all individual differences emerge

 unit service orientation is similar to the meaning of
 resources in the resource-based view and in SHRM.
 Consequently, unit service orientation may contrib-
 ute to unit effectiveness over time. First, as noted
 above, it is a valuable and rare resource in service
 firms. Second, it is difficult to imitate because unit-
 level constructs are causally ambiguous and so-
 cially complex. Barney and Wright stated, "Exploi-
 tation of the synergistic value from a large number
 of individuals who work together is quite costly if
 not impossible for competitors to imitate" (1998:
 39). Finally, as we discuss below, variability in the
 longitudinal flow of unit service orientation makes
 it difficult to copy (i.e., path dependency exists).

 into theoretically relevant unit-level constructs that
 may contribute to a unit's core capabilities. Such
 aggregation is only meaningful to the extent that it
 occurs for core employees and for the unit's core
 competencies and capabilities (Lopez-Cabrales,
 Valle, & Herrero, 2006; Prahalad & Hamel, 1990).
 Core employees are those whose jobs are most cen-
 tral to the existence of a firm (e.g., drivers in a
 trucking firm, service providers in a retail store).
 They perform the essential functions and tasks that
 define the firm's existence. Core competencies are
 those forms of human capital that core employees
 must exhibit to contribute to the firm's strategy and
 goals (i.e., they are valuable) (Lepak & Snell, 1999;
 Prahalad & Hamel, 1990).

 Although our operationalization of unit service
 orientation is similar to that of Ployhart et al.
 (2006), we extend their study in important ways.
 First, our study is longitudinal and looks at both
 the stock and flow of unit service-orientation accu-
 mulation, whereas Ployhart et al. 's (2006) was
 cross-sectional. Second, we assess the unit-level,
 objective, financial consequences of unit service
 orientation; Ployhart et al. only examined individ-
 ual-level, subjective job performance evaluations
 and self-reported job satisfaction. Finally, we ex-
 amine unit service orientation, whereas Ployhart et
 al. (2006) examined unit-level personality. These
 are similar but not identical constructs. Service
 orientation is typically the stronger determinant of
 individual service performance (Hough & Schnei-
 der, 1996) and is becoming the focus of modern
 service research (Salvaggio, Schneider, Nishii,
 Mayer, Ramesh, & Lyon, 2007).

 In this study, we examined the unit service ori-

 entation of frontline retail associates as an opera-
 tionalization of human capital. The service sector is
 the largest sector in private industry and represents
 about 67.8 percent of the U.S. gross domestic prod-
 uct (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2006, http://
 www.commerce.gov). Retail associates are core em-
 ployees because they are the largest group of
 nonmanagerial employees involved in the provi-
 sion of service (Delery & Shaw, 2001; Osterman,
 1994). Unit service orientation is a valuable core
 competency because it contributes directly to the
 mission and goals of a retail organization (Lepak &
 Snell, 1999; Schneider & White, 2004). We define
 unit service orientation as a unit's aggregate, collec-
 tive willingness and ability to deliver high-quality
 service. However, the roots of unit service orienta-
 tion lie at the individual level, because it is a mul-
 tidimensional construct capturing individual dif-
 ferences in willingness to treat customers with
 respect and dignity, perceptiveness of customer
 wants, and ability to communicate effectively and
 manage impressions (Hogan, Hogan, & Busch,
 1984; Schneider & Bowen, 1995). Individuals with
 greater service orientation are more predisposed
 and able to provide higher-quality service at the
 individual level (Frei & McDaniel, 1998; Hogan et
 al., 1984). Units with highly service-oriented indi-
 viduals will have greater unit mean service orien-
 tation (quality of human capital stock), thereby pro-
 ducine interunit differences in collective capacity

 A longitudinal perspective is necessary to test
 whether unit service orientation leads to changes in
 unit effectiveness over time, because it takes time
 for unit-level resources to manifest unit-level
 changes (Armstrong & Shimizu, 2007; Kozlowski &
 Klein, 2000). This time dependency is particularly
 important in the retail industry because of the high
 turnover and volatility of talent (e.g., Kacmar, An-
 drews, Rooy, Steilberg, & Cerone, 2006). However,
 most SHRM research has been cross-sectional or
 focused on static HR practices (Becker & Huselid,
 2006; Gerhart, 2005; Wright & Haggerty, 2005).
 There is surprisingly little evidence that human
 resources contribute to unit effectiveness over time.
 Becker and Huselid summarized the paucity of lon-
 gitudinal research: "Unfortunately, this issue tends

 The Stock and Flow of Unit Service Orientation
 and Unit Effectiveness

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1000 Academy of Management Journal October

 to typically receive a perfunctory mention in the
 of resources is important for understanding their
 Limitations section of most empirical articles and
 consequences.
 The seminal work of Dierickx and Cool (1989) on
 is rarely addressed directly" (2006: 913). Our study
 the accumulation of resource assets nicely illus-
 helps address this neglect by taking a more careful
 trated how resources may be dynamic and influ-
 examination of longitudinal relationships between
 ence unit effectiveness over time. In particular,
 unit service orientation and unit effectiveness.
 they discussed the "bathtub" metaphor, in which
 the amount of water in a tub represents the re-
 source. The stock of the resource is represented by
 the amount of water in the tub at any given time.
 Importantly, there must be a critical mass of the
 resource stock for it to influence unit effectiveness
 (i.e., too little water in the tub makes it impossible
 to get clean). The flows of the resource are repre-
 sented by the water coming into the tub through the
 faucet and out of the tub through the drain. Flows
 influence the stock of a resource and whether a
 critical mass is achieved and maintained. As Di-
 erickx and Cool noted, "It takes a consistent pattern
 of resource flows to accumulate a desired change in
 strategic asset stocks" (1989: 1506). Thus, the stock
 of a resource at a given time is important, but the
 flows of the resource determine whether it pro-
 duces a change in unit effectiveness.

 According to human capital theory, it takes time
 for investment in human capital to create positive
 returns (Strober, 1990), as the generic forms of hu-
 man capital must transfer into more firm-specific
 knowledge and behaviors (e.g., going from general
 knowledge of service provision to understanding
 the unique customers of a specific firm). In the
 resource-based view, time is vital because of the
 sustainability aspect of strategic resources (Arm-
 strong & Shimizu, 2007) and the fact that resources
 are dynamic and have life cycles (Helfat & Peteraf,
 2003). Valuable and rare resources may allow units
 to be competitive, but this advantage will only be
 sustainable if the resources are also inimitable
 and/or nonsubstitutable (Barney, 1991). A key re-
 quirement for inimitability is the path dependence
 or prior history of the units' resources. Specifically,
 business units follow trajectories that are in part
 driven by their prior performance, unique relations
 with the external environment (e.g., customers, lo-
 cal economic conditions), and other internal re-
 sources (e.g., managerial competence) (Barney,
 1991). "Time compression diseconomies" among
 resources suggest that competitors cannot develop
 a resource to equal effectiveness under compressed
 time (Dierickx & Cool, 1989). A good example is the
 equity that a firm acquires from its reputation or
 brand; it is not something easily copied or lost.
 Trying to quickly build human capital is unlikely
 to reproduce the same value it has for units in
 which the capital has been established for a long
 time because, in the latter case, the unit's workforce
 should have more firm-specific and tacit knowl-
 edge. Human capital may also help develop pro-
 cess-dependent, network-based synergies.

 important consequences for the study of unit
 service orientation. First, units must establish a
 critical mass (sufficient stock) of talented service
 providers to influence unit effectiveness. Unfortu-
 nately, we have probably all frequented retail es-
 tablishments where it seemed employees were ei-
 ther unable or unwilling to provide quality service.
 Infusing such a unit with one or a few higher-
 quality employees might marginally help, but the
 unit would need to reach a sufficient stock of
 above-average service provision to see above-aver-
 age returns. Because service providers are core em-
 ployees and influence customer behavior, not hav-
 ing a sufficient stock of employees capable and
 willing to provide quality service can lower effec-
 tiveness (Schneider & White, 2004). Second, em-
 ployees may choose to leave a firm or (to a degree)
 withhold effort (Rouse & Daellenbach, 2002). Turn-
 over is extremely high in retail positions (Kacmar et
 al., 2006), so the flow (and hence stock) of unit
 service orientation is likely to be highly variable
 over time. Finally, even though HR may implement
 the same practices, employees do not identically
 perceive or adhere to the practices (Bowen & Os-
 troff, 2004), thereby contributing to variability in
 unit service orientation over time. For example,
 even given the same selection practices, differences
 in labor markets may enable one manager to hire
 more selectively than another manager. By directly
 measuring unit service orientation as the aggregate
 of individual KSAs, it becomes possible to examine

 importance of time, several scholars have noted
 that it is rather vague in specifying the kinds of
 temporal dynamics that may occur among re-
 sources (Armstrong & Shimizu, 2007; Helfat & Pe-
 teraf, 2003). Research has not sufficiently ad-
 dressed how changes in the accumulation of
 resources influence changes in unit effectiveness
 over time. Yet theory indicates that resources are
 dynamic and evolving. As Helfat and Peteraf noted,
 "The resource-based view must incorporate the
 evolution over time of the resources and capabili-
 ties that form the basis of competitive advantage"
 (2003: 998). Thus, understanding the dynamicism

 Although the resource-based view recognizes the

 The distinction between stocks and flows has

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 1001

 the consequences of changes to the stock and flow
 of human capital. We detail each of these points
 below.

 First, units that create higher stocks of unit ser-
 vice orientation will perform better than units with
 lower stocks because of employees* greater collec-
 tive willingness and ability to manifest effective
 service behaviors, including citizenship behaviors
 and teamwork (Liao & Chuang, 2004; Ployhart et
 al., 2006; Schneider, Ehrhart, Mayer, Saltz, & Niles-
 Jolly, 2005). Such employees will be more likely to
 identify customer preferences, adapt their behavior
 to different types of customers, and generally be
 more effective in influencing customer behavior
 (Gwinner, Bitner, Brown, & Kumar, 2005; Liao &
 Chuang, 2004). Higher-quality unit service orienta-
 tion also increases the consistency of service deliv-
 ery and contributes to greater customer satisfaction,
 loyalty, repeat purchases, and positive word of
 mouth (Liao & Chuang, 2004; Lovelock & Wirtz,
 2004; Salvaggio et al., 2007). Employees with higher-
 quality service orientation may also be more
 likely to develop and share knowledge about cus-
 tomers, products, and services (Dess & Shaw, 2001;
 Ryan & Ployhart, 2003). Prior empirical research is
 consistent with these expectations (Hitt, Bierman,
 Shimizu, & Kochhar, 2001; Liao & Chuang, 2004;
 Ployhart et al., 2006).

 Second, although we expect the stock of unit

 service orientation to be related to unit effective-
 ness, it is the flow of unit service orientation over
 time that should most influence change in unit
 effectiveness (Dierickx & Cool, 1989). By merging
 theory on resource life cycles (Helfat & Peteraf,
 2003) with the empirical findings on customer ser-
 vice, we propose that the longitudinal relationship
 between unit service orientation and unit effective-
 ness is positive but decreasing over time. That is,
 we expect a tipping point at which unit service
 orientation starts to produce diminishing (although
 still positive) returns. We base this prediction on
 the capability life cycle within the dynamic re-
 source-based view (Helfat & Peteraf, 2003), which
 is concerned with understanding the evolution of
 resources and how they form, develop, and mature.
 Importantly, the value of resources is expected to
 change over time because of changes in the envi-
 ronment and the "shelf life" of a resource itself.
 Thus, in this perspective, the contribution of a re-
 source toward unit effectiveness will not exhibit a
 consistent effect (slope) over time. Rather, capabil-
 ities and resources follow what Helfat and Peteraf
 called an "experience" curve, because there are
 "inherent limits to what any team could achieve
 with available technologies, inputs, workers, and
 state of managerial practice" (2003: 1002).

 In line with this theory, customer service schol-
 arship suggests that the flow of service orientation
 into and out of the unit is likely to be highly vari-
 able over time, thus affecting the nature of its rela-
 tionship with unit effectiveness. High turnover in
 retail jobs and the relative ease with which retail
 employees may switch employers create consider-
 able challenges for maintaining a consistent flow
 and thus creation of a sufficient stock of quality
 employees (Kacmar et al., 2006). The relationship
 marketing literature has found that tremendous fi-
 nancial benefits accrue when units establish long-
 term relationships with customers, because it is
 more profitable to keep existing customers than to
 make new ones (Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Reichheld &
 Sasser, 1990). Therefore, units able to maintain or
 increase their flow of unit service orientation are
 likely to increase the number of repeat customers
 who are likely to shop more frequently, shop
 longer, spread more positive word of mouth, and
 purchase more on subsequent visits (Lovelock &
 Wirtz, 2004; Reichheld & Sasser, 1990; Schneider et
 al., 2005). Of course, increasing sales do not con-
 tinue indefinitely, and as predicted by the capabil-
 ity life cycle (Helfat & Peteraf, 2003), the relation-
 ship (slope) between unit service orientation and
 unit effectiveness will start to diminish (although
 remaining positive). This diminishment results
 from the fact that, unless a unit is going to provide
 additional strategic investments (e.g., add person-
 nel, increase store size, invest in new technology),
 the effect of the resource will reach a tipping point
 and start to weaken (Helfat & Peteraf, 2003). Thus,
 the flow of unit service orientation will positively
 relate to unit effectiveness because of increasing
 subsequent sales, but there will also be a tipping
 point at which the slope of unit service orientation
 starts to weaken.

 Hypothesis 1. The flow of unit service orienta-
 tion over time relates to changes in unit effec-
 tiveness, in such a way that the positive rela-
 tionship gets weaker over time.

 Finally, we expect between-unit heterogeneity in
 the relationship between unit service orientation
 and unit effectiveness: the longitudinal relation-
 ship will be stronger for some units than others.
 The resource-based prediction is that this heteroge-
 neity occurs because the value of resources is con-
 text-specific and cannot be separated from a unit's
 unique history and distinctive relationships with
 external and internal factors (Barney, 1991, 2001;
 Helfat & Peteraf, 2003). First, resources are path
 dependent, which means that the unit's specific
 history and prior performance affect the subse-
 quent flow and value of the resource (Barney, 2001;

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1002 Academy of Management Journal October

 Hypothesis 2. The positive but decreasing unit
 service orientation- unit effectiveness relation-
 ship is heterogeneous across units. Units with
 high-quality flows of unit service orientation
 have greater effectiveness over time than
 units with low-quality flows of unit service
 orientation.

 METHODS

 Several conditions must be met to isolate unit

 Barney & Wright, 1998). Because different units
 may be in different parts of the resource life cycle,
 they might be in different parts of the curve; hence,
 "The exact shape of the curve might differ" be-
 tween units (Helfat & Peteraf, 2003: 1004). There-
 fore, heterogeneity in the unit service orientation-
 effectiveness relationship is in part affected by
 prior flows of unit service orientation. Second, the
 value of resources is heterogeneous because of the
 unit's unique relationships with external and inter-
 nal factors (Barney, 1991, 2001). Externally, differ-
 Sample, Context, and Boundary Conditions
 ences in units' competitive environments may
 cause slope heterogeneity (Barney, 1991). For ex-
 service orientation's consequences. First, it is nec-
 ample, some units may face stiff er competition not
 essary to study identical HR systems from similar
 only for customers, but also for high-quality em-
 business units in a single industry. Doing so lets
 ployees. Internally, units may obtain greater value
 researchers benefit from increasing internal valid-
 from a given resource because it is more effectively
 ity by using the same KSAs and unit criteria, while
 leveraged and is complemented by other strategic
 controlling for organizational and business-unit
 resources (it is socially complex) (e.g., Barney &
 differences (e.g., promotions, advertising) and in-
 Wright, 1998; Dierickx & Cool, 1989; Rouse & Dael-
 dustry differences. Second, isolating unit service
 lenbach, 2002). For example, consistent flows of
 orientation's consequences requires a sample with
 high-quality unit service orientation may occur be-
 sufficient numbers of employees who fulfill core
 cause the unit's management recognizes it as a stra-
 roles and are nested within a sufficient number of
 tegic resource, develops a culture to maintain it,
 units.
 and is effective at leveraging it, thereby extracting
 more value from the resource than other units (Car-
 meli & Schaubroeck, 2005; Hitt et al., 2001).

 Customer service research helps specify the na-

 of frontline retail service associates nested within
 stores from a single, large, retail organization over a
 period of three quarters. This context offered sev-
 ture of the heterogeneity in the unit service orien-
 eral advantages for testing our hypotheses. First,
 tation-unit effectiveness relationship predicted
 challenges in recruiting and retaining retail em-
 under the resource-based view. Units with higher-
 ployees created the potential for relatively large
 quality flows of unit service orientation will have a
 stronger (nonlinear) relationship and thus better
 swings in unit service orientation in a short time, as
 unit effectiveness. For example, units that have
 turnover in this industry ranges from over 50 per-
 cent to 100 percent annually. Second, service em-
 more consistent flows of service-oriented employ-
 ployees were considered core employees (Delery &
 ees will better (and more reliably) serve more cus-
 Shaw, 2001) and a key resource for competitive
 tomers, who in turn will report greater customer
 advantage (Dess & Shaw, 2001; Hitt et al., 2001).
 satisfaction, become more loyal, more frequently
 visit the stores and spend more on each visit, and
 Service providers comprised the face of the retail
 spread more positive word of mouth (Liao &
 organization and had a strong influence on cus-
 tomer attitudes, satisfaction, and subsequent pur-
 Chuang, 2004; Lovelock & Wirtz, 2004; Reichheld &
 chases that in turn had strong consequences for
 Sasser, 1990; Schneider et al., 2006). Thus, consis-
 firm performance (Batt, 2002; Liao & Chuang, 2004;
 tently high flows of unit service orientation cascade
 Schneider et al., 2005). Third, there were enough
 into higher sales. In contrast, a unit chronically
 units, with sufficient differences in unit service
 staffed with less-service-oriented employees will
 orientation to allow us to examine the multilevel
 less adequately attend to customer requests, be less
 relationships (Kozlowski & Klein, 2000). Fourth,
 responsive to managerial attempts to enhance ser-
 vice, and be more likely to alienate customers (Liao
 objective indicators of unit effectiveness were mea-
 & Chuang, 2004). These deficiencies will in turn
 sured repeatedly over three quarters. Finally, all
 stores had the same HR practices, including the
 lead to lower customer satisfaction, slower growth
 in customers, negative word of mouth, and lower
 same selection test and hiring procedures. Manag-
 sales over time (Reichheld & Sasser, 1990; Salvag-
 ers did not have the authority to change the prac-
 gio et al., 2007; Schneider et al., 2005). Losing
 tices but had some discretion regarding how they
 customers is perhaps the most damaging outcome
 weighed test and interview scores.
 because of the very high cost in obtaining new
 customers (Mattila, 2001).

 Participants [n = 114,198) were applicants hired
 by a retail department store chain headquartered in

 Therefore, we examined the service orientation

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 1003

 the United States. The jobs were in various depart-
 ments (e.g., sporting goods, men's/women's cloth-
 ing). All applicants completed the same selection
 battery, because a job analysis and criterion-related
 validity study indicated the same KSA require-
 ments were present for effective service provision,
 regardless of department.

 Excluding 19 individuals who lacked demo-

 graphic information, the sample was mostly female
 (66%) and fairly diverse, including Native Ameri-
 cans (0.98%), Asians (4.61%), African Americans
 (21.87%), Caucasians (57.01%), and Hispanics
 (15.52%). As in all retail samples, turnover was
 high: over 75 percent of the sample quit during the
 time period under investigation. Of those who quit,
 the average length of employment was 58.09 days
 (s.d. = 47.73). Individuals applied to one of 1,255
 stores geographically distributed throughout all
 states except Hawaii and Alaska. Our contacts at
 the firm indicated the stores were largely equiva-
 lent in products and services offered. Only stores
 operating since 2002 were included (mean = 11
 years, s.d. = 7.54 years).

 organization used the Kenexa Retail Associate Se-
 lector, a service-orientation battery containing
 three personality traits (conscientiousness, agree-
 ableness, and emotional stability) with 15 items
 each, a 20-item "situational judgment" test (SJT),
 and a 5-item biodata-based measure of educational
 success. Prior research has suggested emotional sta-
 bility, agreeableness, and conscientiousness are the
 three main personality determinants of service ori-
 entation (Frei & McDaniel, 1998; Hogan et al.,
 1984). Situational judgment assesses knowledge of
 appropriate service behaviors and ability to cor-
 rectly perceive and respond to different service
 encounters (not unlike tacit forms of service knowl-
 edge). The SJT was developed using the critical-
 incident technique, meaning that real work situa-
 tions comprised the item stems. Applicants then
 indicated which course of action they thought was
 best/worst in each situation. The educational suc-
 cess measure assessed academically related vari-
 ables such as high school grade-point average
 (GPA), highest grade completed, and number of
 awards received. The overall predictor composite
 was formed by summing the standardized scales,
 and then converting the composite score to a T-
 score. T-scores, standardized values that, with a
 perfectly normal distribution, have a mean of 50
 and a standard deviation of 10, are a frequently
 used alternative to z-scores for removing the nega-
 tive numbers for scores below the mean (see Nun-
 nally & Bernstein, 1994).

 Procedures

 All applicants were required to complete a basic

 application form and service orientation predictor
 on premises. Because of high turnover, the predic-
 tor was used to screen out only the bottom 20
 percent of the distribution. Applicants clearing this
 hurdle were interviewed briefly by store staff; un-
 fortunately, the interview scores were not captured
 and were therefore unavailable to us. Because of
 the relatively low cutoff score, high turnover, and
 differences in local labor markets, there remained
 plenty of room for interstore differences in unit
 service orientation to emerge. We were provided
 with predictor data obtained in the first three quar-
 ters (as defined by the organization) of 2003: quar-
 ter 1 (February 1-April 30); quarter 2 (May 1-July
 31); quarter 3 (August 1-October 31). We obtained
 store-level sales information from the organiza-
 tion's archival data from quarter 2, 2002, to quarter
 4, 2003.

 Measures

 Individual service orientation. We measured in-

 dividual-level service orientation via a composite
 assessing emotional stability, agreeableness, con-
 scientiousness, educational success, and situa-
 tional judgment (see Bettencourt, Gwinner, & Meu-
 ter, 2001; Hogan et al., 1984; Paajanen, Hansen, &
 McLellan, 1993). Drawing on a job analysis and
 criterion-related validity study (n = 2,937), this

 In the criterion-related validity study conducted
 with this organization, the personality subscales
 demonstrated convergent (.60 and higher) and dis-
 criminant (.31 and lower) validity with the Interna-
 tional Personality Item Pool scales. Criterion-re-
 lated validity (uncorrected) was .23 and nearly
 identical to the .24 uncorrected meta-analytic esti-
 mate reported by Frei and McDaniel (1998). The
 composite internal consistency reliability was .81,
 with subscale reliabilities ranging from .71 to .79,
 except for the SJT, which was .47 (typical for SJTs,
 especially for those with so few items; see Mc-
 Daniel, Morgeson, Finnegan, Campion, and Braver-
 man [2001]). Although the educational success
 items may seem out of place, a job analysis indi-
 cated they were necessary to assess basic reading
 and quantitative skills for effective service provi-
 sion (e.g., operating a cash register). Because we did
 not have access to the item data, it was impossible
 to examine whether their inclusion affected the
 validity of the composite, although inclusion of
 educational success is consistent with human cap-
 ital theory (Strober, 1990).

 Unit service orientation. We operationalized

 unit service orientation as the store-level mean of

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1004 Academy of Management Journal October

 aggregate individual-level service-orientation KSA
 This analysis showed that a large percentage (39%,
 p < .05) of variability in unit service orientation
 scores, nested within each store at each quarter.
 over the three quarters was due to between-store
 This aggregation approach to unit service orienta-
 differences. We found further evidence of be-
 tion is identical to that used in prior multilevel
 tween-store differences in the moderate size of
 research on personality homogeneity (e.g., Schnei-
 the unit service orientation test-retest correla-
 der et al., 1998) and human capital emergence
 tions. Table 1 shows these and other descriptive
 (Ployhart et al., 2006). In these studies (as in ours),
 statistics for the store-level variables.
 the level of theory for unit service orientation was
 at the unit level but was measured with individual-
 level KSAs. There were three repeated measures of
 unit service orientation (quarters 1, 2, 3) for each
 store. Each quarterly score was the mean service
 orientation score of all individuals who had ap-
 plied to and were working at a store in a particular
 quarter. For example, an applicant who was hired
 in quarter 1 and quit in quarter 3 would have con-
 tributed to his/her store's unit service orientation
 score for quarters 1,2, and 3. An applicant hired in
 quarter 2 who quit in quarter 2 would have contrib-
 uted only to that quarter. Thus, an individual's
 service orientation score could contribute to a
 store's unit service orientation score for one to
 three quarters - an appropriate result, given our fo-
 cus on unit-mean levels of service orientation.2

 Unit effectiveness. We used store productivity,
 profit, and percentage of sales growth as operation-
 alizations of unit effectiveness because they have
 theoretical importance and relevance to service con-
 texts, and their use ensures our findings were not
 metric-specific (the findings between these measures,
 raw sales, and other variations of sales were nearly
 identical). We measured all criteria from quarter 2,
 2003, through quarter 1, 2004.

 The first criterion was sales per employee. Ser-
 vice firms frequently use this measure as an index
 of productivity, and it has been frequently used in
 past research (e.g., Huselid, 1995). We calculated
 sales per employee by taking the store's quarterly
 sales and dividing it by the average number of
 relevant employee positions for 2003 (provided by
 the firm). Consequently, calculation of sales per
 employee was unaffected by turnover because even
 though there may have been high levels of turn-
 over, the number of positions stayed highly consis-
 tent over the year.

 Bliese (2000) noted that when an individual-

 level measure is not designed to measure a shared
 perception (e.g., unit climate), the critical issue is
 demonstrating sufficient reliability for the unit-
 level measure. Such was the case here, because the
 individual-level measure assessed individual dif-
 ferences rather than some common referent such as
 unit climate or group efficacy (agreement would be
 necessary for establishing aggregation in the latter
 case; see Kozlowski and Klein [2000]). Bliese ar-
 gued that in such instances, the critical issue for
 testing emergence is not agreement but rather, find-
 ing sufficient reliability for the aggregate unit-level
 means: "The key to detecting emergent relation-
 ships is to have groups large enough to produce
 reliable group-mean values - that is, high ICC(2)
 values" (2000: 373). Therefore, ICC(2) values for
 unit service orientation must exceed the .70 mini-
 mum threshold. The ICC(2) values for unit service
 orientation were .87. Although not critical for ag-
 gregation in our case, we followed the ICC(l) pro-
 cedure suggested by Bliese and Ployhart (2002) to
 estimate the amount of between-store variance in
 the service orientation scores for all three quarters.

 2 Although assigning a unit mean score to represent

 employees' scores is in some ways similar to having a
 manager provide a self-report to represent a unit, the unit
 mean is likely to be more reliable and is based on the
 actual aggregate human capital instead of a perceptual
 estimate of that capital.

 The second criterion was adjusted controllable
 profit. Controllable profit represents a store's quar-
 terly sales minus quarterly costs that are, to an
 extent, under the control of the staff (e.g., labor,
 utilities). It represents an index of profitability that
 the store management can be expected to have
 some control over (and for which they are held
 accountable). This index has been used by Sacco
 and Schmitt (2005). However, the studied firm did
 not want us to present raw values, so we adjusted
 the controllable profit figures by multiplying them
 by a decimal constant. This adjustment reduced the
 controllable profit numbers in consistent ways
 through all three quarters but had absolutely no
 effect on distributions, significance tests, standard
 errors, or the form of relationships (Aiken & West,
 1991).

 The final store-level criterion was a measure of

 percentage of sales growth for each store, another
 commonly used index of retail store effectiveness
 (Batt, 2002). Often called same store sales, it esti-
 mates change (expressed as a percentage) in quar-
 terly sales relative to the store's performance in the
 same quarter of the prior year. The measure essen-
 tially uses each store as its own control variable,
 helping to minimize the effects of between-store
 differences. This capacity is important theoretically,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1 s- S
 a ss §1 I w Èb
 s §°s ' ' ¡î ' ' '' " s

 O) N H O) 03 "S
 W O rH rH O U A
 i" " i" " S -^

 _^ O IX CO O CN 03 Jï
 _^ ** ^ ^ *"! ^ ^ 3 ^

 _ rlIflOOCOCOrH >-h
 W _ OtHOOOOS

 •"•■■'•• 5|

 00 CD Oî H W 1Í3 CD -^ 03

 1
 I
 J

 1
 1

 NOiinooNinooN beo
 rH ooqTHrHqrHqq^aj

 (OlflMOON^THd S ?
 O OíOOOrHCMOrHrHOt^t-H

 II

 03 __|
 HCOCDOlOOtriNCOCD ti In
 q iflin^ONCONNOO ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ • ■ ed +3
 ■ ■ ■ f ■ ■ r ■ • ■ g.g

 ' " i

 (OMCDNOOlflQfflON _öo
 QQ roiqwcorjeocorHNqq • • • • • • • • • ^u _öo
 • • • • r • • r • • • o »
 Nlfil'OOlONOCfflinrHOì §3 ^
 1^ OiOJlflincOOflOCOrHNOO ' " 'aStì
 l" ' " l' *H O
 g "S
 cowNonNNinnincoiûrH ^h+2
 {ß OOTHOrHCOOOOrHqCJC) * * ' * fO tì
 r * * ' r r r r r r * -e •§
 ro O
 NOîcD^eoQOOJNnincocûin > m
 IO tsOrHNOrHnqOONOOq * a>o
 r * r r r r r s *>
 00 03
 comt^ocDt^oooooor-iooîmm dw

 ^ DoinrHNNrHNNrnqqroqqq

 N^riMO^lflNNinTfNOÎCOOJW 'o^
 w qqqqqqqqqoqoooqo * * * «« tj

 r * i" * * ■ i* s .N

 nNOninWN(Û(Dfl0NTHOWH0000 'S fcl

 ç^ inoqqoqooqqor¡qqoqq

 ^NOrlM^tNNNNHlflCOOrl^N inw

 ^ innqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq *

 r r r r r r r * r i

 OîiDCSICTlOîOOOOOOOOOOOOOrHO Q. "§
 qcoeqoqqqqqqqqqqqqqrH© Q. ^g
 ^NHdddrHNnddoÓririrHrHrHOrH « l
 'O O) N (û N N 't j, 0)
 ^ 00 n q N co n tí>
 rf CsT CD 1ST tX O5* CÖ O
 r-l rH rH S3
 mTfOcoixcDOOOOOOOOooocoo oqtí
 os tx lo q q q q q q q q qqq q qq coq -g g
 ^^^dòò^Ns^coôdddòodcS ^3
 m in in co^cNOrHco ^* -
 « q s in n q ^ 'S0
 2 rH tC rn" CD O Iß O >,
 CN CM CO 00 ^
 •£ dl
 OîCOincDCOCDCDCDCOCDCOCDCNIOOCDCO^CDrH CdPj
 «. NNcococonnnncocono^oo^scon "So
 N th cN <n o^ o^ q q q q q o^ o^ CN <n rn cn th cn cn u

 ¿S ¿S ¿S V%
 ri M CO OOO piS03

 •43 *i3 "i3 ^2 p52 £ So
 cd (d cd J3 ,û n 03 fe

 § § § ^2 ÌÌÌ p52 £ 1 So «"
 iiiïï:ili««*« 1 «1
 ■S-8-S-S-3-3I1I w w w g g g i.l.f.1 S -S I .0 "sä
 0 Q) » w w w g g g O O O S -S Ä .0 -g w^

 IH I i ilffìììll Sfili J3

 rlCMCO^inoNCOOJOHNm^inCDNOOOì T3

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1006 Academy of Management Journal October

 Ásales = intercept + control variables

 because as Wright, Gardner, Moynihan, and Allen
 (2005) showed, controlling for prior unit perfor-
 mance resulted in a near-total reduction in the ef-
 fects of HR practices on unit performance. Hence,
 using the same-store-sales criterion produces a very
 strong internal control. The calculation of same
 store sales is quarterly sales minus quarterly sales
 for the prior year divided by the quarterly sales for
 the prior year. For example, for quarter 3, 2003,
 same store sales is calculated as [sales quarter 3,
 2003 - sales quarter 3, 2002)/ sales quarter 3, 2002.

 + [Aunit service orientation)

 + [Aunit service orientation)2.

 Unit-level control variables. We used seven

 control variables to hold constant potential store-
 level and economic influences. We calculated store
 size by the average headcount of all frontline retail
 store employees for 2003; store age was the number
 of days the store was open. We obtained the 2003
 unemployment rate for each store's zip code from
 the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The per capita
 income (PCI) for each zip code (cf. Sacco & Schmitt,
 2005) was obtained by linking the zip code from
 each store to U.S. Census Bureau databases. Per
 capita income allowed us to control for whether
 stores located in wealthier locations showed higher
 sales. We used retail density to estimate the amount
 of retail competition facing a store. It was created
 by merging a Census Bureau database containing
 the number of retail establishments per square mile
 in each zip code with our store data. Store turnover
 represents the average annual turnover rate in a
 store for the year (0 = "no turnover"), and tenure
 summarizes the average length of employment for
 employees in a given store.

 Levels of Analysis and Analytic Strategy

 The data for this study are longitudinal and
 nested, such that we are modeling interstore differ-
 ences in intrastore relationships between unit ser-
 vice orientation and effectiveness. Consequently, it
 was appropriate to use a random coefficient growth
 model (RCGM). We built and tested the RCGM us-
 ing procedures outlined in Bliese and Ployhart
 (2002). However, unlike growth models in which
 the independent variable is a time trend (e.g., lin-
 ear, quadratic), our RCGM capitalizes on the repeat-
 edly measured unit service orientation scores. That
 is, the independent variable is not time but flows
 (changes) in unit service orientation over time. Spe-
 cifically, we used a model in which the repeatedly
 measured store sales criteria (sales per employee,
 adjusted controllable profit, same store sales) were
 regressed upon the control variables (measured at a
 single point in time) and the repeatedly measured
 unit service orientation measure. The intrastore
 (level 1) model can be conceptually illustrated as:

 In this model, the dependent variable is change in
 the sales criteria, and the regression weights are
 estimates of whether changes in unit service orien-
 tation lead to positive (but decreasing) changes in
 store sales criteria over time (i.e., intrastore changes
 over time). Note that these regression weights rep-
 resent the average curve for all stores. The inter-
 store (level 2) model uses variance components to
 estimate between-store heterogeneity among the in-
 tercept and slopes. These variance components
 represent the variability in the positive but decreas-
 ing relationship across stores.

 Hypothesis 1 was tested via the statistical signif-
 icance of the regression weights for the unit service
 orientation terms. To support a nonlinear (positive
 but decreasing) curve, not only did both terms
 have to be significant, but also, the change in unit
 service orientation term had to be positive and the
 change in unit service orientation-squared term
 had to be negative. Hypothesis 2 was tested via the
 statistical significance of the variance component
 terms for unit service orientation and unit service
 orientation squared (we modeled the intercept vari-
 ance as well, but it was not part of any hypothesis
 test). Note that the variance component for the lin-
 ear unit service orientation term estimates variabil-
 ity in the general strength of the linear trend, and
 the variance component for the squared unit ser-
 vice orientation term estimates variability in the
 inflection (or "bend") in the curve. Jointly, these
 variance components test whether the positive but
 decreasing relationship differs across stores. Be-
 cause both the linear and squared unit service ori-
 entation terms had to be significant to support Hy-
 pothesis 1, so too must both variance components
 be significant to support Hypothesis 2. Hence, Hy-
 pothesis 1 tests the shape of the average curve, and
 Hypothesis 2 tests whether there is between-store
 variability in the shape of the curve.

 Modeling unit service orientation in this way is
 known as using time-varying predictors (see Singer
 & Willett, 2003). As Singer and Willett noted, it is
 important to include a time lag between predictors
 and criteria when the time-varying predictor is
 nonmonotonic. Therefore, we set up the model so
 that the store sales criteria followed unit service
 orientation temporally by one quarter. Unit service
 orientation in quarter 1 predicts sales in quarter 2;
 unit service orientation in quarter 2 predicts sales
 in quarter 3; unit service orientation in quarter 3

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 1007

 est to the variance diagonal are larger than bands of
 covariances farther from the variance diagonal.

 predicts sales in quarter 4. Note that an added
 benefit of using a lagged model is stronger infer-
 ences of causality, because unit service orientation
 precedes unit outcomes by one quarter (Singer &
 Willett, 2003). We do not claim this modeling
 proves causality, but it does allow for stronger
 causal inferences because it temporally separates
 the predictors from the criteria. This is not a differ-
 ence-score model; instead, it is a model that re-
 gresses change in effectiveness onto change in unit
 service orientation.

 Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1. No-

 RESULTS

 We entered the control variables first for all anal-

 yses, standardized because of their vastly different
 variances. The one exception was turnover rate,
 because it only ranged from 0 to 1; hence, 0 has a
 meaningful interpretation (i.e., no turnover). Unit
 service orientation was the unit mean of individual
 scores, which were already standardized via
 T-scores. We did not further standardize it because
 doing so could have biased estimates of longitudi-
 nal relationships (e.g., Rovine & von Eye, 1991). A
 Toeplitz band- diagonal residual matrix was used
 to model correlations among the residuals in all
 models. This type of residual matrix is like a sim-
 plex matrix in which the covariances among resid-
 uals are estimated in bands, so that the bands clos-

 tice that unit service orientation and the sales cri-
 teria appear to be unrelated. We caution readers
 against making such inferences because aggregate
 means and bivariate correlations can mask the
 within- and between-unit variance in longitudinal
 models (Rogosa, 1995). We emphasize this "lack"
 of relationships only to highlight the critical differ-
 ence between the stock and flow of unit service
 orientation. Also note that, although variability in
 unit service orientation decreases over time, this
 effect is not, to our knowledge, to the result of any
 intervention or change within the organization's
 policies and practices.

 Table 2 shows the results of the RCGM analyses.

 Hypothesis 1 predicts that the change (flow) of unit
 service orientation over time relates to changes in
 unit effectiveness over time in such a way that the
 positive relationship gets weaker. The regression
 weights for the unit service orientation terms were
 both significant for all three criteria, and impor-

 Results of Longitudinal Random Coefficient Growth Models®

 TABLE 2

 Variables Same Store Sales Adjusted Controllable Profit Sales per Employee

 Intercept -1.43* (0.23) -1,394,389.00* (204,665.00) -234,431.00* (28,806.00)

 Store-level controls

 Unemployment rate -0.004 (0.00) -4,356.98* (2,013.54) -524.44* (238.34)
 Size -0.003 (0.00) 110,263.00* (2,902.34) 230.57 (344.51)
 PCI -0.003 (0.00) 14,319.00* (2,077.36) 1,020.67* (246.28)
 Days -0.02* (0.00) -3,637.24 (2,181.72) 377.89 (258.80)
 Retail density -0.0002 (0.00) 8,868.42* (2,178.02) 711.11* (261.96)
 Turnover -0.04 (0.03) 83,679.00* (22,238.00) 7,614.86* (2,642.21)
 Tenure -0.04 (0.00) -3,283.58 (2,156.65) -299.39 (255.24)

 Predictors

 Unit service orientation 0.06* (0.01) 60,263.00* (7,383.94) 10,156.00* (1,045.23)
 Unit service orientation squared -0.001* (0.00) -557.80* (66.46) -93.49* (9.46)

 Between-store heterogeneity (variance

 components)

 Intercept 0.07* (0.03) 2,456,100,000.00* (169,840,000.00) 23,556,574.00* (2,385,197.00)
 Unit service orientation 0.00* (0.00) 814,690.00* (5,611.00) 7,802.12* (787.95)
 Unit service orientation squared 0.00 (0.00) 267.68* (18.66) 2.54* (0.26)

 -2 log-likelihood -7,376.60 74,109.10 62,533.00
 Akaike's information criterion -7,368.60 74,113.10 62,537.00

 a Coefficients for the predictors estimate the longitudinal relationships between changes in the predictors and changes in the criteria.

 Standard errors are in parentheses. A Toeplitz-banded residual matrix models potentially correlated residuals. All controls except for
 turnover rate are standardized; unit service orientation predictors are T-scores. The variance components are estimated with all control and
 predictor variables in the model.

 * p < .05

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1008 Academy of Management Journal October

 sis. For example, in the Frei and McDaniel (1998)
 tantly, the linear terms were positive, while the
 squared terms were negative (thus producing
 meta-analysis, the variance in individual perfor-
 mance explained by individual service orientation
 curves in which the slope gets weaker after a tip-
 was 6 percent. The presence of a systematic rela-
 ping point). For every one-unit increase in unit
 tionship between unit service orientation and sales
 service orientation, there was (on average) a 6 per-
 cent increase in same store sales, a $59,705.20
 suggests that variability in unit service orientation
 increase in adjusted controllable profit, and a
 is not simply due to chance. Figure 1 illustrates the
 $10,062.51 increase in sales per employee over
 predicted values for sales per employee. As the
 figure shows, the relationship between flows of
 time. Using the procedure described in Xu (2003),
 unit service orientation and sales per employee was
 whereby variance explained is equal to one minus
 the ratio of mean square error between full and
 positive but got weaker over time. Thus, Hypothe-
 sis 1 was supported.
 reduced models, the variance explained by the con-
 trol variables was 5 percent, 56 percent, and 7
 percent for same store sales, adjusted controllable
 profit, and sales per employee, respectively.
 Change in unit service orientation explained an
 incremental 8, 2, and 4 percent for each criterion,
 respectively. Interestingly, the incremental vari-
 ance explained for unit service orientation was
 similar to unconditional (no control variables) ef-
 fect sizes obtained at the individual level of analy-

 and the value of adopting a longitudinal perspec-
 tive, we performed some supplemental analyses to
 examine the effects of unit service orientation flows
 (i.e., the linear and quadratic terms) over the stock
 of unit service orientation (i.e., average unit service
 orientation over three quarters). Stated differently,
 we tested whether the flow of unit service orienta-
 tion contributed to the prediction of unit effective-

 To demonstrate further support for Hypothesis 1

 Longitudinal Relationship between Unit Service Orientation and Predicted Sales per Employee3

 FIGURE 1

 46,000 -

 45,500- ^T

 Predicted /
 Sales per 45,000- /
 Employee /

 44,500 -

 44,000 -I

 12 3

 Flow of Unit Service Orientation over Time

 a There is a one-quarter lag between sales per employee and unit service orientation (with unit service orientation measured in the

 quarter prior to sales per employee). This figure was produced using predicted values with the control variables at their means.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 1009

 ness after controlling for the stock of unit service
 orientation. These analyses regressed unit effec-
 tiveness onto the control variables, then the unit
 service orientation mean, and finally the linear and
 quadratic unit service orientation terms. In none of
 these models was the regression coefficient for the
 mean of unit service orientation statistically signif-
 icant. Alternatively, in each model the linear and
 quadratic terms were always statistically signifi-
 cant [p < .05) and, on the basis of the Xu (2003)
 procedure noted above, explained significant incre-
 mental variance (ranging from 2 percent to 7.40
 percent). These supplemental analyses provided
 additional support for the proposition that unit ser-
 vice orientation flows, and not simply unit service
 orientation stock, are related to changes in unit
 effectiveness.

 orientation as the dependent variable and the sales
 criteria as the independent variables. These analy-
 ses were also lagged by one quarter. There was no
 evidence for reverse causation because none of the
 regression weights was statistically significant (p >
 .20). We also examined whether the results
 changed by removing the one-quarter lag, so that
 unit service orientation and unit sales were at the
 same quarter. The conclusions were identical to the
 lagged findings (these results are available upon
 request). As noted by a reviewer, this correspon-
 dence of results may suggest that unit service ori-
 entation can manifest effects on unit effectiveness
 in very short periods of time (i.e., less than one
 quarter). Conversely, the consequences of decreas-
 ing unit service orientation are also likely to occur
 very quickly and possibly in an accelerated man-
 ner. Thus, although we saw the effects of unit ser-
 vice orientation extending to at least one quarter,
 our nonlagged findings suggest that these effects
 may occur in less time than one quarter.

 Hypothesis 2 predicts that the positive, but de-
 creasing, unit service orientation- unit effective-
 ness relationship is heterogeneous among units,
 with units manifesting consistently high flows of
 unit service orientation having greater effectiveness
 than those with consistently low flows of unit ser-
 vice orientation. The between-store variance com-
 ponents in Table 2 provide general support for this
 hypothesis. There was significant heterogeneity for
 both unit service orientation variance components
 for adjusted controllable profit and sales per em-
 ployee. For these two criteria, the positive but de-
 creasing relationship with unit service orientation
 differed across stores. However, for same store
 sales, only the linear variance component was sig-
 nificant, suggesting that there were only between-
 unit differences in the linear part of the slope (i.e.,
 there was variability in the linear trend). In general,
 even when the same HR practices were used in all
 units, variability in the longitudinal linear relation-
 ship between unit service orientation and unit ef-
 fectiveness was considerable. Unfortunately, there
 are no conventions as to what constitutes small or
 large effect sizes for variance components, so we
 instead illustrate the practical consequences of this
 heterogeneity. Specifically, we expected that stores
 with consistently higher flows of unit service ori-
 entation would "outperform" stores with lower
 flows. As an illustration, stores with consistent
 flows of higher unit service orientation (1 s.d.
 above the mean) increased their sales per employee
 by $4,000.00 more per quarter than stores with
 lower flows of unit service orientation (1 s.d. below
 the mean). Hypothesis 2 was therefore supported
 for the adjusted controllable profit and sales per
 employee criteria.

 We conducted additional analyses to examine
 evidence of other forms of causation. We first ex-
 amined reverse causation by placing unit service

 DISCUSSION

 The expectation that human resources contribute

 to a unit's effectiveness is a cornerstone of both
 macro (e.g., resource-based theory) and micro (HR,
 psychology) disciplines of management scholar-
 ship. Those in the field of strategic human resource
 management seek to connect these levels and artic-
 ulate how human resources relate to firm effective-
 ness. The purpose of this study was to test several
 critical, but largely neglected, predictions of re-
 source-based view and SHRM scholarship to dem-
 onstrate how changes in the stock and flow of unit
 service orientation contribute to changes in objec-
 tive indexes of unit effectives.

 First, following recent recommendations (e.g.,
 Gerhart, 2005; Rouse & Daellenbach, 2002), we ar-
 gued for an expanded interpretation of human cap-
 ital, one based on aggregate knowledge, skills, and
 abilities theoretically linked to unit effectiveness in
 specific contexts. We found that a retail unit's ser-
 vice orientation represents a resource capable of
 producing change in unit effectiveness. Our exam-
 ination of unit service orientation provides a nice
 complement to prior service research, which has
 focused on employee job attitudes and climate per-
 ceptions (Schneider et al., 1998). Importantly, unit
 service orientation is not based on inferences from
 HR practices or proxy measures, but is measured
 directly via the aggregation of employee KSAs. Be-
 sides being more consistent with the underlying
 theory of a strategic resource, direct measures of
 aggregate KSAs may offer additional benefits, such
 as better reliability and construct validity (Gerhart,

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1010 Academy of Management Journal October

 sales essentially controls for a store's prior perfor-
 2005; Wright & Haggerty, 2005). Further, measures
 of aggregate KSAs are likely necessary to study
 mance, it may have the effect of reducing the mag-
 human resource accumulation (e.g., Helfat & Pe-
 nitude of curvilinear changes, which would in turn
 reduce the size of relationships found with unit
 teraf, 2003), including changes to stocks and flows,
 because HR practices or proxy measures may not
 service orientation. Alternatively, it may be that for
 this criterion, changes in unit service orientation
 change over time. For example, although HR prac-
 do not produce accelerated sales beyond a straight
 tices may not change very often, the effects those
 linear relationship. Future research should exam-
 practices have on employee attitudes, cognitions,
 ine this possibility with other samples and
 and behaviors may be highly variable (Bowen &
 industries.
 Ostroff, 2004).

 Theoretical Implications

 Second, we demonstrated that changes in the
 flow of unit service orientation related to changes
 in unit effectiveness over time. Although many
 have suggested longitudinal research is necessary
 This study has broad theoretical implications for
 SHRM scholarship, resource-based theory, and cus-
 to advance SHRM scholarship (e.g., Gerhart, 2005;
 tomer-service scholarship. First, our study offers
 Wright et al., 2001), cross-sectional studies domi-
 several new directions for SHRM scholarship. As
 nate the empirical literature. This study is unique
 others before us (Bowen & Ostroff, 2004; Gerhart,
 in that it shows how the flow of unit service orien-
 2005; Wright & Haggerty, 2005), we believe it is
 tation contributes to changes to unit effectiveness
 important for SHRM to take a broader perspective
 over time (Dierickx & Cool, 1989). Thus, our empir-
 on human capital and consider other types mea-
 ical tests shed new light on some of the reasons
 sured via aggregation of employee KSAs. This view
 why human resources may be inimitable: the diffi-
 does not argue against the importance of traditional
 culty in creating a critical mass of high-quality em-
 conceptualizations of human capital, but supple-
 ployees occurs because of the difficulty in main-
 ments it. For example, Rouse and Daellenbach
 taining a consistent flow of quality unit service
 (2002) noted that macro scholars should "work
 orientation. Although building a high-quality stock
 backwards" from criteria and identify the specific
 is important, the key driver of unit effectiveness
 over time is the flow of human resources. Of course,
 types of resources likely to be important in a given
 we did not identify why unit service orientation
 context. Interestingly, such a perspective has long
 been held in micro HR, as Wallace (1965) noted
 changed in the first place. This change may result
 that predictors derive their importance from crite-
 from changes in the quality of the recruiting pool,
 ria. Micro HR scholarship recognizes many poten-
 the quality of hiring decisions (e.g., weighting of
 test and interview scores), or other factors we could
 tially important KSAs, such as motivation, person-
 ality, and more refined types of knowledge and
 not identify. Future research should examine how
 unit service orientation emerges by isolating the
 skill, than does traditional human capital research.
 effects of unit service orientation from these other
 Thus, we suggest an integration of micro and macro
 research to examine the manifestations and conse-
 potentially important determinants.
 quences of different types of human capital. One
 possibility is to link HR practices and policies,
 forms of human capital, and unit outcomes in a
 single study. For example, different practices
 should create different compositions of human cap-
 ital and hence differences in unit performance. Ex-
 amining human capital in this manner may contrib-
 ute to better measures of "intangible resources" and
 help illuminate the "black box" that plagues SHRM
 research (Becker & Huselid, 2006).

 Finally, we found that the relationship between

 the flow of unit service orientation and unit effec-
 tiveness was positive but decreasing over time and
 heterogeneous among units. Drawing on the re-
 source life cycle (Helfat & Peteraf, 2003) and prior
 customer-service research (e.g., Liao & Chuang,
 2004; Lovelock & Wirtz, 2004; Mattila, 2001;
 Schneider et al., 2007), we argued that units with
 flows of higher-quality unit service orientation will
 generate more new customers and more repeat cus-
 tomers, who will shop more frequently and pur-
 chase more on subsequent visits. This cycle creates
 a positive but decreasing relationship between unit
 service orientation and unit effectiveness, because
 sales are likely to accelerate to a tipping point, and
 then start to weaken (yet remain positive) (Reich-
 held & Sasser, 1990). Of course, we did not find
 significant heterogeneity for the squared term with
 the same-store-sales criterion. Because same store

 source-based theory. One key implication is that
 although accumulating a high-quality stock of hu-
 man resources is important for increasing unit ef-
 fectiveness, it is even more important to control the
 flow of talent (Barney & Wright, 1998; Wright et al.,
 2001). This finding provides some preliminary sup-
 port for recent theory predicting resources and ca-
 pabilities are dynamic, and perhaps even for the

 This study offers several new directions for re-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 1011

 idea that a resource cannot be a source of sustained
 competitive advantage without additional inputs
 (Helfat & Peteraf, 2003). That is, without continual
 reinvestment in or renewal of the resource, it will
 eventually cease to be a source of competitive ad-
 vantage. Recognizing the importance of resource
 flows requires future research to study how re-
 sources are created and evolve over time. For ex-
 ample, it becomes critical to understand which HR
 practices most influence flow in the quickest and
 most efficient manner. Understanding resource
 emergence is critical for testing resource-based the-
 ory in a prescriptive manner (Helfat & Peteraf,
 2003).

 The fact that unit service orientation manifests a

 positive but decreasing relationship with unit out-
 comes, and that this relationship is largely hetero-
 geneous among units, also stimulates many re-
 search questions. For example, if the flow of
 resources manifests nonlinear relationships with
 unit outcomes, then it becomes important to under-
 stand why the relationship is nonlinear, and
 whether other resources manifest similar nonlinear
 relationships. In our study, we expected positive
 but decreasing sales over time, because firms with
 higher-quality human resource flows produce more
 satisfied customers that shop more and spend more
 money (Lovelock & Wirtz, 2004; Reichheld &
 Sasser, 1990; Schneider et al., 2005). Obviously, the
 nonlinear function may differ across types of re-
 sources and contexts. For example, human re-
 sources may show weaker slopes in industries
 dominated by more tangible forms of capital (e.g.,
 manufacturing), but may show stronger slopes in
 industries where there is a more intimate relation-
 ship between service providers and customers (e.g.,
 law firms). Likewise, the lag between the time
 when the resource reaches a high-quality stock and
 the time when changes in unit effectiveness occur
 may be resource and context specific. Barney
 (1991) argued that strategic resources are context-
 specific and dependent on the unit's strategy,
 which helps explain the heterogeneity in unit ser-
 vice orientation- unit effectiveness relationships
 we observed. Integrating context and strategy with
 human resources could prove to be very interest-
 ing. For example, one may question whether the
 generalizable relationships found for KSA predic-
 tors of individual-level performance would be
 generalizable at the unit level. Similarly, future
 research should examine why there was heteroge-
 neity in the positive but decreasing unit service
 orientation-unit effectiveness relationship. Such
 heterogeneity may be caused by differences in
 units' strategies, their ability to leverage the capital
 or combine it with other resources, managerial

 practices, and related internal factors (e.g., Barney,
 1991). Indeed, managers who better recognize the
 strategic value of unit human capital are more
 likely to leverage it and hence extract more value
 more from it (Carmeli & Schaubroeck, 2005; Hitt et
 al., 2001). Alternatively, heterogeneity may be due
 to external reasons, such as a unit's reputation and
 brand equity, local competition, and similar con-
 textual factors.

 Finally, this study has implications for the cus-

 tomer service literature because most prior unit-
 level service research has focused on either shared
 employee attitudes and perceptions or manager
 competencies (see Schneider & White, 2004). Ne-
 glected in this literature is the actual aggregate
 competence of a service unit's workforce - a strik-
 ing area of neglect, considering that service em-
 ployees are core employees and fulfill key "bound-
 ary-spanning" roles (Batt, 2002). Research should
 now consider how aggregate service orientation,
 attitudes, climate, satisfaction, and sales are re-
 lated. For example, climates not supportive of ser-
 vice may nullify the positive potential of unit ser-
 vice orientation, because service behaviors are not
 perceived to be valued.

 Of course, not all human resources will be as

 volatile as those in the retail industry, and we
 would not expect human resources to always relate
 to unit effectiveness. For example, in industries
 that are less affected by human capital, such as
 agriculture and manufacturing, human resources
 may be more substitutable. The human capital-
 unit effectiveness relationship may also be stronger
 or weaker under different types of HR configura-
 tions (e.g., Bamberger & Meshulam, 2000) or differ-
 ent jobs. Similarly, retail firms could choose to use
 process-based strategies in an attempt to replace
 human capital (see Bamberger & Meshulam, 2000).
 We remind readers that enhancing human capital is
 not free. There are costs associated with acquiring
 and retaining human capital, and utility models are
 helpful for understanding these costs (Sturman,
 Trevor, Boudreau, & Gerhart, 2003).

 Managerial Implications

 Many in the retail industry are skeptical about
 the value of investing in frontline service employ-
 ees. The argument is that with high turnover and
 few apparent differences among applicants, HR
 should simply use the "cheapest way of getting
 warm bodies." Such is the "value challenge" facing
 HR more generally (Barney & Wright, 1998). The
 present study offers an empirical response to such
 criticism. First, it presents an alternative way to
 estimate unit service orientation's value to a firm

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1012 Academy of Management Journal October

 talent or customers) may have exerted influences in
 by demonstrating the relationships at the unit level,
 ways we could not assess.
 on which most managers focus, and by linking it to
 Second, although the stores used identical HR
 the kinds of criteria managers attend to and are
 practices, and managers were expected to imple-
 held accountable for (Ployhart, 2006). Notice that
 ment those practices identically, it may be possible
 this is not a replacement for utility analysis, but a
 that some managers did not implement the prac-
 supplement to it - perhaps even a way to explain it.
 tices appropriately. This of course relates back to
 Utility analysis is an attempt to estimate the dollar
 the distinction between HR policies as guiding
 value associated with individual employee compe-
 principles for a firm and HR practices that are ac-
 tencies. This estimate is important but can be chal-
 tually implemented on employees. However, it
 lenging to calculate or to convey to managers. The
 must be remembered that our study focused on
 approach adopted in this article offers an alterna-
 aggregate KSAs instead of manager self-reports.
 tive perspective that may help pinpoint the eco-
 nomic value of HR interventions. Indeed, it is ar-
 Much of the concern with using HR manager self-
 reports is that they can describe HR policies but not
 gued that the reason SHRM scholarship has been
 necessarily how HR practices are actually imple-
 impactful is precisely because it defines the level of
 mented (Arthur & Boyles, 2007; Gerhart, Wright, &
 analysis as the business unit, and the dependent
 McMahan, 2000). Our study directly examined ag-
 variables are usually financial (Gerhart, 2005).
 gregate KSAs, so any discrepancies between guid-
 ing HR policies and the practices actually admin-
 istered should contribute to more between-store
 variability in unit service orientation, as Bowen
 and Ostroff (2004) predicted. One might argue that
 directly studying employee KSAs is a potentially
 useful way to assess the consistency between HR
 policies and practices, as well as address other
 issues with self-reports (see Arthur & Boyles, 2007;
 Gerhart, 2005; Gerhart et al., 2000), although this is
 a question for future research.

 Thus, the practical implications of this study are
 much more than simply noting that unit service
 orientation is important. One key implication is
 that organizations should strive to develop and
 maintain a critical mass of high unit service orien-
 tation. Applying an HR practice from the "high-
 performance work system" bundle is not enough;
 managers must monitor and evaluate the practice's
 consequences at the unit level. Sustainable compet-
 itive advantage may come not from the use of a
 particular HR practice, but from management's
 ability to effectively apply the practice (in coordi-
 nation with relevant dynamic labor conditions) to
 accumulate and maintain a stock of talented em-
 ployees. As this study shows, considerable vari-
 ability can exist even within the same firm. Man-
 agers must realize it will take time for unit service
 orientation to emerge and produce unit-level
 effects.

 Third, we modeled unit service orientation for
 jobs of relatively low complexity, and within a
 service environment. Theoretically, one might pre-
 dict similar results in other industries and for other
 types of constructs (e.g., cognitive ability), but the
 fact remains that until such data are available, one
 should be cautious about generalizing our findings
 to different contexts, jobs, and KSAs. Fourth, we
 were only able to analyze the overall service-orien-
 tation composite. Because the organization did not
 use the subscales for selection, we were unable to
 examine whether these different KSAs might have
 had different relationships with store sales (e.g.,
 conscientiousness may have exhibited different re-
 lationships than agreeableness). However, please
 recognize that the service-orientation composite
 was assessed in a manner consistent with prior
 research, the items were chosen to measure the
 service-orientation composite, and the cut score
 was based on the composite. Fifth, we were not
 able to capture interview scores or identify whether
 interviewers considered the service-orientation
 scores when making hiring decisions (although all
 applicants had to participate in both assessments).
 That said, the key issue for the present study is
 demonstrating whether changes in unit service ori-
 entation relate to changes in unit effectiveness, so
 between-store variability in interviewer practices

 Limitations

 Such a large longitudinal field study offers sev-

 eral challenges, and our approach has limitations
 that should be addressed in future research. First,
 our study was conducted within a single industry
 and firm. Even with seven control variables, we
 cannot eliminate the possibility that some stores
 differed from others in ways we could not model.
 Relatedly, our use of stores that varied in naturally
 occurring ways (no extreme groups) and all used
 the same HR practices may have resulted in con-
 servative tests of our hypotheses, and we urge other
 researchers to replicate our study with different
 samples, industries, methods, and contexts. Doing
 so is particularly important, because unmeasured
 variables may account for some of our findings. For
 example, we had to use a rough measure of retail
 density, yet various forms of retail competition (for

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 1013

 Batt, R. 2002. Managing customer services: Human re-

 Barney, }. B. 2001. Is the resource-based "view" a useful
 perspective for strategic management research? Yes.
 Academy of Management Journal, 26: 41-56.

 Barney, J. B., & Wright, P. M. 1998. On becoming a
 strategic partner: The role of human resources in
 gaining competitive advantage. Human Resource
 Management, 37: 31-46.

 should only contribute to more between-store vari-
 ability in unit service orientation. Sixth, although
 the study was longitudinal, the data were only
 modeled over a three-quarter period. This period is
 longer than that used in most prior research, but it
 would be helpful to examine even longer time
 frames. Including the predictors in the quarter prior
 to the criterion strengthens inferences of causality,
 but stronger inferences of causality require longer
 periods of time. Future research should test differ-
 ent lags between unit resources and unit effective-
 ness using different types of resources, contexts,
 and data. Too long or too short a lag may obscure
 dynamic relationships. Studying issues relating to
 the duration and timing of unit resource effects
 would provide great precision in understanding
 how resources contribute to unit effectiveness and
 enhance knowledge of the resource life cycle (Hel-
 fat & Peteraf, 2003). Finally, we modeled employ-
 ees as being part of a unit's service orientation,
 even if they worked only a short period of time.
 Future research might benefit from finer-grained
 analysis of the relationship between length of em-
 ployment and human capital's consequences.

 Becker, G. S. 1964. Human capital: A theoretical and
 empirical analysis with special reference to edu-
 cation. New York: National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 A comparison of attitude, personality, and knowl-
 edge predictors of service-oriented organizational
 citizenship behaviors. Journal of Applied Psychol-
 ogy, 86: 29-41.

 source practices, quit rates, and sales growth. Acad-
 emy of Management Journal, 45: 587-597.

 resource management: Where do we go from here?
 Journal of Management, 32: 898-925.

 Becker, B. E., & Huselid, M. A. 2006. Strategic human

 Bliese, P. D. 2000. Within-group agreement, non-inde-

 Bettencourt, L. A., Gwinner, K. P., & Meuter, M. L. 2001.

 In conclusion, this study presents important ev-

 idence that unit service orientation can be a deter-
 minant of unit effectiveness. We believe a more
 direct focus on human capital operationalized as
 aggregate KSAs may connect micro and macro dis-
 ciplines and levels of scholarship. Human capital is
 critical to the effectiveness of business units, firms,
 and even nations. It is incumbent on scholars in all
 disciplines to better understand the creation and
 consequences of this vital resource.

 REFERENCES

 Aaronson, D., Barrow, L., & Sander, W. 2007. Teachers

 and student achievement in the Chicago public high
 schools. Journal of Labor Economics, 25: 95-135.

 Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. 1991. Multiple regression:
 Testing and interpreting interactions. Thousand
 Oaks, CA: Sage.

 Armstrong, C. E., & Shimizu, K. 2007. A review of ap-

 proaches to empirical research on the resource-based
 view of the firm. Journal of Management, 33: 959-
 986.

 Arthur, J. B., & Boyles, T. 2007. Validating the human
 resource system structure: A levels-based strategic
 HRM approach. Human Resource Management Re-
 view, 17: 77-92.

 pendence, and reliability: Implications for data ag-
 gregation and analysis. In K. J. Klein & S. W. J.
 Kozlowski, (Eds.), Multilevel theory, research, and
 methods in organizations: Foundations, exten-
 sions, and new directions: 349-381. San Francisco:
 Jossey-Bass.

 Bliese, P. D., & Ployhart, R. E. 2002. Growth modeling
 using random coefficient models: Model building,
 testing, and illustrations. Organizational Research
 Methods, 5: 363-388.

 Bowen, D. E., & Ostroff, C. 2004. Understanding HRM-
 firm performance linkages: The role of the "strength"
 of the HRM system. Academy of Management Re-
 view, 29: 203-221.

 Carmeli, A., & Schaubroeck, J. 2005. How leveraging
 human resource capital with its competitive distinc-
 tiveness enhances the performance of commercial
 and public organizations. Human Resource Man-
 agement, 44: 391-412.

 Delery, J. E., & Shaw, J. D. 2001. The strategic manage-
 ment of people in organizations: Review, synthesis,
 and extensions. In G. Ferris (Ed.), Research in per-
 sonnel and human resources management, vol. 20:
 165-198. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

 Dess, G. G., & Shaw, J. D. 2001. Voluntary turnover, social
 capital, and organizational performance. Academy
 of Management Review, 26: 446-456.

 Bamberger, P., & Meshulam, I. 2000. Human resource

 strategy. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

 Barney, J. B. 1991. Firm resources and sustained compet-
 itive advantage. Journal of Management, 17: 99-
 120.

 Dierickx, I., & Cool, K. 1989. Asset stock accumulation
 and sustainability of competitive advantage. Man-
 agement Science, 35: 1504-1511.

 Frei, R. L., & McDaniel, M. A. 1998. Validity of customer
 service measures in personnel selection: A review of

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 1014 Academy of Management Journal October

 and forecasting tools. Journal of Social, Political,
 criterion and construct evidence. Human Perfor-
 mance, 11(1): 1-27.
 and Economic Studies, 8(2): 131-160.

 Gerhart, B. 2005. Human resources and business perfor-
 mance: Findings, unanswered questions, and an al-
 ternative approach. Management Revue, 16(2):
 174-185.

 Liao, H., & Chuang, A. 2004. A multilevel investigation of
 factors influencing employee service performance
 and customer outcomes. Academy of Management
 Journal, 47: 41-58.

 Gerhart, B., Wright, P. M., McMahan, G. C. 2000. Mea-

 Lopez-Cabrales, A., Valle, R. N., & Herrero, I. 2006. The

 surement error in research on the human resources
 and firm performance relationship: Further evidence
 and analysis. Personnel Psychology, 53: 855-872.

 Gerhart, B., Wright, P. M., McMahan, G. C., & Snell, S. A.

 2000. Measurement error in research on human re-
 sources and firm performance: How much error is
 there and how does it influence effect size estimates?
 Personnel Psychology, 53: 803-834.

 Gwinner, K. P., Bitner, M. J., Brown, S. W., & Kumar, A.

 2005. Service customization through employee
 adaptiveness. Journal of Service Research, 8: 131-
 148.

 Helfat, C. E., & Peteraf, M. A. 2003. The dynamic re-
 source-based view: Capability lifecycles. Strategic
 Management Journal, 24: 997-1010.

 Hitt, M. A., Bierman, L., Shimizu, K., & Kochhar, R. 2001.

 Direct and moderating effects of human capital on
 strategy and performance in professional service
 firms: A resource-based perspective. Academy of
 Management Journal, 44: 13-28.

 contribution of core employees to organizational ca-
 pabilities and efficiency. Human Resource Manage-
 ment, 45: 81-109.

 Lovelock, C, & Wirtz, J. 2004. Services marketing: Peo-

 ple, technology, strategy (5th ed.). Upper Saddle
 River, NT: Prentice-Hall.

 Mattila, A. S. 2001. The impact of relationship type on
 customer loyalty in a context of service failures.
 Journal of Service Research, 4: 91-101.

 McDaniel, M. A., Morgeson, F. P., Finnegan, E. B., Cam-
 pion, M. A., & Braverman, E. P. 2001. Use of situa-
 tional judgment tests to predict job performance: A
 clarification of the literature. Journal of Applied
 Psychology, 86: 730-740.

 Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. 1994. The commitment-trust
 theory of relationship marketing. Journal of Market-
 ing, 58(3): 20-38.

 Nunnally, J., & Bernstein, I. 1994. Psychometric theory

 (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill.

 Hogan, J., Hogan, R., & Busch, C. M. 1984. How to mea-
 sure service orientation. Journal of Applied Psy-
 chology, 69: 167-173.

 Osterman, P. 1994. How common is workplace transfor-
 mation and who adopts it? Industrial and Labor
 Relations Review, 47: 173-188.

 Hough, L. M., & Schneider, R. J. 1996. Personality traits,
 taxonomies, and applications in organizations. In
 K. R. Murphy (Ed.), Individual differences and be-
 havior in organizations: 3-30. San Francisco:
 Jossey-Bass.

 Huselid, M. A. 1995. The impact of human resource
 management practices on turnover, productivity,
 and corporate financial performance. Academy of
 Management Journal, 38: 635-672.

 Kacmar, K. M., Andrews, M. C., Rooy, D. L. V., Steilberg,
 R. C, & Cerone, S. 2006. Sure everyone can be re-
 placed . . . but at what cost? Turnover as a predictor
 of unit-level performance. Academy of Manage-
 ment Journal, 49: 133-144.

 Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Klein, K. J. 2000. A multilevel
 approach to theory and research in organizations:
 Contextual, temporal, and emergent processes. In
 K. J. Klein & S. W. J. Kozlowski (Eds.), Multilevel
 theory, research, and methods in organizations:
 Foundations, extensions, and new directions: 3-90.
 San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Paajanen, G. E., Hansen, T. L., & McLellan, R. A. 1993.
 PDI employment inventory and PDI customer ser-
 vice inventory manual Minneapolis: Personnel De-
 cisions Inc.

 Ployhart, R. E. 2006. Staffing in the 21st century. Journal

 of Management, 32: 868-897.

 Ployhart, R. E., Weekley, J. A., & Baughman, K. 2006. The
 structure and function of human capital emergence:
 A multilevel examination of the ASA model. Acad-
 emy of Management Journal, 49: 661-677.

 Prahalad, C. K., & Hamel, G. 1990. The core competence
 of the corporation. Harvard Rusiness Review, 68(3):
 79-91.

 Reichheld, F. F., & Sasser, W. E. 1990. Zero defections:

 quality comes to services. Harvard Rusiness Re-
 view, 65(5): 105-111.

 Rogosa, D. R. 1995. Myths and methods: "Myths about

 longitudinal research" plus supplemental questions.
 In J. M. Gottman (Ed.), The analysis of change:
 3-66. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

 Lepak, D. P., & Snell, S. A. 1999. The human resource
 architecture: Toward a theory of human capital allo-
 cation and development. Academy of Management
 Review, 24: 34-48.

 Rouse, M. J., & Daellenbach, U. S. 2002. More thinking
 about research methods for the resource-based per-
 spective. Strategic Management Journal, 23: 963-
 967.

 Lerner, B. 1983. Test scores as measures of human capital

 Rovine, M. }., & von Eye, A. 1991. Applied computa-

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 2009 Ployhart, Weekley, and Ramsey 1015

 tional statistics in longitudinal research. Cam-
 bridge, MA: Academic Press.

 Wallace, S. R. 1965. Criteria for what? American Psy-

 chologist, 20: 411-417.

 Ryan, A. M, & Ployhart, R. E. 2003. Customer service

 Wright, P. M., Dunford, B. D., & Snell, S. A. 2001. Human

 behavior. In R. J. Klimoski, W. C. Borman, & D. R.
 Ilgen (Eds.), Handbook of psychology, vol. 12: 377-
 397. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

 resources and the resource based view of the firm.
 Journal of Management, 27: 701-721.

 Sacco, J. M., & Schmitt, N. 2005. A dynamic multilevel

 model of demographic diversity and misfit effects.
 Journal of Applied Psychology, 90: 203-231.

 Wright, P. M., Gardner, T. M., Moynihan, L. M., & Allen,
 M. R. 2005. The relationship between HR practices
 and firm performance: Examining causal order. Per-
 sonnel Psychology, 58: 409-446.

 Salvaggio, A. N., Schneider, B., Nishii, L. H., Mayer,

 Wright, P. M., & Haggerty, J. J. 2005. Missing variables in

 D. M., Ramesh, A., & Lyon, J. S. 2007. Manager
 theories of strategic human resource management:
 personality, manager service quality orientation, and
 Time, cause, and individuals. Management Revue,
 service climate: Test of a model. Journal of Applied
 16: 164-173.
 Psychology, 92: 1741-1750.

 Schneider, B., & Bowen, D. E. 1995. Winning the service

 Xu, R. 2003. Measuring explained variation in linear

 mixed effects models. Statistics in Medicine, 22:
 3527-3541.

 game. Boston: HBS.

 Schneider, B., Ehrhart, M. G., Mayer, D. M., Saltz, J. L.,

 & Niles-Jolly, K. 2005. Understanding organization-
 customer links in service settings. Academy of Man-
 agement Journal, 48: 1017-1032.

 Schneider, B., Smith, D. B., Taylor, S., & Fleenor, J. 1998.

 Personality and organizations: A test of the homoge-
 neity of personality hypothesis. Journal of Applied
 Psychology, 83: 462-470.

 Robert E. Ployhart (ployhart@moore.sc.edu) is an associ-
 ate professor and Moore Research Fellow in the manage-
 ment department at the Moore School of Business, Uni-
 versity of South Carolina. He received his Ph.D. from
 Michigan State University. His primary interests include
 staffing, recruitment, multilevel modeling, and advanced
 statistical methods.

 search perspectives. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

 Schneider, B., & White, S. 2004. Service quality: Re-

 Singer, J. D., & Willett, J. B. 2003. Applied longitudinal

 data analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.

 Sturman, M. C, Trevor, C. O., Boudreau, J. W., & Gerhart,

 B. 2003. Is it worth it to win the talent war? Evalu-
 ating the utility of performance-based pay. Person-
 nel Psychology, 56: 997-1035.

 Strober, M. H. 1990. Human capital theory: Implications
 for HR managers. Industrial Relations, 23: 214-239.

 Sweetland, S. R. 1996. Human capital theory: Founda-
 tions of a field of inquiry. Journal of Educational
 Research, 66: 341-359.

 Takeuchi, R., Lepak, D. P., Heli, W., & Takeuchi, K. 2007.
 An empirical examination of the mechanisms medi-
 ating between high-performance work systems and
 the performance of Japanese organizations. Journal
 of Applied Psychology, 92: 1069-1083.

 Jeff A. Weekley (jeff.weekley@kenexa.com) is a principal
 with Kenexa, a human capital management consulting
 firm. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Texas-
 Dallas. His primary research interests are in selection, job
 analysis, and performance management.

 Jase Ramsey (jaseramsey@gmail.com) is an assistant pro-
 fessor of organizational behavior and international busi-
 ness at the Fundação Dom Cabral in Brazil, where he is
 the coordinator of the International Business Center. He
 received his Ph.D. from the University of South Carolina.
 His research interests broadly focus on internationaliza-
 tion, strategic human resource management, interna-
 tional human capital, and travel stress.

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Wed, 01 Feb 2017 19:54:08 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

