Organizational Effectiveness  and
Managements  Public Values:
A  Canonical Analysis

BERNARD  C.  REIMANN
University of Pennsylvania

Canonical  correlation  analysis  of  manufacturing  firm
data  demonstrated 
that  organizational  "competence"
(executive  ratings of  organizational  performance  and  ex-
ecutive  turnover)  was  not  strongly  related  to  situational
variables like organization size, structure,  and  technology.
Instead,  "competence"  was related  primarily  to  manage-
ment's  values  regarding  the  firm's  publics,  such  as  cus-
tomers,  suppliers,  employees,  and  government.

What  makes  some  organizations  so  much  more  effective  than  others?
While this  certainly  is one  of  the  most  important  questions  in  organization
research  today,  the literature  thus far  has  provided  few  consistent  answers.
The  controversy  appears  to  revolve  around  two  related  issues—first,  what
criteria  are to be  used in assessing organizational  effectiveness  and,  second,
what  factors  in  the  organization's  setting  are  likely  to  influence  this  effec-
tiveness.

This  paper  introduces  a  conceptualization  of  effectiveness—organiza-
tional competence—which  is not tied to the accomplishment of specific goals
and  may,  therefore,  be  superior  to  many  earlier  constructs  in  providing
some  comparability  between  different  organizations  as  well  as  different
field studies. A new predictor variable also is introduced,  one which  has  not
received  the  attention  it  deserves  in  organizational  research—that  of  man-
agement's  values  with  respect  to  the  organization's  relevant  publics.  The
relationships  between  organizational  competence  as  the  criterion  variable
and  management  public  values,  along  with  traditional  variables  such  as
size,  technology,  dependence,  and  structure,  as  predictor  variables,  are
examined  in a field study.

Bernard  C,  Reimann  (D,B,A,—Kent  State  University)  is  Assistant  Professor  of  Manage-

ment,  Wharton  School,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania.

224


'^''^ 

Volume  18, Number  2 

225

ORGANIZATIONAL  EFFECTIVENESS

The  concept  of  organizational  effectiveness  is  among  the  most  elusive
and controversial in the organization  theory literature. A major  contributor
to  the  controversy  appears  to  be  the  fact  that  organizational  effectiveness
has come to be regarded by many as synonymous with goal attainment  (11).
The  effort  by  Price  (24)  to  distill  some  propositions  about  organizationai
effectiveness  from  50 or so empirical studies illustrates the popularity of  this
goal  model.  The  indicators  of  effectiveness  summarized  by  Price  all  could
be  interpreted  in  terms  of  the  accomplishments  of  goals  such  as  high
productivity,  morale,  conformity,  adaptiveness,  and  institutionalization.

However, most organizations  generally  are seeking  to  accomplish  several
different  goals  at  the  same  time,  and  the  accomplishment  of  one  of  these
goals  often  may  inhibit  the  realization  of  another.  For  example,  high  pro-
ductivity  may  well be  achieved  at  the  expense  of  high  employee  morale  or
low environmental pollution. Therefore,  the goal model of effectivness  raises
the  possibility  that  an  organization  really  cannot  be  effective  if  it  means
attainment  of  all or  even most  of  its goals.

A  further  difficulty  with  the  goal  model  is  that  it  has  limited  use  for
comparing  the  relative  effectiveness  of  different  organizations,  since  their
salient  goals  may  differ  substantially.  This  may  be  true  even  for  organiza-
tions  which  seem  to  have  similar  goals,  such  as  business  firms,  some  of
which, for example, may emphasize profit  or sales growth more than  others.
Perrow  (22)  makes a useful  distinction between  an organization's  "official"
and  "operative"  goals.  Operative  goals  indicate  what  the  organization  is
really  trying  to  accomplish,  as  opposed  to  its  officially  stated  aims.  Any
assessment  of  the  organization's  effectiveness  must  focus  on  its  operative
goals. Assuming that  operative goals can be identified  (which  may be  quite
difficult),  they  will  tend  to  be  unique  to  a  given  organization.  This,  of
course,  would  make  the  comparison  of  the  effectiveness  of  a  number  of
complex  organizations  practically  impossible.

Yuchtman  and Seashore attempt to deal with this problem by  abandoning
the  goal  model  of  organizational  effectiveness  in  favor  of  a  "system-re-
sources" approach. Organizational  effectiveness  is seen as the "ability of  the
organization,  in either relative or  absolute  terms, to exploit  its  environment
in  the  acquisition  of  scarce  and  valued  resources"  (34,  p.  898).  An  appli-
cation of  this approach  to a study of  75 insurance sales  agencies yielded  10
factors  of  organizational  effectiveness  related  to  resource  procurement
(29).  Several  of  these  factors  were  specific  to  the  types  of  organizations
examined  or  to  the  stage  in  their  cycle  of  development.  Thus  this  systems-
resources  approach  still does not  appear  to solve one major  problem  of  the
goal  model—that  effectiveness  must  be  evaluated  according  to  the  type of
organization  being  studied.

As  Georgiou  points  out,  the  "commitment  to  a  goal  paradigm"  may
actually  have  retarded,  rather  than  aided,  organizational  analysis.  He
proposes  a  "counter-paradigm,"  based  on  Barnard's  (2)  work,  which


226 

Academy  of  Management  Journal 

June

would  focus  on  the  individual  participants  in  the  organization  who  are
"exchanging  a variety  of incentives  and  pursuing  a diversity  of  goals"  (13,
p.  291).  In  this model  an organization's  effectiveness  is considered  to  be  a
function  of  its  ability  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  its  members  by  providing  in-
centives which exceed  (or are perceived  to exceed)  their  contributions.

On  the  other  hand,  some  proponents  of  the  goal  model  might  still  say
that the satisfaction  of member  needs would  simply be one  of  the  organiza-
tion's  multiple  goals.  Friedlander  and  Pickle  (12,  p.  298),  for  example,
suggest that effectiveness  measures "must  take into  account  the  profitability
of  ttie  organization,  the  degree  to  which  it  satisfices  its  members,  and  the
degree to which it is of value to the larger society of which it is a part."

The Concept of Competence

Actually,  the concept of  organizational  effectiveness  is difficult  to  define,
and even more difficult  to operationalize, without reference to organizational
goals.  The  framework  which  Georgiou  (13)  provides  is  not  really  appro-
priate  as  a  gauge  of  effectiveness  per  se  but,  rather,  as  an  index  of  an
organization's  "propensity"  to  be  effective.  That  is,  when  an  organization
satisfices  its various  participants  by  providing  incentives  which  are  seen  to
exceed  their  contributions,  it  establishes  the  base  for  effective  accomplish-
ment  of  its  goals—whatever  these  may  be.  To  avoid  confusion  with  the
concept of effectiveness,  the organization's  ability to satisfice its participants
might be called organizational competence. Where actual effectiveness  is the
degree  to  which  the  organization  attains  its  goals,  organizational  com-
petence is its propensity  or potential for  reaching its various goals.

Since it is not  tied  to  specific  goals, this  concept  of  organizational  com-
petence,  or  propensity  to  be  effective,  seems  to  offer  some  significant  ad-
vantages over goal-oriented effectiveness  measures. The relative  competence
of  different  organizations  can  easily  be  compared,  for  example,  while  any
evaluation  of  their  relative  effectiveness  in  reaching  different  sets  of  goals
would present major  problems. Moreover,  the relative weight to be  assigned
to the various goals  (such  as high profits,  sales growth, product quality,  em-
ployee morale,  etc.)  is no  longer  important,  since  the  focus  is  only  on  the
organization's  potential  for  achieving  any  (or  even  all)  of  these  various
goals.

Predictors of  Effectiveness

As mentioned  above, there is little  consistent  agreement  in the  literature
with  regard  to  the  factors  which  predict  high  or  low  effectiveness  for  an
organization.  Again,  the  use of  the goal model  may have a great  deal to  do
with  this controversy.  Different  factors  are likely  to  predict  effectiveness  in
achieving  goals  such  as high  employee  morale  or  low  turnover  from  those
predicting accomplishment of goals such as high productivity or sales growth.
Nevertheless,  although  different  studies  have  yielded  different  individual
predictors,  some  agreement  seems  to  have  emerged  that  certain  factors


'^^^ 

Volume  18. Number  2 

227

Which  define  the  organization's  setting  or  environment,  and  its  internal
struc  ure,  should  be  considered  as  potential  contributors  to  (or  detractors
trom)  orgamzational  effectiveness.  For example. Price  (24)  and Hall  (17)
have  recently  summarized  a  number  of  empirical  studies  suggesting  that
organizational  performance  may  depend  on  such  structural  and  situational
factors  as the degree  of  specialization  (or  division  of  labor),  formalization
ot rules, the degree of  autonomy  (or decentralization),  and  the type of pro-
duction  technology.

Management Vaiues

It is logical, of  course, to expect  an organization's  structure  and  situation
to  have  an  impact  on  its  performance,  or  on  its  potential  for  performing
well.  However,  it  also  seems  reasonable  to  expect  the  actions  of  manage-
ment,  based  on  its  perceptions  of  situational  and  structural  constraints  to
have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  organization's  chances  for  success  For
example. Chandler's  (6)  longitudinal study of large scale American business
enterprises  suggests  that  organizational  performance  may  be  strongly
influenced  by  the  strategic  choices  made  by  top  executives.  Child  (7)
points  out  that  the  most  infiuential  models  of  organization  seem  to  ignore
the  potential  impact  of  the  "agency  of  choice"  by  the  organization's  top
decision  makers.  He  feels  that  this  strategic  choice  influences  decisions  re-
garding orgamzation structures, the manipulation of environmental  features
and the selection of relevant performance  standards  (or goals).

This  strategic  choice  variable  would  be  difficult  to  operationalize  in
the  context  of  a  cross-sectional  study;  however,  a  major  related  factor
influencing  managerial  decision  making  can  be  measured.  Guth  and
Tagiun  (15)  show that top executives' value systems may play a major  role
in the cntical choices they make and may, therefore,  have a strong  inffuence
on  their  orgamzation's  perfonnance.  Steiner  also  suggests  that  a  business
hrm  has  a  "umque  value  system" which  "constitutes  the  fundamental  driv-
ing force in each business and may be more important  in its success than its
matenal  assets"  (31, pp.  121-122).  Of particular  importance  would be  the
business  executives'  values  with  respect  to  the  publics  with  whom  their
orgamzation  must  deal.  Likert,  for  example,  suggests  that  an  important
vanable determining the course of developments in a business organization is
Its management's philosophy, policy, and values with respect to employees,
customers, the public, unions, suppliers, and  others"  (19, p. 212).

Negandhi  and  Prasad  provide  one  of  the  earliest  attempts  to  examine
empincally  the  relationship  between  the  public  values  of  an  organization's
executives  and  its structure  and  performance.  They  define  the  firm's  "man-
agement  philosophy"  as  the  "implied  and  expressed  attitudes  of  the  man-
agers  toward  consumers,  employees,  stockholders,  suppliers,  distributors
government,  and community"  (20, p. 21). In a study of  30 Indian  business
finns,  Negandhi  and  Prasad  measured  management  philosophy  on  the
basis of extensive interviews with middle to top level executives in each firm.


228 

Academy  of  Management Journal 

June

A  given  executive's  philosophy  score  was  a  weighted  average  of  his  ex-
pressed  attitudes toward  the seven agents, or publics, of  his firm. The  firm's
management  philosophy  score  was  the  arithmetic  average  of  the  scores  of
its executives  (20).

Negandhi  and  Prasad  found  that  their  management  philosophy  variable
was very strongly associated  with  a number  of  organizational  variables.  For
example, the more positive or "progressive" their management  philosophies,
the  more  decentralized  and  the  more  effective  (in  both  financial  and  be-
havioral terms)  the firms appeared  to be  (20).  Negandhi  and  Prasad  inter-
preted  their  finding  as  suggesting  that  a  progressive  management  attitude
toward  its important  publics  or  "task  environmental  agents" is  more  likely
to result in high organizational effectiveness  than is a nonprogressive  attitude
(or  a  low  score  on  management  philosophy),  at  least  in  the  context  of  a
developing  country.

A  cross-sectional  study like Negandhi  and Prasad's  (and  the bulk  of  the
other research on predictors of organizational effectiveness)  cannot establish
the direction of causality. However,  a recent longitudinal  study of  16 health
and  welfare  agencies  by  Hage  and  Dewar  (16),  provides  evidence  sup-
porting  Negandhi  and  Prasad's  causal  interpretations.  Hage  and  Dewar
measured  the  values  of  high  ranking  or  elite  members  of  the  organization,
along with  structural  variables similar  to the ones used  in  the present  study
—complexity  (similar  to  specialization),  centralization,  and  formalization.
They report  that elite values were the best predictors  of  organizational  per-
formance  in  terms  of  the  number  of  new  programs  introduced  over  the
following  three years. A major  conclusion of their research is that the values
of  an  organization's  elite inner  circle  may  "largely,  though  not  completely,
determine organizational  policy"  (16, pp. 287-288).

THE  STUDY

The  research  summarized  above  suggests  that  managerial  values  with
respect to the organization's publics may be an important,  though  neglected,
variable  for  predicting  the  organization's  potential  effectiveness.  The  field
study  reported  here was designed  to  establish  the  importance  of  the  public
values  variable  in  relation  to  more  traditional  structural  and  situational
predictors  of  organizational  performance.

Sampie and Metiiod

The sample for  this study  consisted  of  19 American  manufacturers  rang-
ing in size from  about  200  to  4,000  employees  and  competing  in  a  variety
of  industries.  Data  on  organization  structure,  effectiveness,  and  situational
variables were gathered from interviews with the top level executives in each
organization  (4  to  10  executives,  depending  on  the  size  of  the  firm)  and
by  consulting  available  company  documents  such  as  organization  charts,
standard  operating  procedures,  and  policy  manuals.  The  public  values


^ ^^ 

Volume  18, Number  2 

229

scores  were  obtained  by  means  of  a  semantic  differential  questionnaire
admmistered  to  these  top  level  executives.  The  operationalization  of  all
variables  is described  below.

Organizationai Competence

The dependent variable of organizational  competence was  conceptualized
as the degree of  satisfaction  of  the members  with  the  way  the  organization
accomplishes  a  wide  variety  of  goals—financial  as  well  as  social—in
companson  with  other  organizations  they  might  have  joined.  The  partici-
pants whose satisfaction  would  be most relevant  here  would  be  the  organi-
zation's  elite,  or  its  high-ranking  executives,  who  typically  are  the  most
mobile  members  of  the  organization  since they  are  most  likely  to  leave  the
orgamzation  in  search  of  better  opportunities  if  not  satisfied.  These  execu-
tives'  mobility,  as  well  as  their  active  role  in  goal-setting,  puts  them  in  an
excellent  position  to  judge  their  organization's  performance  in  relation  to
Its peers.

Two indicators  of  executives'  satisfaction  with  their  organizations'  effec-
tiveness were used in this study:  (a)  executive  turnover,  and  (b)  executive
ratings of their firms' performance.

1.  Executive  turnover  was determined  by  asking  all  top  level  executives
how  many  of  their  group  had  left  the  firm  voluntarily  over  the  past  two
years.  Their  answers  were  corroborated  whenever  possible  by  consulting
personnel  records.  Differences  in  answers  between  executives  were  recon-
ciled and the number expressed  as an annual percentage of the total  number
of  executives considered  in  calculating  the  turnover  rate.  These  differences
generally were due to memory lapses on the part  of  one or more executives,
or an occasional  misunderstanding  about the size of the group of  executives
included.  This  group  was  defined  by  the  researcher  to  include  all  of  the
organization's  key executives,  and  it  could  encompass  the  top  two  or  three
levels  of  management  and  anywhere  from  12  to  40  executives,  depending
on the organization's size and structural makeup.  (The turnover rate actually
varied  from  0 to  11 percent,  with  eight firms having  experienced  no  execu-
tive  turnover  at  all.)

2.  Performance  rating by the  group  of  top  executives  was  an  attempt  to
assess executive perceptions of their organization's  success in  accomplishing
a  number  of  relevant  business  goals.  Executives  were  asked  to  rate  their
firm's performance  relative  to  competitors,  on  a  scale  of  0  to  100  percent,
on the following  eight goals:

(a)  Profit  growth  in  the last five years
(b)  Sales  growth  in  the  last five years
(c)  Attraction and retention of high quality manpower
(d)  Product  quality
(e)  Customer  service
(f)  Employee  job  satisfaction  and  morale


230 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June

(g)  Potential  for  growth
(h)  Competitive  strength

These  eight  goals  were  not  intended  to  be  exhaustive,  but  simply  repre-
sentative of  a variety of  goals likely to be important  to business firms. Most
of the  140 executives interviewed  in the study indicated  that they felt this to
be a fairly  good  and comprehensive  list of  goals.

The  internal  consistency  of  the  executive  ratings  of  the  eight  goals  was
relatively good  (Kendall's coefficient  of concordance was  0.385—significant
beyond  the  .001  level);  therefore,  all  eight  scores  were  combined  (aver-
aged)  to yield  a single rating for  each executive. To  obtain  an overall  score
for  each  firm,  the  ratings  of  its  group  of  executives  (which  generally  were
fairly  close to one another)  were  averaged.

Sitnationai Variabies

A  great  many  factors  in  the  organization's  situation  may  affect  its  per-
formance,  and  any comparative  study with  a small sample  of  organizations
can  focus  on  only  a few.  Among  the  situational  variables  most  commonly
identified  as  important  to  organizations  are  size,  dependence,  and  tech-
nology.  The  Aston  group  (25),  for  example,  found  all  three  of  these
variables  to  be related  to  various  aspects  of  organization  structure.  Wood-
ward  (33)  found  that  the  type  of  structure  chosen  by  organizations  with
various process technologies from  unit to mass to continuous production was
related  to  their  performance.  A  similar  finding  is  reported  by  Bums  and
Stalker  (5)  with  respect  to  the  degree  of  change  in  the  organization's
technological  and  market  environment.

In  this  study  three  situational  variables  were  operationalized  as  follows:
1.  Organization  size was the  total  number  of  full  time  employees  of  the
organizational  unit.  The  logarithm  of  this  number  was  used  to  make  the
distribution  more  nearly  normal.

2.  Dependence  of  the  organization  on  other,  higher  authority,  organi-
zations was assessed by means of the Aston group's abbreviated scales  (18).
These  scales  take  into  consideration  (a)  the  impersonality  of  origin  (i.e.,
was  the  firm  founded  by  a  person  or  by  a  corporation),  (b)  its  status
(branch  plant,  headquarters,  etc.),  (c)  the  public  accountability  of  the
ultimate  owners  (i.e., to government  or  shareholders),  and  (d)  the  size of
the  organizational  unit  relative  to  the  total  or  parent  organization.  Scores
vary from two points  (relatively independent)  to six  (relatively  dependent).
3.  Technical  change  was the  average  rate  of  change  in  the  productivity
of  the  organization  over  the  previous  12  years.  This  measure  was  used  by
Pfeffer  and Leblebici  (23)  as an index of technical change. It is also similar
to  Bums  and  Stalker's  (5)  rate  of  technological  innovation.  This  measure
was used, rather than Woodward's  (33), since it was virtually  impossible  to
apply her classification  to the process technologies of the firms in this study.
Most used  a mixture of  unit,  mass, or  continuous  process  manufacture  and


Volume  18. Number  2 

231

could  not  be  classified  in  any  single  category.  Furthermore,  the  rate  of
techmcal  change  provided  a  continuous  variable  which  could  be  readily
determined  once the firm's major  product  lines had  been  identified

Rates  of  productivity  change  for  1958-1969  are  avaUable  by  four-digit
S.I.C.  classification  (4,  30).  Each  firm's  score  on  technical  change  was  an
unweighted average of the rates of productivity change of the S.I.C.  industry
classification(s)  of its major  product  line(s).

Structurai Variabies

Organization  structure  was  measured  along  three  basic  dimensions  iso-

r)T\  ^^J.^^'f^^'^^^^^^ of factor  and cluster  analyses of  11 structural  scales
U 0^ 
scales  were  as  follows: 

ifte  three  dimensions  of  bureaucratic  structure  and  their  defining
*
1.  The  Centralization  dimension  was  based  on  the  following  two  meas-

ures:

(a)  Delegation  of  authority  was  the  percentage  of  decisions  the  chief
executive  of  the organization  delegated  to  his subordinates.  Each  executive
was  asked  which  decisions,  from  a  specific  list  of  23  typical  management
decisions, he had authority to make. Then he was asked to indicate which of
these  decisions  he  delegated  to  his  subordinates.  Most  of  his  immediate
subordinates similarly were questioned  to corroborate his answers
n  ^^\  J^^  Cen/rafea//on  index,  based  on  the  work  of  Negandhi  and
Prasad  (20), was a function  of  (a)  the locus of decision making with respect
. uf  ^f 7"^*  'P^'^'^'^ functional  (i.e., marketing,  production,  etc.)  policies;
(b)  the degree of information  sharing between levels; and  (c)  the degree of
participation  in long range  planning.

The  score on  the  centralization  dimension  was  the  average  of  the  firms'
rankings on the two measures  described  above.  (The  delegation  ranks  were
reversed.)

2.  The  Specialization  dimension  was  defined  by  the  following  three

(inclusive). 

(a)  Number  of  levels  in  the  hierarchy  from  the  bottom  to  the  too
^
(b)  Functional  specialization  was  the  number  of  specialties,  from  a
specific hst, which were performed  by at least one specialist. The list included
17  functions  such  as  advertising,  market  research,  employee  training  and
development,  quality  control,  maintenance,  and  transportation.  Each  func-
tion represented was awarded one point, so that the organization's  maximum
score  was  seventeen  points.

(c)  Professionalization  was  the  degree  to  which  highly  specialized  re-
quirements were spelled out in formal job descriptions for various  functions
1 his  was  intended  as  an  indicator  of  the  degree  of  technical  competence
required  for  employee  selection.  The  score  on  professionalization  was  the
proportion  of  the  organization's  individual  jobs  for  which  a  formal  job
requirement  specified  at  least  four  years  of  training.


232 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

June

The  specialization  score  was  the  average  of  the  rankings  on  the  above

three  scales.

3.  The Formalization  dimension was a combination  of  the following  two

measures:

(a)  The  formalization  of  role definition  was  a function  of  the  extent  to
which the employee's role was defined  by various formal  documents, such  as
information  booklets, organization  charts, job descriptions, policy  manuals,
and the like.

(b)  Lack  of  autonomy  was  a measure  of  the degree  to  which  top  man-
agement had  to refer  certain  typical  decisions to  a higher  level of  authority
outside  the organization.  The  list  of  typical  decisions  was  the  same  as  that
used for  the delegation  of  authority  measure.

The score for the formalization  dimension was the average of the rankings
on the above two scales. Increasing  scores for  centralization,  specialization,
or formalization  indicated increasing degrees of bureaucratic structure  along
these  three  dimensions.  Details  on  the  above  structural  measures  can  be
found  in Reimann  (26).

Management's Public Values

A questionnaire based on Osgood's  (21)  Semantic Differential  (SD)  was
used to assess executive's public values. England  (10)  has demonstrated  that
the  personal  value systems of  managers  can be  effectively  measured  by  the
SD technique. Moreover,  a paper  and  pencil  questionnaire  like  the SD was
expected  to  be  considerably  more  reliable  than  the  interview  technique
employed  by  Negandhi  and  Prasad  (20)  to  measure  the  values,  or  phil-
osophies, of  their  Indian  managers.

Several pretests with business executives, as well as college students, were
made  in  the  development  of  the  Public  Values  Questionnaire  used  in  this
study. The details of these pretests have been published elsewhere  (28)  and
essentially  confirmed  Osgood's  (21)  claims  for  the  reliability  and  (face)
validity  of  the  SD  technique.

Managers were asked to rate each of  the nine publics and seven  reference
concepts  on  ten  bipolar  adjectives.  The  publics  chosen  as  being  the  most
vital to the modern American business firm were:  (a)  the national  govern-
ment,  (b)  the  supplier,  (c)  the  consumer,  (d)  the  community,  (e)  the
stockholder,  (f)  the  creditor,  and  (g)  the  employee.  The  competitor  and
labor  union  also  were  on  the  questionnaire,  but  the  value  scores  for  these
publics  were  either  negatively  or  very  weakly  related  to  those  of  the  other
seven publics  and  therefore  were excluded  from  this  study.  (Negandhi  and
Prasad  (20)  did not include these two publics either.)  Also some  reference
concepts such as "friend"  and "enemy" were included  to check for  response
bias in this study.

Five of the ten bipolar adjective  scales measured the evaluative dimension
of  meaning  (e.g.,  friendly-unfriendly),  and  the  other  five  measured  the
dynamism dimension  (e.g., fast-slow  or strong-weak). The evaluative  scales


Volume  IS,  Number  2 

233

provided  an  index  of  the  attitudes  of  respondents  toward  the  stimulus  con-
cepts. The dynamism scales, on the other hand, were indicative of  the extent
to which a given stimulus concept was perceived  as being dynamic, or  force-
ful  and  quick  (21).

The scores on each of the two dimensions of each manager's public values
(evaluation  and  dynamism)  were  obtained  by  summing  the  values  of  the
appropriate  five  bipolar  adjective  scales.  The  numerical  scale  values
varied from  one point  for  the most negative end of  the scale to  seven points
for  the most positive end.  The public value scores on either  dimension  have
a maximum possible range of  from five points  (most  negative)  to  thirty-five
points  (most  positive).

A.S has been demonstrated elsewhere  (27), the SD questionnaire was able
to differentiate  effectively  between  the public values of  the top  management
groups of  the different  firms  in  this study.  That  is, the variation  among  the
public  values  of  different  firms  (averaged  over  the  members  of  their  man-
agement  teams)  exceeded  to  a  substantial  degree  the  variation  among  the
managers within any one firm. Moreover, such differences  were not observed
for  the reference  concepts. This finding suggested  that each  firm  (or  type of
firm)  may  well  have  a public  value  system  or  philosophy  which  is  unique
to its group of  top decision  makers  (27).  Therefore,  the  scores of  the indi-
vidual  managers  in  each  firm  were  averaged  to  obtain  the  firms'  scores  on
the  two  dimensions  of  (a)  evaluative  and  (b)  dynamic  public  values  for
each  of  the  seven  publics.

Although  the  evaluative  and  dynamism  of  dimensions  of  a  respondent's
"meaning  space"  (21)  are  theoretically  independent,  they  were  positively
correlated  for  each  of  the  seven publics  in this study.  Therefore,  the  scores
on  the  two dimensions  were combined  (added)  to yield  each  firm's  overall
public value scores, which could vary from  a minimum  of  10 to a maximum
of  70  points.

These  value  scores  then  represented  the  degree  to  which  each  pubUc
was  (a)  evaluated  in  positive  terms  (friendly,  loyal,  etc.),  as  well  as  (b)
considered  to  be  dynamic  (effective,  fast,  etc.),  by  each  firm's  group  of
top  or  elite  decision  makers.  For  further  details  on  the  scales,  etc.,  of  the
SD  questionnaire,  see  Reimann  (27).

Negandhi  and  Prasad  (20)  computed  a  weighted  average  of  the  man-
agement  philosophy  scores  for  their  seven  individual  publics  to  arrive  at  a
single, overall  management  philosophy  score for  each  firm.  Since  the  value
scores for the individual publics  all were fairly  strongly,  and  positively,  cor-
related  in  the  present  study,  a  similar  overall  public  value  score  also  was
computed  by  simply  averaging  all  seven  individual  pubhc  scores  for  each
firm.

RESULTS

Since some of the measures  used in this study had,  at best,  ordinal  rather
than  interval  scales and somewhat  skewed rather  than  normal  distributions.


234 

Academy  oj Management  Journal 

June

TABLE  1

Correlations with Effectiveness  Criteria

Executive
Turnover

Performance

Rating

Public Values

National  government
Suppliers
Customers
Community
Stockholders
Creditors
Employees
Overall

Structure

Centralization
Specialization
Formalization

Situation
Size
Dependence
Technical  change
p <  .05

- . 42
- . 6 3 **
- . 5 6*
- . 4 5*
- . 30
- . 40
- . 41
-.65**

.42
.16
.28

- . 16
.43
- . 19

.49*
.53*
.42
.00
.22
.50*
.69**
.57**

- . 13
.05
- . 35

- . 01
- . 34
.32

nonparametric  analyses  might  be  safer  than  would  the  more  traditional
parametric  techniques. However,  since the rank-order  and  product-moment
correlation  coefficients  among  all variables were found  to be very similar,  it
was decided  to  use the more powerful  and  versatile parametric  tests for  the
analysis  of  the  results  of  this  study.

The  product  moment  correlation  coefficients  between  the  two  effective-
ness criteria  and  the rest  of  the variables  are  shown  in Table  1. As may  be
seen from  these correlation  coefficients,  the public value scores for  all seven
pubhcs  were  negatively  related  to  executive  turnover,  with  three  publics
(suppliers, customers, and the community)  reaching the  .05 level of  signifi-
cance or better.  (Since the  sample  of firms studied  was not  random  in  any
sense, statistical  hypothesis  testing  was  not  used  with  the  usual  purpose  of
generalizing  to some population  of  organizations. Rather  it was used  to de-
termine which of the observed  relationships were strong enough  not to  have
been likely to occur  by chance  alone.)

All  public value scores except for  the community  were positively  related
to  the  organizational  competence  index,  with  four  reaching  significance
(government,  suppliers,  creditors,  and  employees).  However,  none  of  the
structural or situational variables were significantly  related to either criterion
of  effectiveness—with  only  two  coming  close  (i.e.,  the  .10  level),  namely
centralization  and  dependence  (see  Table  3).

It should  be noted  that the major  difference  in the way the  two  effective-
ness criteria were related  to the public value  scores was found  for  the  com-
munity.  Possibly this reflects  the fact  that  if  the plant  community  is held  in
relatively  high  esteem,  executives  are  somewhat  less  likely  to  leave,  other


Volume  18, Number  2 

235

things being equal. On the other hand,  the executives' attitudes  toward  their
community  had  little  to  do  with  their  perception  of  their  firm's  relative
performance  or  goal  attainment.

It  would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  analyze  the  multiple  inter-
relationships  among  13  variables  with  a  sample  of  only  19  firms.  In  the
interest  of  parsimony,  therefore,  only  the  overall  pubhc  value  score  was
used in the multivariate  analyses—thus  reducing the number  of  variables  to
seven.  Very little  was lost  in this data  reduction,  since  the  individual  value
scores  for  the  seven  publics  were  highly  intercorrelated.  Also,  as  may  be
seen from  Table  3, the overall public value scores were significantly  related
to  both  effectiveness  measures.

The  correlations  between  the  seven  remaining  variables  are  shown  in
Table 2. In addition to the correlations already discussed, three relationships
among  the independent  variables  reached  the  .05  level  of  significance.  De-
pendence  was very  strongly  related  to  formalization,  size  to  specialization,
and centralization to public values.

Canonical Correlation

Since  the  objective  of  the  data  analysis  was  to  sort  out  the  multiple
relationships  between  five  predictor  variables  and  two  criterion  variables,
the  statistical  technique  of  canonical  correlation  seemed  to  be  an  appro-
priate  analytical  tool.  This  technique  has  not  seen  a  great  deal  of  use  in
organization  research,  but  recently  has  become  quite  popular  in  marketing
research  (1).

Multiple linear regression on each  of  the two effectiveness  indicators  was
also tried. The results essentially paralleled  the canonical  analysis. Discrimi-
nant  analysis  also was used  for  the  executive  turnover  variable  to  discrimi-
nate  between  firms  with  zero  turnover  and  the  others.  Again,  the  results

TABLE  2

Matrix of Correlation  Coefficients

1

2

3

4

5 

6

7

8

- . 22
.42
.16
.28
- . 16
.43
- . 19

- . 13
.05
- . 35
-.0]
- . 34
.32

- . 19
.08
- . 03
.14
- . 16

- . 02

.60**
j2
.16

-.65**

.57**

- . 5 3*

- . 12

- . 36 

.81** 

- . 36 

- . 23 

—
- . 29
.26

— .35

.17

- . 22

.30

].

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

Executive
turnover
Performance
rating
Centralization
Specialization
Formalization
Size (log)
Dependence
Technical
change
Public values
* p  <  .05
** p <  .01


236

Academy  of  Management Journat

lune

were in  general  agreement  with  those  of  the  canonical  analysis  in  that  the
public values variable was by far  the most important  in the linear  discrimi-
nant  function.

Essentially,  canonical  analysis  establishes  two  sets  of  weighting  coef-
ficients (a set for the criterion variables and a set for the predictor  variables)
such  that  if  linear  variates  (or  canonical  factors)  were  formed  of  each  set
of  variables,  these  variates  would  be  more  highly  correlated  than  would
any other pair of  linear compounds that could be formed.  This technique  is
similar  to factor  analysis in that  a large number  of  relationships  is  reduced
to a smaller number of factors.  However, where the factor  model  establishes
orthogonal  factors,  each  of  which  accounts  for  a  maximum  amount  of  the
variance  among  variables  in  one  domain,  the  canonical  model  establishes
orthogonal  factor  pairs, each  of  which  accounts  for  a maximum  amount of
the  covariance  between  the  respective  sets  of  variables  in  two  different
domains  (9).

The results of  the canonical  analysis  are shown in Table  3. Only  the first
canonical  correlation  was significant;  therefore,  no attempt will be  made  to
interpret the meaning of the second. The first canonical correlation  of  0.918
indicates  that  about  84.2 percent  of  the variance in the  criterion factor  was
explained  by  the  predictor  factor—significant  at  the  .01  level.  This,  of
course,  represents  the  optimal  relationship  between  linear  combinations  of
the  two  sets  of  variables.

TABLE  3

Canonical Correlations"

Canonical 
Factor No. 

Canonical
Correlation

1 
2 

.918
.550

Chi

Square
30.87
5.05

Degrees of
Freedom

Level of

Significance

14
6

.0059
.5388

Factor Loadings''

Factor i

Factor 2

"Criterion" Variable Set
Executive  turnover
Performance  rating

"Predictor" Variable Set

Public  values
Centralization
Specialization
Formalization
Size
Dependence
Technical  change

-.937
.545

.831
-.442
-.131
-.400
.144
-.538
.303

.349
.838

.340
-.191
.256
-.322
-.178
-.158
.356

" Computations by SAS CANCORR  Procedure (3).
I" Correlation between variables and factors—loadings  greater than  .50 underlined.


'^^ 

Volume  18, Number  2 

237

The  "redundancy" measures  between  the two sets of  variables give a less
inflated  picture  of  the  overall  relationships  between  the  variables,  them-
selves.  The  redundancy  of  the  criterion  set,  given  the  predictor  set,  was
0.57;  the  redundancy  of  the  predictor  set,  given  the  criterion  set,  was
0.20.  These  redundancies  show  that  a  fair  proportion  of  the  variance  in
each  set  of  individual  variables  was  explained  by  the  other  set's  canonical
variates  (1, 32).

In  order  to interpret  the  meanings  of  the  criterion  and  predictor  factors
in  this  canonical  relationship,  the  factor  loadings  or  correlations  between
the orgmal  variables in  each  set  and  their  respective  canonical  factors  may
be  examined  (see  Table  3).  These  factor  loadings  are  superior  to  the
"weighting  coefficients"  since  the  latter  suffer  from  the  same  difficulty  as
do  their  equivalent  "beta  coefficients"  in  multiple  linear  regression—that
of  multicollinearity  when  two  or  more  variables  in  either  set  are  highly
correlated  (1).  As pointed  out  earlier,  several  of  the independent  variables
were  significantly  correlated  (Table  2).

The  factor  loadings  suggest  that  the  criterion  factor  was  a  function  of
decreasing  executive turnover  and  (to  a lesser degree)  increasing  executive
performance  ratings.  Although  the  two  measures  of  organizational  com-
petence were not, themselves, at all strongly related  (r  =  - 
.22), they both
loaded fairly  strongly on their canonical factor.  This factor,  therefore,  seems
to be  a good  overall  indicator  of  the organization's  competence  in  terms of
keeping  its  key  executives  satisfied.
Moreover,  the  predictor  factor 

loadings  suggest  that  organizational
competence  was  strongly  related  to  the  executives'  public  values  and,  to  a
much  lesser  extent,  to dependence.  These  results  reinforce  the  conclusions
from  the zero-order correlations shown in Table  1, in that pubhc values were
by far  the most strongly related to both  indicators  of  organizational  compe-
tence among  all the independent  variables  considered  in this  study.

In  summary,  these  results  suggest  that  organizational  competence  in-
creased with increasingly positive public values of the organization's decision
makers,  and  with  decreasing  dependence  on  other  (higher  authority)
organizations.

DISCUSSION  AND  IMPLICATIONS

One somewhat surprising result of this study is that none of the situational
or  structural  variables  were  very  strongly  related  to  organizational  com-
petence.  Only  the  dependence  of  the  organization  came  close  to  being
significantly  related  to  competence.  However,  it  is  worth  noting  that,
while  not  as  strong  as  might  have  been  expected,  this  relationship  was  in
the  expected  direction.  Increasing  autonomy  of  decision  making  is  con-
sidered  to  have  a  positive  influence  on  organizational  performance—
especially  performance  in  social  terms  such  as  turnover  and  morale  (17,
19,  24).  The  dependence  measure  indicates  the  relative  autonomy  of  the


238 

Academy  of  Management  Journal 

June

organization  unit—the  less  the  dependence  on  higher  authority  organiza-
tions, the greater the autonomy of the unit's executives.

The  loadings  on  two  of  the  structural  dimensions—centralization  and
formalization—while  relatively  weak,  also  were  in  the  negative  direction
to be expected from previous research. Decreasing centralization and formal-
ization  also  mean  increasing  autonomy  of  executives  with  respect  to  the
internal  structure  of  the organization  and,  therefore,  these  measures  would
be expected to load negatively, along with dependence, on the organizational
competence factor.  (See Table  3.)

Thus previous results with respect  to the relationship between  situational
and structural variables  and organizational  effectiveness  were only modestly
supported  in  the  present  research.  However,  the  public  values  of  manage-
ment  were  found  to  be  considerably  stronger  predictors  of  organizational
effectiveness  (or  competence,  as  conceptualized  in  this  study)  than  either
situational  variables like size, dependence,  and  rate  of  technical  change,  or
structural  variables  like  centralization,  specialization,  and  formalization.

This  result  strongly  supports  the  findings  of  Negandhi  and  Prasad  (20)
of  a  strong  positive  correlation  between  organizational  effectiveness  and
management  values  or  philosophies  with  respect  to  the  organization's
pubHcs.

Nevertheless,  the  results  of  this  study  must  be  interpreted  with  care,
particularly  in  view  of  the  way  in  which  effectiveness  was  conceptualized.
Organizational  effectiveness  or  competence  was  essentially  a  function  of
the degree  to  which  the  high  ranking  decision  makers  valued  their  organi-
zations—that  is,  the  degree  to  which  they  were  satisfied  with  the  relative
performance  of  their  organizations  in  terms  of  achieving  a  set  of  typical
goals  (profit  and sales growth, product quality, employee  satisfaction,  etc.),
and  in  terms of  their  own job  satisfaction  (executive  turnover).  It  is  quite
possible,  therefore,  that  their  value  judgments  about  the  organization's
various publics  may have been influenced  by  their  feelings  about  their  own
organization's  relative  effectiveness.  The  more  they  valued  their  own
organization,  the more they might tend  to value its various publics. That is,
the  strong  positive  relationships  found  between  organizational  competence
and  managers' public values may refiect,  in part  at least,  the operation  of  a
variation  of  the  halo  effect.

On  the  other  hand,  research  has  indicated  that  member  perceptions  of
their  organization's  relative  performance  may  be  strongly  related  to  per-
formance  assessments  made  by  objective  raters  outside  the  organization
(8,  14).  For  the  six  independent  firms  in  the  present  study  which  were
willing  and/or  able  to  provide  accurate  financial  data,  actual  growth  in
sales and profits for  the previous five years were positively  and  significantly
associated  with  executive  self-ratings  for  these  indicators.  Moreover,  in
Negandhi  and  Prasad's  (20)  research,  management's  values  or  philosophy
with  respect  to  their  publics  were  strongly  associated  with  actual  perform-
ance indicators  such  as profit  and  sales growth,  absenteeism,  turnover,  and
employee  morale.


' ^ '5 

Volume  18, Number  2 

239

These  findings  suggest  that  the  public  values  of  the  top  decision  makers
may  well  be  strongly  related  to  organization  effectiveness  in  objective
terms  like  profitability.  However,  as  mentioned  previously,  cross-sectional
studies cannot  establish  the causal direction  of  the relationships  discovered.
For  example, it could be argued  that  executives in a relatively  effective  firm
may  view  the  firm's  various  publics  in  relatively  positive  terms  simply
because  they  feel  that  these  publics  have  contributed  to  this  effectiveness.
Executives in relatively low performing firms, by the same token, would then
tend to view their publics in a less favorable  light.

Nevertheless, it appears at least as logical to argue that  executives' values
will  infiuence  their  strategies  for  dealing  with  various  publics.  These
strategies, in turn, can infiuence  the organization's  effectiveness  in  satisfying
the  needs  of  the  publics  on  which  it  depends  for  survival  and  growth.  The
arguments  of  Guth  and  Tagiuri  (15),  Child  (7),  and  Steiner  (31),  sum-
marized  earlier,  would  certainly  favor 
the  above  interpretation.  The
historical  case  study  of  corporate  enterprises  by  Chandler  (6)  also  implies
that organizational  performance  is a consequence of its executives'  strategic
choices and thus of their value systems, rather than the reverse. And, finally,
the longitudinal  study by Hage  and  Dewar  (16)  strongly  suggests  the pos-
sibility that the values of  organizational  elites, such  as executives, may have
a  substantial  impact on  organizational  performance  in  terms of  the  relative
innovativeness  of  health  and  welfare  agencies.

It  appears,  therefore,  that  empirical  evidence  tends  to  support  the  inter-
pretation  that  the  public  values  of  the  organization's  elite  decision  makers
can exert considerable infiuence  on organizational performance,  and not the
reverse. However, considerably more research is needed before one can hope
to do much more than speculate about the influence  executive value systems
may  exert  on  organizational  performance—whether  it  be  potential  (com-
petence)  or  actual  (in  terms  of  goal  achievement).  The  exploratory  re-
search  reported  in  this  paper  should  be  extended  in  at  least  two  directions
—laterally  and  longitudinally.  A  lateral  extension  to  include  many  more
organizations  would be desirable from  the standpoint  of generalization,  and
a  longitudinal  study  could  be  helpful  in  establishing  the  likely  causal  link-
age between  executive  public  values  and  organizational  effectiveness.

A  primary  reason  that  longitudinal  field  studies  of  organizations  are  so
rare may well be that  they tend  to be substantially  more difficult  and  costly
to carry out than equivalent  cross-sectional designs. In the present  case,  for
example,  readings  of  executive  public  values,  organizational  effectiveness,
and  other  relevant  variables  would  have  to  be  taken  at  two  or,  preferably,
several  points  in  time.  During  this  time,  however,  a  great  many  changes
are likely to occur, especially if the time period  covered is long enough to be
meaningful.  One of the most likely  and most serious of these changes would
be  the  turnover  among  the  executives  being  questioned.  To  gain  any  kind
of control over the possible effects  of such changes, a relatively large sample
of  organizations  would  be required.  Also,  a  mass mailing  of  questionnaires
would  not  be  satisfactory,  since  some  personal  contact  between  researcher


240 

Academy  of  Management  Journal 

June

and subject  is necessary for  reliable data  collection,  especially  when  several
time  periods  are  to  be  sampled.  As  a  result,  longitudinal  designs  appear
doomed  to be extremely  costly as well as time  consuming. Nevertheless,  or-
ganization  research  is  at  a  point  where  longitudinal  designs  are  becoming
increasingly  necessary  to  put  predictive  models  based  on  purely  cross-
sectional designs, as is the case in the present study, to the test of time.

Another shortcoming of the present research is that the size and  restricted
nature  of  the  sample  (manufacturing  firms  only)  precludes  any  kind  of
generalization.  Before  any  valid  implications  for  organization  theory  can
be  drawn  from  this  research,  rephcations  with  larger  samples  and  with
different  kinds of  organizations  appear  to be needed.  Obviously  some  mod-
ifications  of  the measures  used  in this study would  be necessary  for  replica-
tion  in  different  kinds  of  organizations.  For  example,  the  list  of  relevant
publics  in  the  public  values  questionnaire  would  have  to  be  changed  ac-
cording  to  the  type  of  organization  studied  (hospital,  university,  prison,
government  agency, etc.). Similar  modifications  may be required  in the  hst
of  possible  goals  for  executive  performance  ratings.  If  possible,  it  would
also be desirable to obtain  some objective  indicators  of performance  appro-
priate for  the organizations  studied,  such  as productivity  data  or  some  sort
of performance  ratings, by qualified  judges outside the  organization.

However,  while  much  remains  to  be  done,  the  study  described  in  this
paper  has  provided  some preliminary  empirical  evidence  that  the values of
key  decision  makers  with  respect  to  their  organizational  publics  may  have
much to do with how satisfied  they are with their organization's  performance.
Moreover,  some research  instruments  have been provided  which,  hopefully,
will  enable  other  researchers  to  attempt  replications  of  this  study  both
laterally, with different  kinds of organizations, and longitudinally,  over time.

REFERENCES

1.  Alpert,  Mark I., and  Robert  A.  Peterson.  "On  the Interpretation  of  Canonical  Analysis,"

Journal of Marketing  Research, Vol. 9 (1972),  187-192.

2.  Barnard,  Chester  I.  The  Functions  of  the  Executive  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  Uni-

versity Press, 1938).

3.  Bass, Anthony  J.,  and  James  H.  Goodnight.  Statistical Analysis  System  (Raleigh,  N.C:

North Carolina State University,  1972).

4.  Bureau  of  National  Affairs,  Inc. "Labor  Relations  Reporter:  Wage and  Salary  Controls,"

No. 511 (Washington: The Bureau of  National  Affairs,  Inc.,  1973), 963-965.

5.  Bums,  T.,  and  C.  M.  Stalker.  The  Management  of  Innovation  (London:  Tavistock,

1961).

6.  Chandler,  Alfred.  Strategy  and  Structure:  Chapters  in  the  History  of  Industrial  Enter-

prise (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1962).

7.  Child,  John.  "Organization  Structure,  Environment,  and  Performance:  The  Role  of

Strategic Choice," Sociology, Vol. 6 (1972), 1-21.

8.  Comrey,  A.  L., J.  M.  Pfiffner,  and  Helen  P.  Beem:  "Factors  Influencing  Organizational

Effectiveness,"  Personnel Psychology, Vol. 5 (1952), 307-328.

9.  Cooley,  William  W.,  and  Paul  R.  Lohnes.  Multivariate  Procedures  for  Behavioral

Sciences (New York: Wiley, 1971).

10.  England,  George  W.  "Personal  Value  Systems  of  American  Managers,"  Academy  of

Management Journal, Vol.  10 (1967), 53-68.

11.  Etzioni,  Amitai.  Modern  Organizations (Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice-Hall,  1964).


1975 

VoUmie 18, Number  2 

241

12,  Friedlander,  Frank,  and  Hal  Pickle.  "Components  of  Effectiveness  in  Small  Organiza-

tions," Administrative  Science Quarterly, Vol.  13 (1968), 289-304.

13,  Georgiou,  Petro.  "The  Goal  Paradigm  and  Notes  Towards  a  Counter  Paradigm"

Administrative  Science Quarterly, Vol.  18 (1973), 291-310.

14,  Georgopoulos,  Basil  S.,  and  Arnold  S.  Tannenbaum.  "A  Study  of  Organizational  Effec-

tiveness," American  Sociological Review,  Vol. 22 (1957), 534-540.

15,  Guth,  William  D.,  and  Renato  Tagiuri.  "Personal  Values  and  Corporate  Strategy,"

Harvard Business Review,  Vol. 43, No. 5 (1965), 123-132.

16,  Hage,  Jerald,  and  Robert  Dewar.  "Elite  Values  Versus  Organizational  Structure  in

Predicting  Innovation,"  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  Vol.  18  (1973),  279-290.

17,  Hall, Richard  H.  Organizations: Structure  and Process (Englewood  Cliffs  N J • Prentice-

Hall,  1972),

18,  Inkson,  J,  H.  K,,  D,  S,  Pugh,  and  D,  J,  Hickson,  "Organization  Context  and  Structure:
An  Abbreviated  Replication,"  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  Vol.  15  (1970),  318-

19,  Likert,  Rensis. Human  Organization: Its  Management  and  Value (New  York:  McGraw-

Hill,  1967).

20,  Negandhi,  Anant  R,,  and  S,  Benjamin  Prasad.  Comparative  Management  (New  York'

21,  Osgood,  C,  G,  Suci,  and  P,  Tannenbaum,  The  Measurement  of  Meaning  (Urbana-

Appleton-Century-Crofts,  1971),

University  of  Illinois Press,  1957),

22,  Perrow,  Charles:  "The  Analysis  of  Goals  in  Complex  Organizations,"  American  Socio-

logical Review,  Vol. 26 (1961), 854-866,

23,  Pfeffer,  Jeffrey,  and  Huseyin  Leblebici,  "Executive  Recruitment  and  the  Development
of  Interfirm  Organizations,"  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  Vol.  18  (1973),  449-461.
24,  Price,  James,  Organizational  Effectiveness:  An  Inventory  of  Propositions  (Homewood

111,: Irwin, 1968),

25,  Pugh,  D,  S,,  D,  J,  Hickson,  C,  R,  Hinings,  and  C,  Turner,  "The  Context  of  Organiza-

tion Structures," Administrative  Science Quarterly, Vol,  14 (1969) 91-114,

26,  Reimann,  Bernard  C,  "On  the  Dimensions  of  Bureaucratic  Structure:  An  Empirical

Reappraisal," Administrative  Science Quarterly, Vol.  18 (1973), 462-476,

27,  Reimann,  Bernard  C,  "The  Public  Philosophy  of  Organization,"  Academy  of  Manage-

ment Journal, Vol,  17 (1974), 418-427,

28,  Reimann,  Bernard  C,  F,  Glenn  Boseman,  and  Jack  L,  Simonetti,  "Toward  a  Measure
of  Management  Concern  for  Task  Environment  Agents:  An  Exploratory  Study," Quar-
terly Journal of Management  Development,  Vol, 2 (March  1971), 25-38.

29,  Seashore,  Stanley  E,,  and  Ephraim  Yuchtman,  "Factorial  Analysis  of  Organizational

Performance," Administrative  Science Quarterly, Vol,  12 (1967), 377-395,

30,  Standard  and  Poor's  Register  of  Corporations,  Directors  and  Executives  (New  York-

Standard  and  Poor,  1972),

31,  Steiner, George A, Business and Society (New  York: Random  House, 1971),
32,  Tatham,  Ronald  L,,  and  Ronald  J,  Dornoff.  "The  Significance  and  Interpretation  of

Canonical Analysis," Decision Sciences, Vol, 4 (1973), 343-349,

33,  Woodward,  Joan,  Industrial  Organization:  Tiieor\  and  Practice (London:  Oxford  Uni-

versity Press, 1965),

34,  Yuchtman, Ephraim, and Stanley  E, Seashore. "A System  Resource  Approach  to  Organi-

zational  Effectiveness,"  American  Sociological Review,  Vol.  32  (1967), 891-903,


