A Typology of Deviant Workplace Behaviors: A Multidimensional Scaling Study

Sandra L. Robinson; Rebecca J. Bennett

The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 2. (Apr., 1995), pp. 555-572.

Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199504%2938%3A2%3C555%3AATODWB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P

The Academy of Management Journal is currently published by Academy of Management.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aom.html.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

http://www.jstor.org
Wed Mar 12 08:56:02 2008


0 Academy  of  Management Journal 
1995, Vol.  38, No.  2,  555-572. 

A  TYPOLOGY OF DEVIANT WORKPLACE BEHAVIORS: A 

MULTIDIMENSIONAL  SCALING STUDY 

SANDRA L. ROBINSON 


New York University 

REBECCA J. BENNETT 

University of Toledo 


In this study, we developed a typology of deviant workplace behaviors 
using multidimensional scaling techniques. Results suggest that deviant 
workplace behaviors vary along two dimensions: minor versus serious, 
and interpersonal versus organizational. On the basis of these two di- 
mensions, employee deviance appears to fall into four distinct catego- 
ries: production deviance, property  deviance, political deviance, and 
personal  aggression. Theoretical  and  empirical implications are  dis- 
cussed. 

Had I a hundred tongues, a hundred mouths, a voice of  iron and a chest 
of  brass, I could not tell all the forms  of  crime. 

Virgil, Aeneid 

Employee deviance and delinquency produce organizational  losses es- 
timated  to  range  from  $6 to  $200 billion  annually  (Murphy, 1993). Of  all 
employees, 33 to  75 percent have engaged in some of  the following behav- 
iors: theft, computer fraud, embezzlement, vandalism, sabotage, and absen- 
teeism  (Harper, 1990). Almost  daily, there  are media reports of  workplace 
deviance, whether  it  be  corruption  among police  officers,  violence  in the 
post  office, or illegal  activity on Wall Street. 

The prevalence of  workplace deviance and its associated organizational 
costs  necessitates  a  specific, systematic, theoretically  focused  program  of 
study  into  this  behavior.  To  date,  relatively  little  empirical  research  has 
directly addressed  the darker  side of  employee behavior  (Vardi & Wiener, 
1992). The  organization  behavior  literature has  shown  a  disproportionate 
emphasis on desirable phenomena such as organizational citizenship behav- 
ior  (e.g., Organ, 1988), commitment (e.g., Mowday, Porter,  &  Steers, 1982), 
and adaptation (e.g., Hulin, 1991). 

An  Academic  Challenge  Grant  from the  University  of  Toledo  supported  this  study. We 
gratefully  acknowledge the assistance of  Daniel  Lopuch and Timothy Murphy. We also thank 
Karen  Jehn, for her  advice and assistance  during the various  stages of  the project, and Blake 
Ashforth, Aela Boyum, Dafna Eylon, Daniel Farrell, and Elizabeth Morrison, for their comments 
on earlier drafts of  this article. 


556 

Academy of Management Journal 

April 

Some research  has addressed behaviors that could be considered devi- 
ant, although they have not been conceptualized as such: absenteeism  (e.g., 
Goodman & Atkins,  1984), withdrawal  (e.g., Gupta  & Jenkins, 1980), with- 
holding  effort  (e.g., Kidwell  &  Bennett,  1993), and  behaviors  that  lead  to 
procedural or distributive injustice or both (e.g., Sheppard, Lewicki, & Min-
ton, 1992). However, these research efforts have not focused on the deviant 
nature of  the behaviors  themselves.  Thus, although such research  may  ex- 
amine the same behaviors  as the study of  employee deviance and be useful 
for understanding it, workplace deviance needs to be examined as a distinct 
and important organizational  phenomenon  in its own right. 

Of  the few studies examining workplace deviance, most have been iso- 
lated attempts to answer specific questions about particular types of  deviant 
acts. For example, studies have looked exclusively at theft (Greenberg, 1990, 
1993; Hollinger & Clark, 1982), sexual harassment (Gutek, 1985), and uneth- 
ical decision making (Trevino & Youngblood, 1990). Researchers have yet to 
develop a comprehensive theory or set of  theories regarding workplace  de- 
viance. For  empirical work  to  advance an area  of  knowledge,  studies that 
build  upon one another are needed  (Robertson, 1993). The development of 
employee deviance theories  will  direct  the currently scattered research  ef- 
forts and enable researchers to establish complementary research agendas. In 
sum, a systematic, theory-directed study of  deviance will ultimately increase 
understanding of  workplace  deviance. 

Definition 

WORKPLACE DEVIANCE 

Employee deviance is defined here as voluntary behavior  that violates 
significant organizational norms and in so doing threatens the well-being of 
an  organization, its  members, or both. Employee  deviance is voluntary  in 
that employees either lack the motivation to conform to normative  expecta- 
tions of  the social context or become motivated to violate those expectations 
(Kaplan,  1975). Organizational  norms,  or  those  prescribed  by  formal  and 
informal  organizational  policies, rules, and  procedures, are  specified  here 
because  deviance must be  defined  in terms  of  the standards of  a specified 
social group rather than in reference to a system of  absolute moral standards 
(Kaplan, 1975). We focused on the violation of  norms espoused by the dom- 
inant  administrative  coalitions  of  organizations  rather  than  the  norms  of 
work groups or subcultures. 

The study of  workplace  deviance is distinct from the study of  ethics in 
that  the  former  focuses  on  behavior  that  violates  organizational  norms, 
whereas the latter focuses on behavior that is right or wrong when judged  in 
terms of  justice, law, or other societal guidelines determining the morality of 
behavior  (Lewis, 1985). Thus, although a  particular  behavior  can be  both 
deviant  and unethical,  the two  qualities  are not  inevitably  linked.  For  ex- 
ample, dumping toxic waste in a river is not deviant if  it conforms with the 
policies of  one's organization. However, most people would probably agree 


1995 

Robinson and Bennett 

557 

that this act is unethical. Conversely, reporting this dumping to authorities 
may be an ethical act, but  it would also be  a deviant act in this particular 
example if  it violated  organizational norms. 

Deviant  behavior  also  has  the  potential  to  harm  an  organization, its 
members, or both. The term deviant is usually reserved for acts that violate 
significant norms (Cohen, 1966) and result in an "unacceptable violation . . . 
believed to threaten society's well-being"  (Best & Luckenbill, 1982: 4). Con- 
sistent  with  this  focus,  our  definition  of  workplace  deviance  focuses  on 
violations  of  norms that threaten  the well-being of  an organization. Hence, 
employee  deviance  excludes  minor  infractions  of  social  norms,  such  as 
wearing a suit of  the wrong style to the office, that are not usually or directly 
harmful to  most organizations.' 

A typology of  employee deviance is a useful starting point for develop- 
ing a systematic, theory-based study of  employee deviance. We saw such a 
typology as enabling us to develop broader, more comprehensive theories of 
deviance (Rich, 1992) and as giving parsimony  and order to the diverse set 
of  behaviors  that  comprise workplace  deviance, helping  us  to  identify the 
relationships between these different deviant behaviors, and enabling us to 
make  connections  between  the  different  findings  of  studies that  have  ad- 
dressed  specific types  of  deviant behavior.  We  also  viewed  a  typology  as 
useful  for  developing broader  measures  of  employee  deviance  and thus as 
enabling empirical tests of  our theories of  deviance. Aggregated measures are 
more reliable and valid than specific measures (Rushton, Brainerd, & Press-
ley, 1983) and also overcome the low base rate problems commonly associ- 
ated with measuring deviant behaviors  (Hulin & Rousseau, 1980). 

Few attempts have been made to  classify  employee  deviance. Redeker 
(1989) developed a list of  punishable  offenses in organizations but  did not 
integrate  the  different  behaviors  into  any  meaningful  pattern.  Wheeler 
(1976), examining  how  arbitrators  should  punish  rule-breaking  behavior, 
classified  forms  of  organizational  rule-breaking  into  serious  offenses  and 
nonserious offenses. Hollinger and Clark (1982) categorized  employee devi- 
ance into property deviance, or acquiring or damaging property belonging to 
one's employer, and production deviance, or violating organizational norms 
regarding the quantity and quality of  work performed. Mangione and Quinn 
(1974) suggested  two similar categories  of  deviance: counterproductive be- 
havior, defined as purposely damaging employers' property, and doing little, 
defined  as producing output of  poor  quality or low quantity. 

These categorical schemes of  workplace deviance provide a useful start- 
ing point for creating an integrative framework of  deviant behaviors. How- 

'It  should  be  noted  that  although  many  behaviors  might  meet  one  of  our  definitional 
criteria, we focused only on behaviors  that met all three criteria and were likely to be deviant 
in most organizational contexts. 


558 

Academy of  Management Journal 

April 

ever, these typologies also raise  several questions. First, are the typologies 
comprehensive? They capture acts against organizations, such as theft and 
slowed production, but  they do not  seem to be  able to account for deviant 
acts of  an interpersonal nature, such as physical aggression  and sexual ha- 
rassment. An  accurate typology  of  employee  deviance  should take  into ac- 
count not only behavior  directed at organizations, but also that directed at 
individuals. Second, how are the different deviant behaviors, or the catego- 
ries themselves, related to one another? It would be useful to have a typology 
that identified the dimensions underlying these categories. And finally, are 
the typologies valid? Although it is quite conceivable that these typologies 
are all somewhat accurate classifications  of  employee  deviance, they were 
not  inductively  or  empirically  derived  and have  not  yet  been  empirically 
tested. 

In this study, we sought to answer the above questions by developing an 
inductively and empirically derived  typology  of  workplace  deviance using 
multidimensional  scaling  (MDS) techniques  (Kruskal  &  Wish,  1978). The 
product  was  intended  to  be  a  comprehensive classification  of  deviant be- 
haviors highlighting the similarities and differences between deviant behav- 
iors as well  as their underlying dimensions. 

METHODS AND RESULTS 

Multidimensional  scaling is a useful  tool for producing inductive, but 
empirically derived, typologies. MDS techniques enable a researcher to pro- 
duce a typology using the perceptions of  a diverse set of  individuals who are 
blind to the purpose of  a given study. Hence, MDS-based typologies are less 
prone to researchers' biases than typologies  developed through other meth- 
ods. MDS  involves  several  distinct  phases  of  data  collection and analyses. 
The procedures followed for each phase in this study and the results of  each 
phase are discussed below. 

Phase  1 

Sample. We recruited 70 respondents, 27 men and 43 women, from four 
sources in Toledo, Ohio: a university office (n  =  7), a technical staff  office 
within  an industrial  company  (n  =  lo), a neighborhood  (n  =  38), and an 
evening master's  in  business  administration  (M.B.A.) class  (n  =  15). All 
respondents worked full-time. Their average age was 37 years (sad. = 14.69), 
and  their  average  number  of  years  of  work  experience was  15.69  (s.d.  = 
12.10). 

Procedures.  Respondents  were  asked  to  describe  two  incidents  of 
"someone  at work  engaging in something considered to  be  deviant at their 
workplace, i.e., something that is considered to be wrong." We provided this 
colloquial  definition of  employee  deviance  instead of  our theoretical defi- 
nition  because  it  was  easier  to  understand. We  also  asked  respondents  to 
define deviance in their own words. Over 81 percent made specific reference 


1995 

Robinson  and Bennett 

559 

to violation of  norms  or rules, consistent with our definition. Both the de- 
scriptions and the definitions were in writing. 

Next,  the  second  author  and  a  research  assistant  independently  re-
phrased the descriptions the respondents  provided  to simplify them, to re- 
move redundant words and phrases  (most were a paragraph or longer), and 
to ensure that the descriptions were relatively generic and applicable across 
organizations  and  occupations. Descriptions  repeating  another  description 
were then removed. The final pool of  statements described 45 deviant work- 
place behaviors; the Appendix lists these behaviors. 

We also had 1 2  judges, professors  of  management, independently assess 
how well each behavior fit our definition of  employee deviance. They rated 
each behavior  (yes or no) in terms  of  whether it was voluntary, potentially 
harmful to organizations, and likely to  violate  the norms  of  most  organiza- 
tions.  The  judges  unanimously  agreed  that  most  of  the  behaviors  fit  our 
definition of  deviance. 
Phase 2 

Sample.  There  were  180 respondents,  86 men  and  94  women, all  of 
whom were part-time evening students in an M.B.A. program at a midwest- 
ern university. All the respondents worked full-time. Their average age was 
29 years (s.d. = 12.57) and their average number of  years of  work experience 
was  11.12 (s.d.  =  11.06). 

Procedures. We gave each respondent a survey containing the list of  45 
deviant  workplace  behaviors  and  a  brief  description  of  a  target  behavior, 
which  appeared  at  the  top  of  the  first  page.  The  respondents  rated  each 
deviant  behavior  in terms  of  its  similarity  to  or  difference from  the  target 
behavior, using a nine-point  Likert-type scale  (1 =  very similar, 9  =  very 
different). We  also  asked  respondents  to  specify the  criteria  they  used  to 
distinguish between the target behavior  and each of  the deviant behaviors. 
Although  MDS  often involves  having respondents  compare  every pos- 
sible pair of  stimuli [n(n - 1)12], we asked our respondents to make only a 
subset of  the 990 possible comparisons because having them address the full 
set  would  have  been  too  cognitively taxing and  likely to  have  resulted  in 
fatigue, errors, and respondent  attrition. A valid  means by  which to  over- 
come the problems associated with comparing a large number of  stimuli is to 
have respondents  make  a subset of  comparisons  (Thompson, 1983). 

To determine the visual configuration and underlying dimensions of  the 
deviant behaviors, we used the ALSCAL program (Young & Lewykcyj, 1979). 
This  program  derives  spatial  configurations  of  objects  on the basis  of  the 
perceived  differences between the objects. The greater the perceived  differ- 
ence between the objects, the greater the distance between them in the spa- 
tial configuration. We first created a dissimilarities matrix by computing the 
perceived  differences  between  the  pairs  of  deviant  behavior  descriptions 
(Kruskal & Wish, 1978). We  then employed  Torgeson's  (1952) metric MDS 
analysis to create five different visual configurations of  these deviant behav- 
ior descriptions, ranging from one dimension to five dimensions. An analogy 


560 

Academy of  Management Journal 

April 

for this  program  is that  it  is like having  a computer  draw several maps of 
various  dimensions for a set of  cities by relying on only information about 
the  distances  between  the  cities.  The  resulting  maps  could  be  one-
dimensional  in  that  they  would  be  placed  along  a  single  line;  two- 
dimensional  like  a typical  road  map; three-dimensional like  a  globe  with 
bas-relief reflecting elevation; and so forth. We used Kruskal's  (1964) stress 
index to  determine which map configuration  explained the most variance. 
This stress index indicates how well  data fit a particular configuration: the 
higher the stress, the poorer the fit. 

Results. We conducted a scree test by plotting the stress indexes for all 
five map configurations  (Cattell, 1986). The plot of  stress indexes produces 
a curve. The appropriate configuration is determined on the basis of  where 
(at which configuration) the stress index values begin to level off  to form an 
almost horizontal slope. The one-dimensional solution had a stress index of 
,494. For the two-dimensional solution, the index made a considerable drop 
to  .27, suggesting  a better  fit with  the  data. The  amount  of  reduced  stress 
leveled  off  for the three-, four-, and five-dimensional solutions with values 
of  ,199, .159, and .137, respectively. Hence, the scree results suggested  that 
the two-dimensional solution provided the most parsimonious and accurate 
description of  the data. Figure  1 shows the two-dimensional configuration. 

Phase 3 

Procedures. We derived a list of  potential labels or attributes to describe 
the dimensions from the criteria that respondents said they used in phase 2 
to compare the deviant behaviors  and the target  behavior.  We  selected  the 
six most frequently  cited  criteria before looking at the two-dimensional so- 
lution. Four judges,  senior candidates for doctorates in management, rated 
how well each attribute described each deviant behavior. Working indepen- 
dently and blind  to the purpose  of  the study, they used  five-point bipolar 
scales with the  following  attribute  anchors: unintentionallintentional,  not 
seriouslserious, not harmful to companylharmful to company, not harmful to 
individualslharmful to individuals, very unethicallethical, and covertlovert. 
Results.  The  judges'  ratings  were  averaged  for  each attribute-behavior 
comparison. We  used  multiple  regression  analysis  to  assess  relationships 
between  the  attributes  and  the  two-dimensional configuration.  The  labels 
chosen were based  on examination of  the multiple  correlation  coefficients, 
F-values, and  beta  weights  from  the regression  analysis  (Kruskal &  Wish, 
1978). Table  1provides  those  statistics. 

Dimension  1.Relationships between the attributes and the first dimen- 
sion suggested a label reflecting the seriousness or harmfulness of  the devi- 
ant acts.  The  attributes that  explained  the most  variance  for  dimension  1 
were not seriouslserious (p = -66, p < .001) and very unethical1 ethical (P = 
- .67, p < ,001). Also significantly related to dimension 1were not harmful 
to  companylharmful to  company  (P  =  .42, p  < .001) and  not  harmful  to 
individualslharmful to individuals (P  = .27, p < .05). Thus, one end of  this 


1995 

Robinson a n d  Bennett 

561 

dimension reflected deviant behaviors that were not serious, not harmful to 
the company, and not harmful to the individuals targeted, and the other end 
reflected deviant behaviors that were serious, harmful to the company, and 
harmful to the individuals targeted. Consequently, we  labeled this first  di- 
mension "minor  versus serious deviance." 

Other attributes were also related to this dimension in ways consistent 
with  the minor-versus-serious label. Covertlovert was negatively related to 
the not seriouslserious attribute (r =  - -36,p < .01) and positively related to 
the very unethicallethical attribute (r = .47,p < -01).This relationship is not 
surprising given that harmful behavior  is typically more covert than innoc- 
uous  behavior.  Similarly, the unintentionallintentional  attribute was  posi- 
tively  related  to  the  not  seriouslserious  attribute  (r  =  5 7 ,  p  < .01) and 
negatively related to the unethicallethical attribute (r =  - .60, p < -01).This 
relationship  is consistent with the fact that behavior  is perceived  to be  in- 
tentional  to the extent that  it  is considered harmful  (Hamilton, 1980). Ex-
amination of  the two-dimensional configuration (Figure 1) also supports use 
of  the  label  minor  versus  serious  deviance.  The  less  serious, less  harmful 
deviant behaviors  fell on the negative  end of  this dimension, and the more 
harmful or serious deviant behaviors fell on the positive end of  this dimen- 
sion. 

Dimension 2. The relationships between  the attributes  and the second 
dimension suggested a label reflecting the extent to which deviant behaviors 
are interpersonal and harmful to individuals rather  than non-interpersonal 
and harmful to organizations. The attribute not harmful to companylharmful 
to company was positively related to dimension 2 (P = -30,p < .05),and the 
attribute not  harmful to  individualslharmful to  individuals  was  negatively 
related to dimension 2 (P  =  - .84, p < .001).The covertlovert attribute was 
also negatively related to this  dimension (P  =  - .74,  p  < .001). This rela- 
tionship makes sense given that interpersonal behaviors are more likely to be 
overt than  covert  since at  least  one  other  person  is usually  present  in the 
context  of  interpersonal  behavior.  Hence,  one  end  of  this  dimension  re- 
flected behaviors that were harmful to individuals, not harmful to the organ- 
ization, and overt, and the other end reflected behaviors that were harmful 
to the  organization, not harmful to  individuals, and  covert.  Consequently, 
we  chose the  label  "interpersonal  versus  organizational  deviance"  for  di- 
mension 2. Observation of  the two-dimensional configuration (Figure 1) sup-
ports use of  this label. Deviant behaviors that fell on the negative end of  this 
dimension were overt, interpersonal behaviors, directly harmful to individ- 
uals, and deviant behaviors  that fell on the positive  end of  this  dimension 
were  non-interpersonal  behaviors  that  were  directly  harmful  to  organiza- 
tions. 

Quadrant labels. A  closer inspection  of  the two-dimensional  configu- 
ration suggests that deviant acts not only vary along two dimensions but can 
also be  classified into four categories. Figure  2  exhibits these categories. 

The quadrant containing serious and organizationally harmful deviance 
was  labeled  "property  deviance."  This  quadrant  is  consistent  with  Man- 


Academy of  Management Journal 

Two-Dimensional Configuration of Deviant Behaviors 

FIGURE 1 

Employee making personal! 
I 

calls or mailings 

Boss leaving early or 
leaving his work for 

. 

employee to do  Employee com-
ine in late or 

" 

leaving 

Employee wasting com-

pany  resources 

Employee leaving  job  in 

progress

Employee  taking  excessive breaks 

Employee working unnecessary  overtime

Employee calling in sick when not 

. 

. 
. 

Employee  intentionally  working slow 

:mployee hiding in back 
.oom to read newspaper 

Employee endan-

gering self 

Employee gossiping 

about manager 

Employee blaming co-worker for mistakes 

Boss  asking :mployee 

to work beyond  job  description 

Employee gossiping about co-worktr

. 

Boss blaming  employee for own mistakes 

Employee competing in nonbeneficial way 

Boss showing favoritism 

. 
. 
. Boss gossiping about employees 

. 

I 
I 
I 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I
I 
I

I 
II 

? 

I 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I

I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
I
I 
I 

.----------------------.-------------------------------------------

Employee talking with  co-
worker instead of  working 

Employee acting foolish  in front of customer 

Employee starting negative I 
I 
rumors about company 


Robinson and Bennett 

FIGURE  1 (continued) 

I 
I  Employee  misusing 
I  discount privilege 

Employee accepting  company equipment and merchandise 

Employee stealing

. 

drawer 

Employee stealing money from cash 

Employee lying  kickbacks 

about hours worked 

. 

Employee overcharging for 

services for own profit 

. 

I Employee covering up mistakes 

Employee misusing 

expense account 

.

. 

Employee stealing customer's possessions 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

. 

Employee sabotaging equipment 

. 

Boss  refusing to give employee earned 

Employee physically  abusing customer

Employee stealing co-worker's  possessions

benefits or pay. 
. 
. 
. 

Employee verbally abusing  customer 

Employee endangering  co-workers 

by reckless behavior 

Boss unjustifiably  firing employee

. 
. 

Boss sexually harassing employee

Employee sexually harassing co-worker 

. 

employee 

. 

I I Boss verbally abusing 
I 
. 
:  Boss  following rules  to  letter of  law 

I 

I 

0.5 

I 

1 

1.5 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

II 

I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I I 

0 


TABLE 1 

Derivation of Labels for the Dimensions 

Attributes 

1. Unintentionaliintentional 
2.  Not serious/serious 
3.  Not harmful to company/harmful to company 
4. Not harmful to individualsiharmful to individuals 
5. Very unethical/ethical 
6. Covertlovert 

Dimension  Dimension 

Correlations 

1 

2 

.13 
- .12 

.30* 

.-.84*** 

.03 

-.74*** 

1 

2 

3 

4 

.57** 
.38** 
.OO 

-.60** 
-.54** 

.64** 
.37** 
-.89** 
-.36** 

-.21 
-.51** 
-.40** 

.29* 
.30* 

5 

'd 

a
5 
% z 
3 
73
9 
1, 
.47**  3 


1995 

Robinson  and Bennett 

565 

gione  and  Quinn's  (1974) counterproductive  behavior  and  Hollinger  and 
Clark's  property  deviance, which  they  defined  as  "those  instances  where 
employees  acquire  or  damage  the  tangible  property  or  assets  of  the  work 
organization  without  authorization"  (1982:  333).  The  quadrant  reflecting 
relatively  minor but still organizationally harmful  deviant acts was labeled 
"production  deviance."  This quadrant is similar to Mangione  and Quinn's 
(1974) doing  little  or  nothing  and  Hollinger  and  Clark's  production  devi-

Typology of Deviant Workplace Behaviora 

FIGURE 2 

ORGANIZATIONAL 

Leaving early 
Taking excessive breaks 
Intentionally  working slow 
Wasting resources 

Sabotaging equipillent 
Accepting kickbacks 
Lying about hours worked 
Stealing from company 

MINOR  4 

I 

) SERIOUS 

Political Deviance 

Showing favoritism 
Gossiping about co-workers 
Blaming co-workers 
Competing nonbeneficially 

I  Personal Aggression 

Sexual harassment 
Verbal abuse 
Stealing from co-workers 
Endangering co-workers 

v 

INTERPERSONAL 

aThese lists are not exhaustive. We  provide a set of  the most typical behaviors  for each 

category for illustrative  purposes only. 


566 

Academy of  Management Journal 

April 

ance, which they defined as "behaviors that violate the formally proscribed 
norms  delineating the minimal  quality  and quantity of  work  to be  accom- 
plished"  (1982: 333). The third quadrant contained minor and interperson- 
ally  harmful  deviant  behavior.  We  labeled  this  quadrant  "political  devi-
ance," defining the behavior  as  engagement  in social interaction that puts 
other individuals at a personal or political disadvantage. The final quadrant, 
containing  serious  and  interpersonally  harmful  deviant  behavior,  was  la- 
beled "personal aggression,"  which we defined as behaving in an aggressive 
or hostile manner toward  other individuals. 

The four quadrants appeared to represent four distinct but related types 
of  deviance. To garner empirical support for our post hoc interpretations of 
these  categories, we  had  four  judges  who were blind  to  the  study and  its 
results  independently code the behaviors. These judges,  who were not  the 
same as the judges used in phase 3, were doctoral students in management. 
They  coded  each  behavior  into  one  of  four  categories  on the basis  of  the 
labels and definitions provided. Kappas were calculated for each of  the four 
categories to measure the degree of  interrater reliability. Overall, the kappas, 
which ranged from 74 to 89 percent, indicated high agreement between our 
typology and the raters'  categorization of  the behaviors. These results lend 
validity to our interpretation of  the quadrant labels and their meanings. 

DISCUSSION 

The study reported here integrated numerous deviant workplace behav- 
iors into a parsimonious framework. The results suggest that workplace  de- 
viance  varies  along two  dimensions  and  can be  classified  into four  types. 
The typology derived  here makes a contribution to the literature by empir- 
ically validating Wheeler's  (1976) distinction between serious and nonseri- 
ous  workplace  offenses  as  well  as  Mangione  and  Quinn's  (1974)  and 
Hollinger and Clark's  (1982) typologies, which distinguish between produc- 
tion and property  deviance. 

A more significant contribution of  this study is that it builds upon these 
previous  categorical schemes  and  produces  a  more  accurate and  compre- 
hensive  typology of  workplace  deviance.  First, our typology identifies the 
underlying dimensions of  deviance and thus clarifies not only the different 
categories of  deviance but  also how these categories  are related  to one an- 
other. Second, the typology incorporates two previously neglected forms of 
employee deviance, political deviance and personal aggression. To date, the 
limited literature on workplace  deviance has focused primarily  on produc- 
tion and property  deviance  (acts directed  at organizations), ignoring inter- 
personal forms of  deviance. As this study demonstrates, numerous behaviors 
directed at individuals, including verbal  abuse, physical assault, and polit- 
ical  behavior,  are  also  perceived  as  deviant.  These  findings  suggest  that 
workplace  deviance research should address social as well as organization- 
directed forms of  deviance. This refocusing  is important in light of  growing 
concerns about reducing social injustice, discrimination, and interpersonal 
violence in workplaces. 


1995 

Robinson and Bennett 

567 

This typology should prove useful in the development of  general theo- 
ries  of  workplace  deviance.  First, it  creates meaningful  patterns  out of  the 
wide range of  deviant behaviors and enables researchers to look at the gamut 
of  deviant behaviors  as a parsimonious whole. Second, it identifies the re- 
lationships between these behaviors as well as their underlying constructs. 
This framework paves the way for creating an integrated theory or theories 
encompassing the  behaviors  found  within  each  quadrant  or  across  quad- 
rants. Rather than continue to expend efforts on separate, unconnected, and 
potentially redundant studies of  specific deviant acts, researchers can begin 
to develop and test theoretical models of  the basic forms of  deviant behavior, 
such as  production  deviance  and  personal  aggression.  Such theories  will 
direct research attention and enable systematic exploration of  this phenom- 
enon and cumulation of  findings. 

The results  of  this study have implications for theories  addressing the 
antecedents  of  workplace  deviance.  Opinions  on  the  causes  of  deviance 
abound; some have argued that deviance results from individual attributes, 
such as low moral  standards (Merriam, 1977), and others have  argued  for 
situational  explanations  of  deviance,  such  as  organizational  inequities 
(Greenberg, 1990) and group norms  (Siehl, 1987). This study suggests that 
different variables  may  explain  different types  of  workplace  deviance. For 
example, organizational  variables  might  be  more  likely  to  influence  devi- 
ance  directed  at  harming  organizations,  and  individual  variables  may  be 
more likely to explain interpersonal forms of  deviance. 

The results  of  this  study may  also  have  implications  for  theories  ad- 
dressing  the  outcomes  of  workplace  deviance.  Deviance  may  be  dysfunc- 
tional and threatening to the well-being of  a social system (Best & Luckenbill, 
1982), but it may have several positive outcomes as well: providing a safety 
valve,  alerting  group  members  to  their  common  interests,  and  providing 
warning  signals  to  organizations.  This  study, which  clarifies the  different 
types of  workplace deviance, suggests that different forms of  deviance may 
have different consequences. For example, interpersonal deviance may serve 
social  functions  for  organization  members-building 
group  cohesiveness, 
organization-directed  deviance  may  be  more  likely  to 
for  example-and 
serve signaling functions for organizations. 

This typology, which incorporates  a wide range of  behaviors from var- 
ious domains of  organizational behavior, is also valuable in that it connects 
these  previously  unrelated  domains  of  study. For  example, the  employee 
deviance literature, which has focused almost exclusively on organization- 
directed forms of  deviance such as sabotage and theft, has remained largely 
separate from  the  growing  literature on discrimination  and  sexual harass- 
ment  in the workplace  (Kahn & Robbins, 1985; Levinger,  19871, which ad- 
dresses some behaviors that could be considered interpersonal forms of  de- 
viance.  Our  typology  may  provide  a  bridge  between  these  two  currently 
unrelated bodies of  research by conceptually integrating organizational and 
interpersonal  deviance.  Similarly,  this  typology  may  offer  a  conceptual 
bridge  between  the  traditional  study  of  absenteeism  and  withdrawal  (re- 


568 

Academy of  Management Journal 

April 

flected in production deviance) and other, thus far unrelated behaviors that 
we  also  identified  as forms of  production  deviance, such as wasting  com- 
pany resources  and intentionally working slowly. 

These findings  also  have  managerial  implications.  Procedural  justice 
research  has shown that employees perceive consistent punishment as fair 
(Bennett, 1993); that is, punishment is perceived to be fair to the extent that 
similar behaviors are punished similarly and to the extent that it matches the 
seriousness  of  the  offense  committed  (Wheeler, 1976). This  study reveals 
employees' perceptions of  the similarity between potentially punishable be- 
haviors  and  their  perceptions  of  the  seriousness  of  these  behaviors.  The 
procedural justice  findings, combined with the results of  this study, suggest 
that managers who are seeking to be fair should apply similar types of  pun- 
ishments  to  deviant  acts  that  are  physically  close  to  one  another  in  the 
spatial configuration,  such as intentionally making errors and  engaging  in 
sabotage.  Managers  should  also  match  the  severity  of  punishment  to  the 
perceived  seriousness  of  a  deviant  act; for  instance,  employees accepting 
kickbacks  and employees intentionally making errors  should receive  simi- 
lar, severe punishments, whereas  employees  intentionally  working  slowly 
should receive less severe punishments. 

Although this study focused on deviant workplace behavior rather than 
on unethical  behavior,  it  does  suggest that the study of  ethics may benefit 
from  an analogous  multidimensional  scaling  study  of  unethical  behavior. 
Robertson (1993), discussing ethics research, offered a number of  recommen- 
dations. Specifically, she recommended that researchers  clarify their  oper- 
ational definition of  ethics, emphasize behavior as the key dependent vari- 
able, focus on theory development, and build broader predictive models of 
behavior. An MDS study like the one employed here would begin to address 
these exact issues. 

To  summarize,  the  present  study  makes  a  variety  of  theoretical  and 
practical contributions. Its findings empirically validate previous categorical 
schemes of  deviance and extend those typologies by identifying the thus far 
neglected  interpersonal  forms  of  deviance.  Further,  this  typology  should 
prove useful for developing much-needed general theories of  workplace  de- 
viance,  particularly  theories  concerning the  antecedents  and  outcomes  of 
forms of  workplace  deviance. It should also aid in creating aggregated mea- 
sures of  workplace deviance to be used to test those theories. More broadly, 
the typology  generated  here  may  provide  a  valuable  conceptual  bridge  to 
previously  unrelated  domains  of  study  and  serve  as  a  model  for  related 
domains of  study, such as organizational  ethics. Finally, this typology has 
practical  implications,  suggesting  guidelines for  ways  in which  managers 
can fairly allocate punishments for deviant behavior. 

Several limitations of  this study should be noted. First, it was not tech- 
nically or  conceptually feasible to use an exhaustive list of  deviant behav- 
iors. The purpose  of  our  study was  to  develop  a typology from  which we 
could  classify  most  deviant  behaviors  (not only  those  used  to  create  the 
typology). That goal was accomplished. Second, although we attempted to 


1995 

Robinson and Bennett 

569 

reduce  researcher  biases,  they  were  not  eliminated.  Our  biases  may,  for 
example, have  entered the study when  we  selected  and rephrased  the be- 
havioral descriptions to be used in the analysis. However, we only shortened 
descriptions,  changing  no  content,  and  we  removed  only  descriptions  of 
already included behaviors.  Second, we  may have  also been biased  in our 
selection of  the attributes used in interpreting the dimensions. However, we 
selected  only  the  most  frequently  used  attributes, prior  to  looking  at  the 
configuration. Further, since we based the interpretation of  the dimensions 
on a  large  set  of  attributes, the inclusion  or  exclusion of  an additional  at- 
tribute is unlikely to have altered this interpretation. And finally, in deriving 
the names and meanings  of  the quadrants, we relied  on our post hoc inter- 
pretation  of  the  clusters. We  attempted  to  offset the potential bias  in this 
interpretation by validating our results with the judgments  of  independent 
and blind judges. In sum, we made a conscious effort to reduce the influence 
of  our biases  in the development of  this inductively derived typology. 

We hope this study will bring attention to the darker side of  organiza- 
tional behavior. It is our intention that this study serve as a springboard for 
additional  empirical  research  into  workplace  deviance.  Some  future  re- 
search directions include the development of  aggregated measures  of  devi- 
ance based  on the "four  p's"  (property deviance, production  deviance, po- 
litical deviance, and personal aggression) and the development of  predictive 
models of  deviance that take into account the wide range of  deviant behav- 
iors.  Management  research  has  developed  a  fairly  comprehensive  under- 
standing of  extrarole,  prosocial,  organizational  citizenship  behavior  (e.g., 
Organ, 1988) but has largely neglected  subrole, antisocial, deviant behavior. 
Researchers and practitioners need to understand  not only behavior  that is 
beneficial to organizations, but also behavior that is detrimental to them. 

REFERENCES 

Bennett, R.  1993. Reactions  to fair  punishment  for  unethical behavior. Working paper, Uni- 

versity of  Toledo, Toledo, OH. 

Best, J., & Luckenbill, D. F. 1982. Organizing deviance. Englewood  Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Cattell,  R. B.  1986. The meaning  and  strategic  use  of  factor  analysis.  In  R. B.  Cattell  & J. R. 
Nesselroade (Ed.), Handbook of multivariate experimentalpsychology (Zd ed.): 131-203. 
New York: Plenum. 

Cohen, A. K.  1966. Deviance  and social control. Englewood  Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Goodman, P., & Atkins, R. 1984.Absenteeism: New approaches to understanding, measuring 

and managing  employee  absence. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Greenberg, J. 1990. Employee theft as a reaction to underpayment inequity: The hidden cost of 

pay cuts. Journal of  Applied  Psychology, 75: 561-568. 

Greenberg, J. 1993. Stealing in the name of  justice: Informational and interpersonal moderators 
of  theft reactions to underpayment inequity. Organizational Behavior and Human Deci- 
sion Processes,  54: 81 -103. 

Gupta, N., & Jenkins, G. 1980. The structure  of withdrawal: Relationships among  estrange- 
ment, tardiness, absenteeism and turnover. Springfield, VA: National Technical Informa- 
tion Service. 


5 70 

Academy of Management Journal 

Gutek, B. A.  1985. Sex in the workplace. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Harper, D.  1990. Spotlight abuse-Save 
Hamilton, V. L.  1980.  Intuitive  psychologist  or  intuitive  lawyer?  Alternative  models  of  the 

profits. Industrial  Distribution,  79: 47-51. 

attribution  process. Journal of Personality and  Social Psychology,  39: 767-772. 

Hollinger, R. C., & Clark, J. P. 1982. Formal and informal social controls of  employee deviance. 

Sociological  Quarterly, 23: 333-343. 

Hulin, C. 1991. Adaptation,  persistence and commitment in organizations. In M. D. Dunnette & 
I. M. Hough  (Eds.), Handbook  of  industrial  organizational psychology,  vol.  2  (2d ed.): 
445-505.  Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists  Press. 

Hulin, C., & Rousseau, D. 1980. Analyzing infrequent events: Once you find them, your troubles 
begin. In K. H. Roberts & L. Burstein (Eds.), Issues in aggregation: 65-75.  San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 

Kahn, E. D.,  &  Robbins,  L.  (Eds.).  1985.  Sex  discrimination  in  academe.  Journal  of  Social 

Issues, 41(4): 135-154. 

Kaplan, H. B.  1975. Self-attitudes and  deviant  behavior. Pacific Palisades, CA: Goodyear. 
Kidwell, R. E., &Bennett, N. 1993. Employee propensity to withhold effort: A conceptual model 

to intersect three avenues of  research. Academy of  Management  Review,  18: 429-456. 

Kruskal, K. B.  1964. Multidimensional scaling by  optimizing  goodness  of  fit to  a  non-metric 

hypothesis. Psychometrika, 29: 1-27. 

Kruskal, K. B., & Wish, M.  1978. Multi-dimensional  scaling. Sage University  paper series on 
Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences, 07-011.  Beverly Hills and London: Sage. 
Lewis, P. V.  1985. Defining  "business  ethics":  Like nailing jello  to a wall. Journal ofBusiness 

Ethics, 4: 377-383. 

Levinger, G.  (Ed.). 1987. Black employment opportunities: Macro and micro perspectives. Jour-

nal of  Social Issues, 43(1): 1-4. 

Mangione, T. W.,  & Quinn, R. P. 1974. Job satisfaction, counterproductive behavior,  and drug 

use at work. Journal of Applied Psychology,  1: 114-116. 

Merriam, D.  1977. Employee theft. Criminal Justice Abstracts, 9: 380-386. 
Mowday,  R. T.,  Porter,  L. M., &  Steers, R. M.  1982. Employee-organizational linkages:  The 

psychology  of  commitment, absenteeism,  and  turnover. New York: Academic Press. 

Murphy, K. R.  1993. Honesty in the workplace. Belmont, CA: BrooksiCole. 
Organ, D. W. 1988. Organizational citizenship behavior. Lexington, MA: Lexington. 
Redeker, J. R.  1989. Employee  discipline. Washington, DC: Bureau of  National Affairs. 
Rich, P. 1992. The organizational taxonomy: Definition and design. Academy of  Management 

Review, 17: 758-781. 

Robertson, D. C. 1993. Empiricism in business ethics: Suggested research directions. Journal of 

Business Ethics, 12: 585-599. 

Rushton, J. P., Brainerd, C. J., & Pressley, M.  1983. Behavioral  development and construct va- 

lidity: The principle of  aggregation. Psychological Bulletin,  94: 18-38. 

Sheppard, B. H., Lewicki, R. J., & Minton, J. W. 1992. Organizational justice:  The search for 

fairness  in the workplace. New York: Lexington  Books. 

Siehl, E. W. 1987. Garment workers: Perceptions of  inequity and employee theft. British Jour- 

nal of  Criminology, 27(2): 174-190. 

Thompson, P.  1983. Some missing  data patterns  for multidimensional  scaling. Applied  Psy- 

chological Measurement, 7: 45-55. 


1995 

Robinson  and Bennett 

571 

Torgeson, W. S. 1952. Multidimensional scaling: Theory and method. Psychometrica, 17: 401- 

419. 

Trevino, L. K., & Youngblood, S. A. 1990. Bad apples in bad barrels: A causal analysis of  ethical 

decision making behavior. Journal of  Applied  Psychology,  75: 378-385. 

Vardi, Y., & Wiener, Y., 1992. Organizational misbehavior (OMB): A  calculative-normative 
model. Paper presented  at the annual meeting of  the Academy of  Management, Las Vegas. 
Wheeler, H. N.  1976. Punishment  theory and  industrial discipline. Industrial  Relations,  15: 

235-243. 

Young, F. W., & Lewyckyj, R.  1979. ALSCAL-4: User's guide.  Chapel Hill, NC: Data  Analysis 

and Theory Associates. 

APPENDIX 


Deviant Behavior Descriptions Used in the 


Multidimensional Scaling Analysis 


Employee stealing customer's  possessions. 
Boss verbally abusing employee. 
Employee sabotaging equipment. 
Employee coming to work  late or leaving early. 
Employee lying about hours worked. 
Employee gossiping about manager. 
Employee starting negative rumors about company. 
Boss sexually harassing employee. 
Employee physically  abusing customer. 
Employee taking excessive breaks. 
Employee sabotaging merchandise. 
Employee overcharging on services to profit  him- or herself. 
Employee intentionally making errors. 
Employee covering up mistakes. 
Employee leaving job  in progress  with no directions  so the job  is done wrong. 
Boss following rules to the letter of  the law. 
Employee gossiping about  co-worker. 
Employee intentionally working slowly. 

Boss unjustifiably  firing employee. 

Employee sexually harassing  co-worker. 

Employee accepting kickbacks. 

Employee endangering him- or herself  by not following safety procedures. 

Boss leaving early and leaving hisiher work for employees to do. 

Employee hiding in back room to read the newspaper. 

Employee stealing company equipmentimerchandise. 

Employee acting foolish in front of  customers. 

Employee verbally abusing customers. 

Employee working unnecessary overtime. 

Employee calling in sick when not. 

Boss showing favoritism to certain employees. 

Boss gossiping about employees. 

Employee talking with  co-worker instead  of  working. 

Employee stealing money from cash drawer. 

Employee misusing discount privilege. 

Employee wasting company resources by turning up the heat and opening the windows. 

Employee blaming  co-worker  for mistakes. 

Employee misusing expense account. 

Employee going against boss's  decision. 


- 

- 


572 

Academy of  Management Journal 

April 

Employees competing with co-workers  in a nonbeneficial way. 
Boss blaming employees  for hisiher mistakes. 
Boss refusing to give employee hislher earned benefits  or pay. 
Employee making personal  long distance calls or mailing personal  packages  from work. 
Employee endangering co-workers by reckless behavior. 
Employee stealing co-worker's  possessions. 
Boss asking employee to work beyond job  description. 

Sandra  L.  Robinson  is  an assistant  professor  of  management  at the  Stern  School  of 
Business, New York University. She received a Ph.D. degree in organizational behavior 
from Northwestern  University. Her current research interests include workplace  devi- 
ance, psychological contracts, employee voice, and employees' behavioral responses to 
dissatisfaction. 
Rebecca J. Bennett is an assistant professor of  management at the University of  Toledo. 
She received  her Ph.D.  degree  in organizational behavior from Northwestern  Univer- 
sity. Her current research interests include workplace deviance, employees' behavioral 
reactions  to  unfair  punishment, and  the relationship between  organizational citizen- 
ship behavior  and workplace  deviance. 


http://www.jstor.org

LINKED CITATIONS

- Page 1 of 1 -

You have printed the following article:

A Typology of Deviant Workplace Behaviors: A Multidimensional Scaling Study
Sandra L. Robinson; Rebecca J. Bennett
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 2. (Apr., 1995), pp. 555-572.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199504%2938%3A2%3C555%3AATODWB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P

This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.

References

Employee Propensity to Withhold Effort: A Conceptual Model to Intersect Three Avenues of
Research
Roland E. Kidwell, Jr.; Nathan Bennett
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 18, No. 3. (Jul., 1993), pp. 429-456.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199307%2918%3A3%3C429%3AEPTWEA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I

The Organizational Taxonomy: Definition and Design
Philip Rich
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 17, No. 4. (Oct., 1992), pp. 758-781.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199210%2917%3A4%3C758%3ATOTDAD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-X

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

