A STRUCTURE–CONDUCT–PERFORMANCE PERSPECTIVE

OF HOW STRATEGIC SUPPLY CHAIN INTEGRATION

AFFECTS FIRM PERFORMANCE

PETER M. RALSTON

University of West Florida

JENNIFER BLACKHURST, DAVID E. CANTOR, AND MICHAEL R. CRUM

Iowa State University

There are several factors that affect a ﬁrm’s ability to successfully integrate
internally and externally for organizational improvement. This study seeks
to understand the relationship between a ﬁrm’s strategy, its supply chain
integration efforts, and ﬁrm performance. Leveraging the theoretical lens
of structure–conduct–performance from the industrial organization eco-
nomics literature, and utilizing both archival and survey data, we describe
how ﬁrms may align their internal and external supply chain integration
strategies with customers and suppliers. In doing so, these internal and
external integration strategies affect the ﬁrm’s ability to respond to cus-
tomer demand, which then impacts operational and ﬁnancial perfor-
mance. Our work provides theoretical and empirical evidence of these
relationships and thus extends prior strategic supply chain integration lit-
erature.

Keywords: strategic integration; capabilities; performance; buyer/supplier relation-
ships; structural equation modeling; survey; archival data

INTRODUCTION

Linking supply chain processes across enterprises is
a means to create efﬁciencies, generate customer value,
and gain a competitive edge (Devaraj, Krajewski &
Wei, 2007). One way to create supply chain efﬁcien-
cies is to integrate processes both internally across
departments or functions and externally across ﬁrms
(Narasimhan, Swink & Viswanathan, 2010; Paulraj &
Chen, 2007). Stated differently, supply chain integra-
tion enables a ﬁrm to meet customer demand by
bringing departments or partnering ﬁrms
closer
together. In this study, integration is deﬁned as the
management of various sets of activities that aims at
seamlessly linking relevant business processes both
within and across ﬁrms, as well as eliminating dupli-
cate or unnecessary parts of the processes for the pur-
pose of building a better functioning supply chain
(Chen, Daugherty & Roath, 2009).

Managing relationships in a supply chain requires
cross-functional and cross-ﬁrm business processes
with appropriate levels of information sharing, close
partnerships, and the coordination of operational

activities (Leuschner, Rogers & Charvet, 2013). Build-
ing upon that foundation, supply chain integration is
viewed as a process by which a ﬁrm acquires, shares,
and consolidates strategic knowledge and information
internally throughout
the ﬁrm and externally with
supply chain partners (Swink, Narasimhan & Wang,
2007). Effective integration can reach beyond func-
tional silos and ﬁrm boundaries to develop a uniﬁed
value creation process that generates and delivers
value for the customer.

However,

integration among ﬁrms,

and even
within, is not without challenges. Integration is a dif-
ﬁcult undertaking that involves careful management
of resources (Koufteros, Edwin Cheng & Lai, 2007).
For example, Fawcett and Magnan (2002) note that
some ﬁrms have trouble forging relationships with
external partners because they are busy coordinating
internal activities. Richey, Roath, Whipple and Fawc-
to integration
ett
including
information,
incongruent goals, and losing sight of the customer
which could impact external or internal ﬁrm relation-

(2010) discuss certain barriers

a unidirectional ﬂow of

Xxxx 2014

1


Journal of Supply Chain Management

results

ships. Additionally,
integration efforts implemented
without a clear focus can lead to less than desired
performance
(Fawcett & Magnan, 2002;
Springinklee & Wallenburg, 2012). This suggests that
ﬁrms may need to rethink why they integrate as well
as how integration, both internally and externally,
can impact ﬁrm performance.

Integration is not a standard solution to every
business problem. Rather, integration may be better
utilized as a tool for ﬁrms to employ as a response
in certain market and environmental
conditions
(Porter, 1980). Having a reason to integrate may
provide the impetus for more successful
relation-
ships. In this regard, ﬁrms can integrate due to com-
mon issues and share a singular goal to maintain
individual ﬁrm performance while providing cus-
tomer value. The current research investigates this
broad research question by analyzing the extent to
which strategic integration affects ﬁrm performance
from a supply chain perspective. Speciﬁcally, we
leverage
(SCP)
framework from industrial organizational economics
to develop and empirically test theory about how a
ﬁrm’s supply chain integration activities act as a
structural
response to basic market conditions to
impact ﬁrm performance (Caves, 1964; Caves & Por-
ter, 1977; Chatain, 2011).

structure–conduct–performance

the

One contribution within this work is that the inte-
gration constructs contain process-oriented, strategi-
cally focused elements that suggest a higher level of
integration than solely at the operational level. A ﬁrm
integrates with its supply chain partners as a way to
deliver and provide customer value (Flynn, Huo &
Zhao, 2010). Strategic integration of supply chain ele-
ments internally and externally help to further this
endeavor
(Mackelprang, Robinson, Bernardes &
Webb, 2014). This is because integration allows busi-
ness units or groups of ﬁrms to act as a single unit
potentially enhancing efﬁciencies and performance for
all parties (Frohlich & Westbrook, 2001; Schoenherr
& Swink, 2012; Tan, Kannan & Handﬁeld, 1998). The
current research speciﬁcally investigates corporate stra-
tegic integration (internal integration) as well as stra-
tegic
supplier
integration (external
integration). Another contribu-
tion of the work is the use of the SCP framework to
explain the conduct of ﬁrms. Finding ways to distin-
guish ﬁrms from one another is a hallmark of compe-
tition (Porter, 1980). One such method in supply
chain management is to be responsive to customer
demand. Demand response is the ability to anticipate
or handle changes in marketplace demand (Braunsc-
heidel & Suresh, 2009). This ability allows ﬁrms to
meet customer expectations while also mitigating sup-
ply challenges that may be associated with stochasti-
cally demanded goods (Fisher, 1997). Following the

integration and strategic

customer

investigate

SCP framework, we
relationship
between demand response and both operational and
ﬁnancial performance because managers must balance
both metrics in competitive supply chain settings.
Thus, the speciﬁc research questions are as follows:

the

RQ1: Is corporate strategic (internal) integration
related to strategic customer and supplier (external)
integration?

RQ2: Does strategic customer and supplier integra-
tion impact ﬁrm conduct,
speciﬁcally demand
response?

RQ3: What is the relationship between demand
response and ﬁrm performance?

and theoretical

framework supporting

In the next section of this study, we discuss the liter-
ature
the
research. Next, we introduce the study’s conceptual
model and hypotheses. Afterward, we describe the
study’s methodology and sample population and pres-
ent our ﬁndings. We conclude by discussing the theo-
retical and managerial
the study’s
ﬁndings.

implications of

LITERATURE REVIEW

Supply Chain Integration

Firms realize that in order to remain competitive
they have to offer goods or services to customers that
are of higher quality and/or priced lower than com-
petitors (Cousins & Menguc, 2006). In other words,
ﬁrms have to deliver value to customers while remain-
ing proﬁtable. This proves problematic in a time when
ﬁrms are less vertically integrated and ﬁrms may have
to rely on other parties to aid in providing customers
value (Saeed, Malhotra & Grover, 2005). One method
for a ﬁrm to address this challenge is to integrate sup-
ply chains internally and externally. Supply chain inte-
gration links intraﬁrm departments, buyers, suppliers,
and other chain members to improve the efﬁciency
and effectiveness of supply chains and their deliveries
to end users (Morash & Clinton, 1998).

A rich literature base exists on the topic of integra-
tion. Skinner (1969) espouses the beneﬁts of internal
integration to make sure departments are uniﬁed
along a single company goal. Bowersox, Closs and
Stank (2000) concur by discussing how focusing on
functional or departmental excellence can sometimes
come at the expense of ﬁrm goals. Rather, the authors
note that internally integrating can improve ﬁrm per-
formance and prevent internal departments from cre-
ating pockets of power that harm other corporate
functions. Additionally, internal integration can create
value by eliminating redundancies, creating efﬁcien-
cies, and reducing costs
(Mollenkopf, Frankel &

2

Volume 0, Number 0


Strategic Supply Chain Integration and Performance

Russo, 2011; Mollenkopf, Russo & Frankel, 2007;
Stank, Keller & Closs, 2001).

However, the beneﬁts of integration are not solely
held within ﬁrm boundaries. Firms integrate with
external supply chain partners to streamline business
processes with the goal of meeting customer demand
(Narasimhan et al., 2010). External
integration has
been shown to positively beneﬁt customer service,
innovation, and new product development (Koufteros,
Vonderembse & Jayaram, 2005; Koufteros et al., 2007;
Oke, Prajogo & Jayaram, 2013; Vickery,
Jayaram,
Droge & Calantone, 2003). While numerous examples
promote the beneﬁts of integration, why are more
ﬁrms not able to successfully integrate with their sup-
ply chain partners? As Pagell (2004) notes, the impor-
tance of
in doubt. Beneﬁts of
integration have been shown both internally and
externally. Yet ﬁrms struggle to achieve these beneﬁts
(Fawcett & Magnan, 2002). With challenges occurring
during integration, how can ﬁrms hope to capitalize
on these beneﬁts? The answer may lie with enmeshing
strategy and integration.

integration is not

a

and/or

stronger

advancing

supporting

Strategic integration combines resources and compe-
tencies between business units and ﬁrms for the pur-
pose of
corporate
strategy (Burgelman & Doz, 2001). As such, the impe-
tus to integrate is not necessarily to make a process
more efﬁcient or capitalize on economies of scale;
instead integration occurs because it supports ﬁrm
goals or objectives. In this regard, strategically inte-
grating may have
relationship with
improved performance because the foundation for
integration is not operational
in nature; rather the
foundation is to support an underlying strategy (Mac-
kelprang et al., 2014; Wiengarten, Pagell, Ahmed &
Gimenez, 2014). Consistent with our research ques-
tions, and for the purposes of contributing to the lit-
erature related to strategic supply chain integration,
we investigate the role of corporate strategic (internal)
integration and its impact on strategic customer and
supplier
this
higher order view of integration at the strategic level
is examined to determine its impact on demand
response or the ability to handle demand changes in
the marketplace (Braunscheidel & Suresh, 2009).
Finally,
the relationship between demand response
and performance, both operational and ﬁnancial, is
examined.

integration. Additionally,

(external)

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND

HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT

Structure–Conduct–Performance

The SCP framework ﬁnds its roots in industrial orga-
nization economics. The theory argues that ﬁrms
derive competitive advantages by responding to the

characteristics of the industry in which they compete
(Bain, 1956; Caves, 1964; Mason, 1939). Firms pursue
strategies in response to market conditions, which
alter ﬁrm (and supply chain) conduct to positively
impact the level of proﬁts earned (Bettis, 1981; Weiss,
1979). The main contribution of
the theoretical
framework is the consideration of industry and ﬁrm-
level factors on performance (Panagiotou, 2006).

inﬂuences

Porter (1979, 1980, 1991) points out that industry
composition, derived from competitors and standard
operating practices,
the decisions ﬁrms
make to survive. He also notes that a ﬁrm’s strategy is
formulated in response to industry dynamics, which
affects conduct and ultimately ﬁrm performance. Strat-
egy is deﬁned as the match an organization makes
between its internal
resources and skills and the
opportunities available in its external environment
(Grant, 1991). When organizations compete,
is
important for them to consider the marketplace in
which they participate (Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967;
McKone-Sweet & Lee, 2009). This consideration may
lead to a strategy which deﬁnes corporate goals and
steps required to meet those goals (Gibson, Mentzer
& Cook, 2005; Stank, Davis & Fugate, 2005). In this
manner, strategy can lead to reasoned, planned action
driving ﬁrm conduct (Day, 1999).

it

that

levels,

Strategy formulation at the ﬁrm level needs to con-
sider internal and external environments as well as
different organizational
is, departments
and divisions (Bowersox & Daugherty, 1995). How-
ever, considering external environmental factors can
lead ﬁrms to realize that acting alone may not be
enough. Firms usually do not possess all the necessary
resources and capabilities required to effectively com-
pete in today’s marketplace (Ellram, Tate & Billington,
2008; Leuschner et al., 2013). Therefore, creating a
differential advantage by maximizing value to end
consumers can require a multiﬁrm focus (Jap, 1999,
2001). Operational processes and actions spanning
ﬁrms may beneﬁt from a strategic framework, which
fosters cross-functional and cross-organizational inte-
gration (Bowersox, Closs & Stank, 1999). Strategically
integrating with collaborative partners can lead to
coordinated actions which align the processes of mul-
tiple ﬁrms (Flynn et al., 2010; Porter, 1980).

Strategic integration internally and across supply
chain partners may also be a structural response to
industry and market characteristics. Vertical
integra-
tion has been noted as one way ﬁrms can structure
themselves to more effectively compete (Caves, 1964;
Morgan, Kaleka & Katsikeas, 2004; Porter, 1980). In
this manner, strategic supply chain integration may
represent the current structural business form required
for ﬁrms versus traditional approaches in the SCP
framework. This is because achieving supply chain
success and ﬁrm performance outcomes in today’s

Xxxx 2014

3


Journal of Supply Chain Management

business environment may rely on the successful inte-
gration of multiple supply chain partners (Richey
et al., 2010). The current research aims at addressing
this gap by bringing together the theoretical frame-
work of SCP and strategic integration. Speciﬁcally, we
argue for achieving internal integration and utilizing
this internal competency to drive external integration
with both customers and suppliers. This is different
than past research because of the level of focus on
strategic integration and how strategy plays a role in
integrative efforts, both internally and externally. The
strategic emphasis helps
industry
dynamics while providing a focus for ﬁrm and supply
chain partner conduct
to impact performance. The
conceptual model for the current research is provided
below. The following section discusses the hypotheses
underlying the research (Figure 1).

to account

for

Hypothesis Development

Firms search and take note of market factors, includ-
ing the characteristics of
the industry (Jaworski &
Kohli, 1993; Porter, 1979, 1980), to compete with
other ﬁrms. Industry characteristics include the num-
ber and size of buyers and sellers in a given market,
degree of product differentiation, extent of vertical
integration, and the level of the barriers to entry or
switching in a given market (Caves, 1964; McWilliams
& Smart, 1993). Industry factors are an important
determinant of ﬁrm competitive behavior because the
signals that are communicated in the market provide
clues on which actions the ﬁrm needs to take. How-
ever, noting how much ﬁrms could proﬁt provides no
indication on how they should act, or toward what
purpose they should strive, to achieve those proﬁts. In
other words, ﬁrms seek to understand how to struc-
ture themselves to be a successful competitor. One
such method may be through the development of cor-
porate strategy.

The ﬁrm’s corporate strategy inﬂuences how a ﬁrm
competes in an industry or market (Olson, Slater &

Hult, 2005). A ﬁrm’s strategy can serve as a founda-
tion for, as well as a guide to, different company func-
tions on what needs to occur and be accomplished to
meet ﬁrm goals (Rodrigues, Stank & Lynch, 2004).
Chandler (1962) was one of the ﬁrst authors to argue
that strategy, born from knowing and understanding
competitive opportunities, can drive ﬁrm conduct to
improve or assure ﬁrm performance. A properly devel-
oped strategy can serve as a signal to employees as to
what a ﬁrm believes is important. Firm strategies also
provide a unifying sense of purpose to employees
(Thun, 2010). Additionally, and perhaps more impor-
tantly, well-known and accepted ﬁrm strategies align
organizational departments and operations with the
intent of achieving ﬁrm goals (Baier, Hartmann & Mo-
ser, 2008; Wheelwright, 1984). Strategic alignment
between ﬁrm and operational strategies can lead to
efﬁciencies throughout the ﬁrm and improve overall
organizational effectiveness (Chan, Huff, Barclay &
Copeland, 1997; Venkatraman & Prescott, 1990). In a
sense, strategic alignment facilitates the coordinated
actions of ﬁrm departments and employees, assuring
that efforts at work are being directed toward over-
arching ﬁrm goals. This highlights the importance of
ensuring that corporate strategy is diffused through-
out, and fully integrated within, a ﬁrm.

Swink et al. (2007) deﬁne corporate strategic inte-
gration as the process of acquiring and sharing objec-
tives, plans, and related knowledge pertaining to
business and operational strategies. The value of hav-
ing a corporate strategy fully integrated throughout
the ﬁrm is the value generated and potential competi-
tive advantages created (Day & Wensley, 1983). While
this is aided by acquiring and sharing knowledge
between business and operational strategies, other fac-
tors may also play a role. These include alignment
between corporate and functional level strategies, clar-
ity,
communication, and top
management support (Burgelman & Doz, 2001; Chan-
dler, 1962; Fawcett, Magnan & McCarter, 2008). As

intra-organizational

FIGURE 1

Theoretical Model

Corporate 
Strategic 
IntegraƟon

H1

H2

Strategic 
Customer 
IntegraƟon

Strategic Supplier 

IntegraƟon

H3

H4

Demand Response

H5

H6

Cycle Time Process 

Performance

H7

Financial 

Performance

4

Volume 0, Number 0


Strategic Supply Chain Integration and Performance

such, corporate strategic integration is deﬁned as the
diffusion of ﬁrm-level
strategy within functional
departments and functional goals being aligned with,
and communicated throughout, the entire organiza-
tion.

employees

across departments

Ellinger, Daugherty and Keller (2000) and Kahn and
Mentzer (1996) both discuss the ineffectiveness of
forcing
to work
together without a clear objective. Corporate strategic
integration solves this issue. Additionally, corporate
strategic integration can bring together ﬁrm depart-
ments highlighting functional capabilities that can
assist in meeting company goals as well as limitations
that might prevent a ﬁrm from achieving its goals.
When these limitations are known, a single corporate
strategy uniﬁes ﬁrm employees to ﬁnd solutions (Ro-
senzweig, Roth & Dean, 2003). These solutions
include strategically integrating with external partners
including customers and suppliers.

information should allow ﬁrms

Strategic customer integration is deﬁned as the ﬁrm’s
acquisition of information about customers that can
be used to generate customer value (Hayes & Wheel-
wright, 1984; Swink et al., 2007). Strategic customer
integration serves multiple purposes. One beneﬁt is
the ability of the ﬁrm to proactively seek information
on customer preferences and needs (Vickery et al.,
2003). This
the
opportunity to align their actions to best meet cus-
tomer demand because strategically integrating with
customers requires more than process-level or opera-
tional task integration. A ﬁrm has little idea how satis-
ﬁed the customer is with performance or what else
the customer would like to see the providing ﬁrm
accomplish when information is exchanged electroni-
cally or operations occur through established routines.
Customer intimacy and the sharing of customer satis-
faction information throughout the ﬁrm are more per-
tinent
to strategically integrating with customers
(Flynn, Schroeder & Sakakibara, 1995; Flynn et al.,
2010; Swink et al., 2007). However, receiving the ben-
eﬁts of strategically integrating with customers may
occur only when the ﬁrm realizes this is an important
undertaking. One way to espouse these beneﬁts may
be through having a corporate strategy integrated
throughout the ﬁrm. Therefore, the following hypoth-
esis is offered:

H1: Corporate strategic integration is positively
related to strategic customer integration.

successfully

Strategic customer integration is of limited value if
capitalize on the
the ﬁrm cannot
information and requirements shared by customers
(Narasimhan et al., 2010). Sometimes possessing
knowledge or information is not enough, especially if
ﬁrms have no means of producing or providing the

customer requirements. Recently, companies are more
apt to rely on suppliers to help effectively deliver the
goods and services customers want (Koufteros et al.,
2005, 2007). Strategically integrating with suppliers
allows for mutual support, cooperation, and coordina-
tion (Rosenzweig et al., 2003).

Strategic supplier integration is deﬁned as the pro-
cess of acquiring and sharing operational, technical,
and ﬁnancial information and related knowledge with
the supplier to drive improvement and generate value
(Swink et al., 2007). Flynn et al. (2010) note that
strategic supplier integration facilitates the supplier’s
understanding and anticipation of
the focal ﬁrm’s
needs. Strategic supplier integration involves improved
information sharing and supplier engagement (Swink
et al., 2007). Suppliers beneﬁt from strategic supplier
integration because they can become more quickly
aware of the ﬁrm’s operational activities and what the
supplier can do to meet the organization’s needs. This
in turn can lead to an improvement in the focal ﬁrm’s
customer service. Strategically integrating with suppli-
ers also allows ﬁrms to focus on their core competen-
cies. This helps ﬁrms handle what they do well while
being able to rely on the expertise of partners for
areas in which they need assistance (Zhao, Huo, Flynn
& Yeung, 2008). There is a complementarity that
exists between strategically integrated suppliers and
ﬁrms that facilitate improved coordination, capabili-
ties, and performance (Paulraj & Chen, 2007).

We propose that ﬁrms which have their corporate
strategy integrated throughout the ﬁrm may be better
able to strategically integrate with suppliers because
an integrated corporate strategy will highlight oppor-
tunities for external integration as well as what type
of supply partner may be best. As such, we argue
that corporate strategic integration helps in the pro-
cess of integrating with suppliers. Thus, the following
relationship is hypothesized:

H2: Corporate strategic integration is positively
related to strategic supplier integration.

At the center of integrative efforts is the desire to
improve performance by developing or enhancing
competencies with which to meet customer demand
(Flynn et al., 2010). These collaborative relationships
create synergistic resources where summed parts can
be greater than individual components (Corsten &
Kumar, 2005; Ellram et al., 2008). Frohlich and
Westbrook (2001) note that integration can spawn
new, or coordinate existing, capabilities and provide
a competitive advantage. Further, these partnerships
are enhanced when they are strategically integrated
(Flynn et al., 2010; Narasimhan et al., 2010; Swink
et al., 2007). This is because strategy helps to coordi-
nate and manage the value creation process to create

Xxxx 2014

5


Journal of Supply Chain Management

activities designed for customer beneﬁt (Payne &
Frow, 2005). In this manner, strategy serves as the
structural foundation for ﬁrm and supply chain part-
ner integration to create value for the customer. In
this study, we measure value to the customer as the
ability to be responsive to demand.

Demand response is the ability to anticipate or han-
dle changes in marketplace demand (Braunscheidel &
Suresh, 2009; Christopher, 2000; van Hoek, Harrison
& Christopher, 2001). Responding quickly to demand
changes is almost a competitive priority in dynamic
business environments (Danese, Romano & Formen-
tini, 2013; Handﬁeld & Bechtel, 2002). Demand
response derives its value from not only assisting in
meeting customer desires, but also predicting or allevi-
ating any supply issues which might prevent meeting
customer demand. This occurs as strategic integration
with customers and suppliers helps organizations
match resource deployments with demands (Swink
et al., 2007).
Integrating customers and suppliers
based on a foundation of end customer value creation
can lead to a knowledge sharing process between
ﬁrms (Esper, Ellinger, Stank, Flint & Moon, 2010).
Having the ability to synthesize information from
supply chain partners about
their operations and
changes they estimate will happen in the marketplace
greatly enhances a ﬁrm’s capability to respond to
demand (Fisher, 1997). This also enables all ﬁrms in
the supply chain to understand customer require-
ments. Once these requirements are known, ﬁrms can
prioritize and fulﬁll customer orders based upon the
shared generation, dissemination, interpretation, and
application of real-time customer demand and poten-
tial supply constraints (Esper et al., 2010).

Strategic integration with both customers and sup-
pliers can help ﬁrms effectively respond to changes in
demand. Strategic customer integration helps ﬁrms
understand customer preferences and predict how
these preferences may change over time (Swink et al.,
2007). This heightened customer awareness can lead
to capabilities which represent value-added customer
activities (Autry, Grifﬁs, Goldsby & Bobbitt, 2005).
Strategic supplier
integration enhances information
sharing and resource utilization to assist in meeting
demand (Koufteros et al., 2005). With the under-
standing that demand response is vital to creating cus-
tomer value, we offer the following hypotheses:

H3: Strategic customer
related to demand response.

integration is positively

H4: Strategic
related to demand response.

supplier

integration is positively

One of

responding quickly to
changes in customer demand is the ability to main-

the beneﬁts of

tain or improve operational performance (Braunschei-
del & Suresh, 2009; Richey, Adams & Dalela, 2012).
Understanding the linkage between customer demand
response and operational performance is one way in
which ﬁrms can generate a competitive advantage.
Once the needs, preferences, and capabilities of sup-
ply chain partners are known, a supply chain can
operate more efﬁciently (Hult, Ketchen & Nichols,
2002). One potential beneﬁt of
this awareness is
order cycle time process performance (Hult, Ketchen
& Slater, 2004).

is one potential outcome of

Order cycle time process performance is deﬁned as
the interval between a buyer’s request for a good or
service and this good or service’s delivery or fulﬁll-
ment (Hult et al., 2004). Cycle time process perfor-
mance
efﬁcient
operations. Reliable and consistent cycle times repre-
sent a competitive advantage for ﬁrms (Gunaseka-
ran, Patel & Tirtiroglu, 2001) due to the value
derived by customers from receiving timely orders
(Hult et al., 2002, 2004). Anticipating or responding
to changes
in demand should help maintain or
enhance the performance of
the cycle time pro-
cess. Therefore, we hypothesize the following rela-
tionship:

H5: Demand response is positively related to
improved cycle time process performance.

Another desired effect of demand response is the
positive impact on ﬁnancial performance. The ﬁrm
needs to react quickly to demand signals because mar-
ket and consumer conditions change rapidly (Oliva &
Watson, 2011). This ability to understand or even
forecast demand could have a large impact on
resource requirements cost,
inventory expense, and
proﬁtability (Gunasekaran, Patel & McGaughey, 2004;
Peng, Verghese, Shah & Schroeder, 2013). Demand
responsiveness highlights a ﬁrm’s ability to meet mar-
ket needs. This responsiveness may even impact cus-
tomer perceptions and signal
to the competitive
environment an effective utilization of ﬁrm resources
(Day, 1999). As such, a ﬁrm may expect ﬁnancial gain
when it responds quickly to changes in customer
demand. Therefore,
is
offered:

following hypothesis

the

H6: Demand response is positively related to
improved ﬁnancial performance.

Finally, we expect

that operational performance
inﬂuences ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance (Ketchen &
Hult, 2007). Lambert and Burduroglu (2000) concep-
tualize a strategic proﬁt model where operational
capabilities and processes, in this case logistics, impact
ﬁrm performance. Positive cycle time performance
may also affect ﬁrm performance.

6

Volume 0, Number 0


Strategic Supply Chain Integration and Performance

that

Hult et al. (2004) speciﬁcally suggest

time-
based competition is prevalent
in today’s business
environment. The authors posit that improved cycle
time performance positively impacts overall ﬁrm per-
formance, with the rationale that shorter cycle times
can provide ﬁrms a competitive advantage. This factor
may differentiate ﬁrms from competitors and be val-
ued by customers contributing to overall ﬁrm proﬁt-
ability. Handﬁeld and Nichols (2002) as well as
Ketchen and Hult (2007) both state that cycle time
performance has a direct, positive link to ﬁrm proﬁt-
ability. As such, the following hypothesis is offered:

H7: Cycle time process performance is positively
related to ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance.

METHODOLOGY

Measurement Development and Sample

A Web-based survey utilizing Dillman’s (2000) rec-
ommended approach was developed to evaluate the
study’s hypotheses. Multi-item measures were used to
operationalize the constructs. The items used in the
survey were adapted from established scales in the lit-
erature (Churchill, 1979). Before administering the
survey to the respondent pool, feedback was solicited
from eight industry practitioners and ﬁve academic
feedback provided by the experts
faculties. The
ensured survey representativeness,
content
validity, and face validity. After modifying the survey
based on the experts’ edits and recommendations, the
questionnaire was distributed to supply chain profes-
sionals employed in U.S. manufacturing ﬁrms.

clarity,

including

information of

telephone numbers

The sample pool of supply chain professionals was
acquired from a Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) database.
The database contained professional contact informa-
tion,
and email
addresses of supply chain employees of ﬁrms located
in the United States. The D&B database was pur-
chased because it was important to the research team
to acquire a database containing both the telephone
and email address of potential survey respondents.
Having the contact
the respondent
pool allowed the research team to pre-alert the supply
chain professionals about the survey instrument (Dill-
man, 2000). In so doing, a team of university stu-
dents was hired and trained to contact the supply
chain professionals listed in the D&B database. Pre-
contacting the survey respondents was done to create
awareness of the upcoming survey and attempt to mit-
igate the problems associated with a low response
rate. Additionally, contacting the respondent pool also
allowed the research team to gain insight as to why
potential respondents may not participate in the sur-
vey. In total, the research team attempted to contact
4,456 supply chain professionals
from late 2010

through early 2011. Of
the total respondent pool,
2,284 were unreachable due to various reasons such
as bad contact information, the contacts no longer
being with the company, or being employees of com-
panies that did not allow their workers to participate
in surveys. Surveys were provided to the remaining
2,172 potential respondents in an email with a link
to a secure, online Web address. This online platform
allowed the research team to collect responses elec-
tronically. Of the remaining 2,172 potential respon-
dents, 220 completed usable surveys were received
which also represented 220 unique companies. This
resulted in a ﬁnal response rate of 10.13 percent.

The average respondent was 48.2 years old with an
average of 26.75 years of work experience. Approxi-
mately 80 percent of the respondents were male with
respondents representing the occupations of analysts,
managers, or executives. The average ﬁrm represented
in the sample had a market share of 26 percent and a
return on assets (ROA) of 3.2 percent. Thirty-one per-
cent of the respondents represented ﬁrms in the com-
puter and electronic manufacturing industry, with
another 15 percent
chemical
industry. Electrical equipment, food, heavy machinery,
and transportation equipment manufacturers were
industries
represented by between 5 percent and
10 percent of other respondents. Various industries
were represented by the remaining respondents.

from the industrial

factors

among

companies

Nonresponse bias was investigated by comparing
that
demographic
responded to the survey and those that did not. Uti-
lizing the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS)
database, the research team collected ﬁrm ﬁnancial
and operational level information for respondent and
nonrespondent ﬁrms alike. No statistically signiﬁcant
differences among the ﬁnancial and operational vari-
ables collected existed among the respondent and
nonrespondent
groups. Additionally, nonresponse
bias was tested by comparing the responses of early
versus
(Armstrong & Overton,
1977). No statistically signiﬁcant differences were
found between the groups. Therefore,
it was con-
cluded that nonresponse bias is not a serious concern
in our sample.

respondents

late

Common methods bias can be a concern when both
independent and dependent variables are collected
from the same survey respondent (Podsakoff & Organ,
1986). Common method bias (CMB) concerns were
addressed in a variety of ways. First, a Harman’s single-
factor test of all of the measurement items was con-
ducted (Harman, 1976). If all of the measurement
items across the constructs of interest were to load on
one single exploratory factor, or one factor accounted
for more than 50 percent of the explained variance,
CMB would be assumed to be present (Podsakoff &
Organ, 1986). An exploratory factor analysis was

Xxxx 2014

7


Journal of Supply Chain Management

performed and the factor solution identiﬁed ﬁve differ-
ent factors above the eigenvalue greater than 1.0 crite-
rion. These ﬁve factors explained 73 percent of the
variance in the data with the largest factor reporting
only 38 percent of the explained variance. A second test
of CMB was completed using Lindell and Whitney’s
(2001) marker variable technique. In this analysis, the
smallest correlation between constructs was used as a
post hoc proxy to represent CMB. This marker variable
correlation was then partialled out from the remaining
constructs to see whether the remaining relationship
between constructs was still signiﬁcant. The remaining
correlations remained signiﬁcant, indicating CMB did
not play a signiﬁcant role in our ﬁndings.

Additionally, the latent variable constructs in the cur-
rent study utilized different response formats. Podsak-
off, MacKenzie and Podsakoff (2012) advocate this
technique as another way to control for CMB. Finally,
one of the dependent variables (ﬁnancial performance)
and all of the control variables in the study were gath-
ered from the WRDS database. Use of multiple data
sources, in this case the survey and the data from the
WRDS database, helps to mitigate the effects of CMB
(Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee & Podsakoff, 2003).

Independent and Dependent Variables

agree). The

(2007). Respondents were

The variables utilized in the current research project
are described below as well as in the Appendix. The
ﬁrst independent variable is corporate strategic inte-
gration and is adapted from items found in Swink
et al.
asked to rate
(1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree) their level
of agreement with the four corporate strategic integra-
tion items. Strategic customer integration and strategic
supplier integration were also adapted from Swink
et al. (2007) and each had three items. The constructs
were measured on a 7-point scale (1 = strongly dis-
agree, 7 = strongly
items measuring
demand response were adapted from Braunscheidel
and Suresh (2009), Christopher (2000), and van
Hoek et al. (2001). The four items were rated by
respondents on a 5-point scale (1 = strongly disagree,
5 = strongly agree). Cycle time process performance,
one of the dependent variables in the current study,
was rated using three items adapted from Hult et al.
(2002). Respondents were asked to indicate their level
(1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly
of agreement
agree). Return on equity (ROE) serves as the ﬁnancial
performance metric in the current study. This measure
was calculated for ﬁscal year end 2011 based on archi-
val data from the WRDS database. ROE represents
organizational value as derived from, or recognized
by, shareholders (Hillman & Keim, 2001) and has
been used in existing supply chain research (Flynn
et al., 2010; Petersen, Ragatz & Monczka, 2005).
However, the current paper represents one of the ﬁrst

supply chain integration studies to employ objective
ﬁrm ﬁnancial and industry-level data.

Control Variables

The control variables utilized in the analysis were
derived from the WRDS database.
Industry size,
assessed by the number of companies with a common
NAICS code, was one control variable. Similarly, mar-
ket share was also utilized as a control variable. Mar-
ket share was calculated by taking a ﬁrm’s revenue
and dividing it by the industry’s total revenue. Market
share serves as a proxy for the level of power that the
ﬁrm has in the industry.
Industry type was also
included as a control variable to control for industry
factors that could affect ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance
(e.g., industry concentration).

Analysis

Anderson and Gerbing’s (1988) two-step approach
was utilized. A conﬁrmatory factor analysis was used
to evaluate the measurement items. After conﬁrming
the validity of the measurement model, we evaluated
the study’s structural model.

Validity and Reliability

Convergent validity was assessed by examining the
standardized factor
loadings of each measurement
item along with the average variance extracted (AVE)
of each latent measurement construct. The items had
measurement loadings ranging from .63 to .87 and
were all signiﬁcant (p < .001). The loadings are above
the .50 threshold and indicate convergent validity
(Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson & Tatham, 2006). As
shown in the Appendix, the AVE was calculated for
each construct. The AVE indicates the amount of vari-
ance captured by the latent construct relative to error
variances (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). The AVEs for the
constructs in this study range in value from .51 to
.65. This also indicates convergent validity as the con-
structs account for more than 50 percent of the vari-
ance explained in the constructs (Hatcher, 1994). We
tested for discriminant validity by comparing the
square root of the AVEs to the interitem correlations
between pairs of constructs (Fornell & Larcker, 1981).
If the square root value of the AVE is larger than the
correlations, discriminant validity is supported. Our
results, depicted in Table 1, support the discriminant
validity of the study’s constructs based on this test. As
noted in the Appendix, the Cronbach’s alpha estimate
of the constructs ranged from .75 to .86, providing
evidence of construct reliability (Cronbach, 1951).

The measurement model demonstrates adequate ﬁt
(v2 = 170.75, v2/d.f. = 1.57, CFI = .97, TLI = .96,
RMSEA = .05, SRMR = .05). Each index falls within
acceptable model ranges and indicates adequate mea-
surement model ﬁt (Iacobucci, 2010).

8

Volume 0, Number 0


Strategic Supply Chain Integration and Performance

TABLE 1

Correlation Table

CSI

0.81
0.58
0.63
0.68
0.39

CSI
SCI
SSI
DR
CTPP

SCI

SSI

DR

CTPP

0.74
0.48
0.38
0.25

0.71
0.54
0.10

0.75
0.49

0.81

CSI, Corporate Strategic Integration; SCI, Strategic Corpo-
rate Integration; SSI, Strategic Supplier Integration; DR,
Demand Response; CTPP, Cycle Time Process Perfor-
mance.
Square root of the AVE listed in the diagonal.

RESULTS

The structural model ﬁt statistics indicate the data
sufﬁciently ﬁt the hypothesized model (v2 = 251.76,
v2/d.f. = 1.95, CFI = .93, TLI = .92, RMSEA = .07,
SRMR = .08; Iacobucci, 2010; Figure 2).

strategic

corporate

Similarly,

We now turn to describing our ﬁndings. Corporate
strategic integration is predicted to positively inﬂuence
strategic customer integration (H1). The standardized
path weight is .601 (p < .001), providing support for
H1.
integration is
hypothesized to positively inﬂuence strategic supplier
integration (H2). H2 is supported with a standardized
.705 (p < .001). Strategic customer
path weight of
integration and strategic supplier
integration were
both predicted to positively impact demand response
(H3 and H4, respectively). H3 is supported with a
standardized path value of .183 (p < .05). H4 is sup-
ported with standardized path loading of
.527
(p < .001). Demand response is predicted to positively
impact cycle time process performance (H5). The

standardized path weight is .489 (p < .001), providing
support for H5. Demand response is predicted to pos-
itively impact ﬁnancial performance (H6). H6 is sup-
ported with a standardized path loading of
.173
(p < .05). Finally, cycle time process performance is
predicted to be positively related to ﬁnancial perfor-
mance (H7). H7 is not supported. The control vari-
ables are not statistically signiﬁcant. We discuss the
implications of our results in the discussion section.

Mediation Testing

We now turn to examining the mediating relation-
ships in our model as recommended by Zhao, Lynch
and Chen (2010). In so doing, the model paths were
“bootstrapped” with an empirical sample distribution
of the various hypothesized relationships. This sam-
pling process occurred 5,000 times, after which the
direct, indirect, and total effects estimates were gener-
ated. Results indicate that indirect effects were present
between corporate strategic integration and demand
response as well as strategic customer integration and
strategic supplier integration on cycle time process
performance and ﬁnancial performance. Further, the
conﬁdence intervals surrounding these estimates were
statistically signiﬁcant (Preacher & Hayes, 2004). The
direct effects, or direct
relationships, between the
mediated constructs
in the bootstrapping analysis
were not statistically signiﬁcant, indicating that indi-
rect-only mediation is present (Zhao et al., 2010).
These results further support the conceptualization of
the structural model in the current research.

Alternative Model

To further support the mediation test’s results, an
alternative model was examined in which the three
strategic integration variables—corporate strategic inte-

FIGURE 2

Path Model with Results

Strategic 
Customer 
IntegraƟon

.183*

Corporate 
Strategic 
IntegraƟon

.601***

.705***

Demand Response

.527***

Strategic Supplier 

IntegraƟon

Cycle Time Process 

Performance

.489***

.173*

-.195 t

Financial 

Performance

Structural Model: v2 = 251.76, v2/d.f. = 1.95, CFI = .93, TLI = .92, RMSEA = .07,
SRMR = .08.Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis:
v2 = 170.75,
v2/d.f. = 1.57, CFI = .97,
*** = p<.001, * = p<.05, t = p<.10.

TLI = .96, RMSEA = .05,

SRMR = .05,

Xxxx 2014

9


Journal of Supply Chain Management

gration, strategic customer integration, and strategic
supplier integration—each shared a direct relationship
with cycle time process performance and ﬁnancial per-
formance. While adequate model ﬁt statistics were
obtained, the relationships between four of the six
integration and performance variables were statisti-
cally insigniﬁcant. Corporate strategic integration and
strategic supplier integration each had a signiﬁcant
relationship with cycle time process performance
while strategic customer integration did not. None of
the strategic integration constructs shared a signiﬁcant
relationship with ﬁnancial performance. The results
support the current model’s theoretical conceptualiza-
tion of SCP. Stated differently, demand response
serves as an important conduct variable in our model.
Additionally, the structural model was estimated with
ROA as the ﬁnancial performance measure of interest.
ROA, also derived from the WRDS database, measures
the proﬁtability of a ﬁrm relative to the company’s total
asset base (Dess & Robinson, 1984). The hypothesized
results and overall model ﬁt statistics were consistent
with our original structural model using ROE except for
two differences. Hypothesis 6, the relationship between
demand response and ﬁnancial performance, is sup-
ported at the p < .10 level. Hypothesis 7, the relation-
ship between cycle time process performance and
ﬁnancial performance, is still not supported. However,
the standardized path coefﬁcient is negative and statisti-
cally signiﬁcant at the p < .05 level. While the relation-
ship between operational performance and ﬁnancial
performance will be discussed in more detail later, we
believe operational efﬁciency as measured by the ROA
ﬁnancial performance metric may conﬂict with the
speed required by cycle time process performance.

DISCUSSION, IMPLICATIONS, AND

FUTURE RESEARCH

conditions

Leveraging the SCP framework from industrial orga-
nizational economics, we develop and empirically test
theory about how a ﬁrm’s supply chain integration
activities impact ﬁrm performance. We utilize the SCP
framework to examine how the ﬁrm can use its supply
chain integration activities as a structural response to
competitive market
to enhance ﬁrm
performance (Caves, 1964; Caves & Porter, 1977;
Chatain, 2011). As ﬁrms integrate, both internally and
externally, it is important to understand how these
decisions impact ﬁrm and supply chain partner con-
duct and ﬁrm performance. The current study analyzes
the role of supply chain integration,
its effect on
demand response, and the subsequent impact on both
operational and ﬁnancial performance. This study has
implications for researchers and managers alike as
there has been increasing attention to the topic of
supply chain integration and its role on ﬁrm-level

research differentiates itself

competition issues (Braunscheidel & Suresh, 2009;
Flynn et al., 2010; Zhao, Huo, Selen & Yeung, 2011).
The current
from past
work with the theoretical perspective utilized, the type
of integration examined, and the use of both opera-
tional and ﬁnancial performance as well as objective
ﬁnancial performance data sources.

Corporate strategic integration was predicted to, and
did, have a positive relationship to both strategic cus-
tomer integration and strategic supplier integration.
These ﬁndings support similar conclusions reached by
past researchers (Koufteros, Rawski & Rupak, 2010;
Zhao et al., 2011). These results provide additional
support for Bowersox et al. (1999) and Cooper and
Ellram (1993), who propose that internal integration
should occur before external integration. The current
research takes an additional step by discussing strategic
integration. Ensuring that a corporate-wide strategy is
disseminated throughout the ﬁrm and matches to or
has department strategies to support a ﬁrm’s overarch-
ing goals can lead to clarity and sense of purpose. It is
through this sense of purpose that suppliers and cus-
tomers can be identiﬁed to more fully integrate at a
strategic level. The results support ﬁrms generating a
common platform from which all employees work to
highlight needs and identify the best partners possible.
Strategic customer integration and strategic supplier
integration were both predicted to have a positive
relationship to demand response. Research ﬁndings
support these hypotheses. Companies that utilize cus-
tomer satisfaction information and regularly interact
with their customers as well as those that share infor-
mation with and require improvements by suppliers
are readily able to respond to market demand. This
can stem from the ability of ﬁrms to know and under-
stand what customers want while balancing this with
the abilities of their ﬁrm and suppliers. Managers can
utilize this information by understanding that one
way to be responsive to customer demand is through
strategically integrating with both customers and sup-
pliers.

Demand response was predicted to, and did, have a
positive relationship to both order cycle time (opera-
tional performance) and ﬁnancial performance. Being
responsive to demand can have positive effects on
operational and ﬁnancial performance. Operationally,
demand response should result
in a shortening of
order cycle time process performance because more of
the right product or service should be on hand when
it is demanded. Having product available is a prere-
quisite for ensuring cycle time process performance.
Demand response also has positive ﬁnancial perfor-
mance implications. This indicates that being able to
respond to demand is a way to inﬂuence ﬁnancial
performance. The obvious implication is that demand
response can be a way to improve ﬁrm ﬁnances.

10

Volume 0, Number 0


Strategic Supply Chain Integration and Performance

Cycle time process performance was predicted to have
a positive relationship to ﬁnancial performance. There
are many plausible reasons why we did not ﬁnd sup-
port for this hypothesis. Firms sometimes face conﬂict-
ing goals of operational and ﬁnancial performance and
the two objectives are not always synergistic. Speeding
up the delivery process of goods may result in harming
ﬁnancial performance, but ﬁrms see this as a necessary
expenditure (Blank, 2014; Mouton, 2014). Perhaps,
managers may see some operational outcomes (i.e.,
cycle time process performance) as a cost or requisite of
doing business. Some ﬁrms may make this trade-off by
hoping for long-term loyalty or future business which
is difﬁcult to immediately quantify, but could have
positive long-range implications. Further research is
needed to fully understand this relationship.

strategic

From a theoretical perspective, this article leverages
the SCP paradigm when theorizing about the relation-
ship among
integration, ﬁrm conduct
(demand responsiveness capability), and performance.
Selecting strategic supply chain integration as the struc-
tural portion of the framework is a unique contribu-
tion. Many factors such as barriers to entry, product
differentiation, and vertical
integration have been
noted as structural components ﬁrms can utilize in
response to market conditions (Caves & Porter, 1977).
Integrating both internally and externally with supply
chain partners better reﬂects today’s business environ-
ment and expands the list of structural “foundations”
ﬁrms can employ, and researchers can study, to impact
conduct and performance. Considering integration
from a strategic perspective also focuses researchers on
integration over and above simple process coordina-
tion. While process integration has beneﬁts, strategic
integration suggests a long-range goal or plan underly-
ing integrative efforts. Not only can strategic integration
impact ﬁrm conduct and performance, additional bene-
ﬁts may lie in improving integration success. The analy-
sis of both ﬁnancial and operational performance
stemming from integrative efforts is another important
research implication. Understanding that demand
response, spurred by supply chain integration, posi-
tively impacts performance of both kinds establishes
that demand response has multiple beneﬁts. This
allows future research to focus on different aspects of
these relationships such as moderating variables that
provide further knowledge of when and how these rela-
tionships can be impacted.

This study also offers a number of managerial implica-
tions. The study’s results suggest the need to be aware of
the power of strategic integration. The ﬁrm has the ability
to strategically integrate both internally and externally
across functional units and other ﬁrms by coordinating
capabilities and generating efﬁciencies. The strategic focus
ensures ﬁrms are working together for a purpose instead
of simply going through operational motions. This may

lead to lasting and beneﬁcial relationships. Demand
response, impacted by strategic integration, has the ability
to inﬂuence both ﬁnancial and operational performance.
This supports the notion that managers must be cogni-
zant of market demand and make attempts to balance
demand and supply. Having the right goods on hand
provides ﬁrms opportunities to excel at both ﬁnancial
and operational performance. Finally, the study should
make managers pause when balancing operational and
ﬁnancial performance.

Future Research

Our study offers both theoretical and managerial
insights regarding how to successfully integrate the
supply chain to realize improved performance. We
hope that this study provides the foundation for inter-
esting extensions on the topic of supply chain integra-
tion. One extension is to expand on Richey et al.
(2010) by attempting to better understand the barriers
and facilitators of strategic supply chain integration.
Additionally, future studies should look into dyadic
data or even gathering data from the focal ﬁrm, sup-
pliers, and customers to gain a more encompassing
supply chain perspective. Perhaps, further research can
more fully analyze the relationship between opera-
tional and ﬁnancial performance. Looking at other
aspects of operational performance could provide fur-
ther insights. Another interesting extension would be
to collect longitudinal data in order to see the results
of integration and both types of performance over
time. Lastly, future research should examine how a
focal ﬁrm’s supply chain integration efforts enable it
to better respond to a rival’s supply chain actions.

REFERENCES

Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural
equation modeling in practice: A review and rec-
ommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulle-
tin, 103 (3), 411–423.

Armstrong, J. S., & Overton, T. (1977). Estimating
nonresponse bias in mail surveys. Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 14 (3), 396–402.

(2005). Warehouse management

Autry, C. W., Grifﬁs, S. E., Goldsby, T. J., & Bobbitt, L.
M.
systems:
Resource commitment, capabilities, and organiza-
tional performance. Journal of Business Logistics, 26
(2), 165–182.

Baier, C., Hartmann, E., & Moser, R. (2008). Strategic
alignment and purchasing efﬁcacy: An exploratory
analysis of their impact on ﬁnancial performance.
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 44 (4), 36–52.
Bain, J. S. (1956). Barriers to new competition: Their
character and consequences in manufacturing indus-
tries. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Bettis, R. A. (1981). Performance differences in related
and unrelated diversiﬁed ﬁrms. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 2 (4), 379–393.

Xxxx 2014

11


Journal of Supply Chain Management

Blank, C. (2014). Is Amazon to blame for rising ship-
ping costs?, FierceRetailIT. Retrieved from http://
www.ﬁerceretail.com/retailit/story/amazon-blame-
increased-shipping-costs/2014-02-12, accessed Feb-
ruary 12, 2014.

Bowersox, D. J., Closs, D. J., & Stank, T. P. (1999). 21st
century logistics: Making supply chain integration a real-
ity. Oak Brook, IL: Council of Logistics Management.
Bowersox, D. J., Closs, D. J., & Stank, T. P. (2000). Ten-
Mega trends that will revolutionize supply chain
logistics. Journal of Business Logistics, 21 (2), 1–15.

Bowersox, D. J., & Daugherty, P. J. (1995). Logistics
paradigms: The impact of information technol-
ogy. Journal of Business Logistics, 16 (1), 65–80.

Braunscheidel, M. J., & Suresh, N. C. (2009). The orga-
nizational antecedents of a ﬁrm’s supply chain agil-
ity for risk mitigation and response. Journal of
Operations Management, 27 (2), 119–140.

Burgelman, R. A., & Doz, Y. L. (2001). The power of
integration. MIT Sloan Management

strategic
Review, 42 (3), 28–38.

Caves, R. E. (1964). American industry: Structure, conduct,

performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Caves, R. E., & Porter, M. E. (1977). From entry barri-
ers to mobility barriers: Conjectural decisions and
contrived deterrence to new competition. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91 (2), 241–261.

Chan, Y. E., Huff, S. L., Barclay, D. W., & Copeland, D.
G. (1997). Business strategic orientation, informa-
tion systems strategic orientation, and strategic
alignment.
Information Systems Research, 8 (2),
125–150.

Chandler, A. D. (1962). Strategy and structure. Cam-

bridge, MA: MIT Press.

Chatain, O. (2011). Value creation, competition, and
performance in buyer–supplier relationships. Stra-
tegic Management Journal, 32 (1), 76–102.

Chen, H., Daugherty, P. J., & Roath, A. S. (2009).
Deﬁning and operationalizing supply chain pro-
cess integration.
Journal of Business Logistics, 30
(1), 63–84.

Christopher, M. (2000). The agile supply chain: Com-
Industrial Marketing

peting in volatile markets.
Management, 29 (1), 37–44.

Churchill, Jr., G. A. (1979). A paradigm for develop-
ing better measures of marketing constructs. Jour-
nal of Marketing Research, 16 (1), 64–73.

Cooper, M. C., & Ellram, L. M. (1993). Characteristics
of supply chain management and the implications
for purchasing and logistics strategy. International
Journal of Logistics Management, 4 (2), 13–24.

Corsten, D., & Kumar, N. (2005). Do suppliers beneﬁt
from collaborative relationships with large retail-
ers? An empirical
investigation of efﬁcient con-
sumer response adoption. Journal of Marketing, 69
(3), 80–94.

Cousins, P. D., & Menguc, B. (2006). The implica-
tions of socialization and integration in supply
chain management. Journal of Operations Manage-
ment, 24 (5), 604–620.

Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefﬁcient alpha and the inter-
nal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16 (3), 297–334.
Danese, P., Romano, P., & Formentini, M. (2013).
The impact of
supply chain integration on
responsiveness: The moderating effect of using an
international
Transportation
Research Part E, 49 (1), 125–140.

supplier network.

Day, G. S. (1999). The market driven organization:
Understanding, attracting, and keeping valuable cus-
tomers. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.

Day, G. S., & Wensley, R. (1983). Marketing theory
with a strategic orientation. Journal of Marketing,
47 (4), 79–89.

Dess, G. G., & Robinson, Jr., R. B. (1984). Measuring
organizational performance in the absence of
objective measures: The case of the privately-held
ﬁrm and conglomerate business unit. Strategic
Management Journal, 5 (3), 265–273.

Devaraj, S., Krajewski, L., & Wei, J. C. (2007). Impact
of eBusiness technologies on operational perfor-
mance: The role of production information inte-
gration in the supply chain. Journal of Operations
Management, 25 (6), 1199–1216.

Dillman, D. A. (2000). Mail and web based survey: The

tailored design method. New York, NY: Wiley.

relationship

Ellinger, A. E., Daugherty, P. J., & Keller, S. B. (2000).
The
between marketing/logistics
interdepartmental integration and performance in
U.S. manufacturing ﬁrms: An empirical study.
Journal of Business Logistics, 21 (1), 1–22.

Ellram, L. M., Tate, W. L., & Billington, C. (2008).
Offshore outsourcing of professional services: A
transaction cost economics perspective. Journal of
Operations Management, 26 (2), 148–163.

Esper, T., Ellinger, A., Stank, T., Flint, D., & Moon, M.
(2010). Demand and supply integration: A con-
ceptual
framework of value creation through
knowledge management. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 38 (1), 5–18.

Fawcett, S. E., & Magnan, G. M. (2002). The rhetoric
and reality of supply chain integration. Interna-
tional Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics
Management, 32 (5), 339–361.

Fawcett, S. E., Magnan, G. M., & McCarter, M. W.
(2008). A three-stage implementation model for
supply chain collaboration.
Journal of Business
Logistics, 29 (1), 93–112.

Fisher, M. L. (1997). What is the right supply chain
for your product? Harvard Business Review, 75,
105–117.

Flynn, B. B., Huo, B., & Zhao, X. (2010). The
impact of supply chain integration on perfor-
A
mance:
conﬁguration
approach.
Journal of Operations Management, 28
(1), 58–71.

contingency

and

Flynn, B. B., Schroeder, R. G., & Sakakibara, S.
(1995). The impact of quality management prac-
tices on performance and competitive advantage.
Decision Sciences, 26 (5), 659–691.

Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating struc-
tural equation models with unobservable vari-

12

Volume 0, Number 0


Strategic Supply Chain Integration and Performance

ables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing
Research, 18 (1), 39–50.

Frohlich, M. T., & Westbrook, R. (2001). Arcs of inte-
gration: An international study of supply chain
strategies.
Journal of Operations Management, 19
(2), 185–200.

Gibson, B. J., Mentzer, J. T., & Cook, R. L. (2005).
Supply chain management: The pursuit of a con-
sensus deﬁnition. Journal of Business Logistics, 26
(2), 17–25.

Grant, R. M. (1991). The resource-based theory of
competitive advantage: Implications for strategy
formulation.California Management Review, 33 (3),
114–135.

Gunasekaran, A., Patel, C., & McGaughey, R. E.
(2004). A framework for supply chain perfor-
mance measurement. International Journal of Pro-
duction Economics, 87 (3), 333–347.

Gunasekaran, A., Patel, A., & Tirtiroglu, E. (2001). Per-
formance measures and metrics in a supply chain
environment. International Journal of Operations and
Production Management, 21 (1/2), 71–87.

Hair, J. F. J., Black, B., Babin, B., Anderson, R. E., &
Tatham, R. L. (2006). Multivariate data analysis.
New York, NY: MacMillan Publishing Co.

Handﬁeld, R. B., & Bechtel, C. (2002). The role of
trust and relationship structure in improving sup-
ply chain responsiveness.
Industrial Marketing
Management, 31 (4), 367–382.

Handﬁeld, R. B., & Nichols, Jr., E. L. (2002). Supply
chain redesign: Converting your supply chain into an
integrated value system. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

Harman, H. H. (1976). Modern factor analysis. Chi-

cago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Hatcher, L. (1994). A step-by-step approach to using sas
for factor analysis and structural equation modeling.
Cary, NC: SAS Publishing.

Hayes, R. H., & Wheelwright, S. C. (1984). Restoring
our competitive edge: Competing through manufactur-
ing. New York, NY: Wiley.

Hillman, A. J., & Keim, G. D. (2001). Shareholder
value, stakeholder management, and social issues:
What’s the bottom line? Strategic Management
Journal, 22 (2), 125–139.

van Hoek, R.

I., Harrison, A., & Christopher, M.
(2001). Measuring agile capabilities in the supply
chain. International Journal of Operations and Pro-
duction Management, 21 (1/2), 126–147.

Hult, G. T. M., Ketchen, Jr., D. J., & Nichols, Jr., E. L.
(2002). An examination of cultural competitive-
ness and order fulﬁllment cycle time within sup-
ply chains. The Academy of Management Journal, 45
(3), 577–586.

Hult, G. T. M., Ketchen, Jr, D. J., & Slater, S. F. (2004).
Information processing, knowledge development,
and strategic supply chain performance. The Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 47 (2), 241–253.

Iacobucci, D. (2010). Structural equations modeling:
Fit indices, sample size, and advanced topics. Jour-
nal of Consumer Psychology, 20 (1), 90–98.

Jap, S. D. (1999). Pie-expansion efforts: Collaboration
processes in buyer–supplier relationships. Journal
of Marketing Research, 36 (4), 461–475.

Jap, S. D. (2001). Perspectives on joint competitive
advantages in buyer–supplier relationships. Inter-
national Journal of Research in Marketing, 18 (1–2),
19–35.

Jaworski, B. J., & Kohli, A. K. (1993). Market orienta-
Journal of

tion: Antecedents and consequences.
Marketing, 57 (3), 53–70.

Kahn, K. B., & Mentzer, J. T. (1996). Logistics and
interdepartmental integration. International Journal
of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management,
26 (8), 6–14.

Ketchen, Jr., D. J., & Hult, G. T. M. (2007). Bridging
organization theory and supply chain manage-
ment: The case of best value supply chains. Jour-
nal of Operations Management, 25 (2), 573–580.

Koufteros, X. A., Edwin Cheng, T., & Lai, K.-H. (2007).
“Black-Box” and “gray-box” supplier integration in
product development: Antecedents, consequences
and the moderating role of ﬁrm size. Journal of
Operations Management, 25 (4), 847–870.

Koufteros, X. A., Rawski, G. E., & Rupak, R. (2010).
Organizational
integration for product develop-
ment: The effects on glitches, on-time execution
of engineering change orders, and market success.
Decision Sciences, 41 (1), 49–80.

Koufteros, X., Vonderembse, M., & Jayaram, J. (2005).
Internal and external
integration for product
development: The contingency effects of uncer-
tainty, equivocality, and platform strategy. Deci-
sion Sciences, 36 (1), 97–133.

Lambert, D. M., & Burduroglu, R. (2000). Measuring
International

and selling the value of
Journal of Logistics Management, 11 (1), 1–18.

logistics.

Lawrence, P. R., & Lorsch, J. W. (1967). Differentia-
tion and integration in complex organizations.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 12 (1), 1–47.

Leuschner, R., Rogers, D. S., & Charvet, F. F. (2013).
A meta-analysis of supply chain integration and
ﬁrm performance. Journal of Supply Chain Manage-
ment, 49 (2), 34–57.

Lindell, M. K., & Whitney, D. J. (2001). Accounting
for common method variance in cross-sectional
research designs. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86
(1), 114–121.

Mackelprang, A. W., Robinson, J. L., Bernardes, E., &
Webb, G. S. (2014). The relationship between
strategic supply chain integration and perfor-
mance: A meta-analytic evaluation and implica-
tions
research.
Journal of Business Logistics, 35 (1), 71–96.

supply chain management

for

Mason, E. S. (1939). Price and production policies of
enterprise. The American Economic

large-scale
Review, 29 (1), 61–74.

McKone-Sweet, K., & Lee, Y.-T. (2009). Development
and analysis of a supply chain strategy taxonomy.
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 45 (3), 3–24.
McWilliams, A., & Smart, D. L. (1993). Efﬁciency vs.
Structure–Conduct–Performance: Implications for

Xxxx 2014

13


Journal of Supply Chain Management

strategy research and practice. Journal of Manage-
ment, 19 (1), 63–78.

Mollenkopf, D. A., Frankel, R., & Russo, I. (2011). Cre-
ating value through returns management: Explor-
ing the marketing–operations interface. Journal of
Operations Management, 29 (5), 391–403.

Mollenkopf, D., Russo, I., & Frankel, R. (2007). The
returns management process in supply chain strat-
egy.
Journal of Physical Distribution
and Logistics Management, 37 (7), 568–592.

International

Morash, E. A., & Clinton, S. R. (1998). Supply chain
integration: Customer value through collaborative
closeness versus operational excellence. Journal of
Marketing Theory and Practice, 6 (4), 104–120.

Morgan, N. A., Kaleka, A., & Katsikeas, C. S. (2004).
Antecedents of export venture performance: A the-
oretical model and empirical assessment. Journal
of Marketing, 68 (1), 90–108.

Mouton, A. 2014. How Amazon is increasing shipping
costs. USA Today. Retrieved from http://www.usa-
today.com/story/tech/2014/02/10/amazon-prime-
amzn-fedex-shipping/5361351/, accessed February
12, 2014.

Narasimhan, R., Swink, M., & Viswanathan, S. (2010).
On decisions for integration implementation: An
examination of complementarities between prod-
uct-process
technology integration and supply
chain integration. Decision Sciences, 41 (2), 355–
372.

Oke, A., Prajogo, D. I., & Jayaram, J. (2013). Strength-
ening the innovation chain: The role of internal
innovation climate and strategic
relationships
with supply chain partners. Journal of Supply Chain
Management, 49 (4), 43–58.

Oliva, R., & Watson, N. (2011). Cross-functional
alignment in supply chain planning: A case study
of sales and operations planning. Journal of Opera-
tions Management, 29 (5), 434–448.

Olson, E. M., Slater, S. F., & Hult, G. T. M. (2005). The
performance implications of ﬁt among business
strategy, marketing organization structure, and stra-
tegic behavior. Journal of Marketing, 69 (3), 49–65.
Pagell, M. (2004). Understanding the factors that
enable and inhibit the integration of operations,
purchasing and logistics.
Journal of Operations
Management, 22 (5), 459–487.

Panagiotou, G. (2006). The impact of managerial cog-
structure–conduct–performance
nitions on the
(SCP) paradigm: A strategic group perspective.
Management Decision, 44 (3), 423–441.

Paulraj, A., & Chen, I. J. (2007). Strategic buyer–sup-
information technology and
Journal of Supply

plier relationships,
external
Chain Management, 43 (2), 2–14.

integration.

logistics

Payne, A., & Frow, P. (2005). A strategic framework
for customer relationship management. Journal of
Marketing, 69 (4), 167–176.

Peng, D. X., Verghese, A., Shah, R., & Schroeder, R. G.
(2013). The relationships between external inte-
gration and plant improvement and innovation
capabilities: The moderation effect of product

clockspeed. Journal of Supply Chain Management,
49 (3), 3–24.

Petersen, K.

J., Ragatz, G. L., & Monczka, R. M.
(2005). An examination of collaborative plan-
ning
chain perfor-
mance. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 41
(2), 14–25.

and supply

effectiveness

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J.-Y., & Pod-
sakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method biases in
behavioral research: A critical review of the litera-
ture and recommended remedies.
of
applied psychology, 88 (5), 879–903.

Journal

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, N. P.
(2012). Sources of method bias in social science
research and recommendations on how to control
it. Annual Review of Psychology, 63 (1), 539–569.

Podsakoff, P. M., & Organ, D. W. (1986). Self-Reports
in organizational research: Problems and pros-
pects. Journal of Management, 12 (4), 531–544.

Porter, M. E. (1979). The structure within industries
and companies’ performance. The Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics, 61 (2), 214–227.

Porter, M. E. (1980). Competitive strategy. New York,

NY: Free Press.

Porter, M. E. (1991). Towards a dynamic theory of
Journal, 12 (S2),

strategy. Strategic Management
95–117.

Preacher, K., & Hayes, A. (2004). SPSS and SAS proce-
dures for estimating indirect effects in simple
mediation models. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36 (4), 717–731.

Richey, R. G., Adams, F. G., & Dalela, V. (2012). Tech-
nology and ﬂexibility: Enablers of collaboration
and time-based logistics quality. Journal of Business
Logistics, 33 (1), 34–49.

Richey, R. G., Roath, A. S., Whipple, J. M., & Fawcett, S.
E. (2010). Exploring a governance theory of supply
chain management: Barriers and facilitators to inte-
gration. Journal of Business Logistics, 31 (1), 237–256.
Rodrigues, A. M., Stank, T. P., & Lynch, D. F. (2004).
Linking strategy, structure, process, and perfor-
mance in integrated logistics. Journal of Business
Logistics, 25 (2), 65–94.

Rosenzweig, E. D., Roth, A. V., & Dean, Jr., J. W.
(2003). The inﬂuence of an integration strategy
on competitive capabilities and business perfor-
mance: An exploratory study of consumer prod-
ucts manufacturers.
of Operations
Management, 21 (4), 437–456.

Journal

Saeed, K. A., Malhotra, M. K., & Grover, V. (2005). Exam-
ining the impact of interorganizational systems on
process efﬁciency and sourcing leverage in buyer–
supplier dyads. Decision Sciences, 36 (3), 365–396.

Schoenherr, T., & Swink, M. (2012). Revisiting the
arcs of integration: Cross-validations and exten-
sions. Journal of Operations Management, 30 (1),
99–115.

Skinner, W. (1969). Manufacturing-Missing link in
corporate strategy. Harvard Business Review, 47
(3), 136–145.

14

Volume 0, Number 0


Strategic Supply Chain Integration and Performance

distribution

Springinklee, M., & Wallenburg, C. M.

(2012).
Improving
performance
through effective production and logistics integra-
tion. Journal of Business Logistics, 33 (4), 309–323.
Stank, T. P., Davis, B. R., & Fugate, B. S. (2005). A stra-
tegic framework for supply chain oriented logistics.
Journal of Business Logistics, 26 (2), 27–46.

service

Stank, T. P., Keller, S. B., & Closs, D. J. (2001). Perfor-
mance beneﬁts of supply chain logistical integra-
tion. Transportation Journal, 41 (2/3), 32–46.

Swink, M., Narasimhan, R., & Wang, C. (2007). Man-
aging beyond the factory walls: Effects of four
types of strategic integration on manufacturing
plant performance. Journal of Operations Manage-
ment, 25 (1), 148–164.

Tan, K. C., Kannan, V. R., & Handﬁeld, R. B. (1998).
Supply chain management: Supplier performance
and ﬁrm performance. International Journal of Pur-
chasing and Materials Management, 34 (3), 2–9.

Thun, J.-H. (2010). Angles of integration: An empirical
analysis of the alignment of internet-based informa-
tion technology and global supply chain integration.
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 46 (2), 30–44.

Venkatraman, N., & Prescott, J. E. (1990). Environ-
ment-strategy coalignment: An empirical test of its
performance implications. Strategic Management
Journal, 11 (1), 1–23.

Vickery, S. K., Jayaram, J., Droge, C., & Calantone, R.
(2003). The effects of an integrative supply chain
strategy on customer service and ﬁnancial perfor-
mance: An analysis of direct versus indirect rela-
tionships.
Journal of Operations Management, 21
(5), 523–539.

Weiss, L. W. (1979). The structure–conduct–perfor-
mance paradigm and antitrust. University of Penn-
sylvania Law Review, 127 (4), 1104–1140.

Wheelwright, S. C. (1984). Manufacturing strategy:
Deﬁning the missing link. Strategic Management
Journal, 5 (1), 77–91.

Wiengarten, F., Pagell, M., Ahmed, M. U., & Gimenez,
C. (2014). Do a country’s logistical capabilities
moderate the external
integration performance
relationship? Journal of Operations Management, 32
(1), 51–63.

on

the

Zhao, X., Huo, B., Flynn, B. B., & Yeung, J. H. Y.
(2008). The impact of power and relationship
commitment
between
manufacturers and customers in a supply chain.
Journal of Operations Management, 26 (3), 368–388.
Zhao, X., Huo, B., Selen, W., & Yeung, J. H. Y. (2011).
The impact of internal integration and relation-
ship commitment on external integration. Journal
of Operations Management, 29 (1–2), 17–32.

integration

Zhao, X., Lynch, J. G., & Chen, Q. (2010). Reconsider-
ing baron and kenny: Myths and truths about
mediation analysis. Journal of Consumer Research,
37 (2), 197–206.

Peter Ralston (Ph.D. Iowa State University) is an
assistant professor of supply chain management at the
University of West Florida. Dr. Ralston’s research is
focused broadly under the umbrella of inter-organiza-
tional
to
investigate areas such as supply chain collaboration,
supply chain power, and supply chain strategy.

relationships where he speciﬁcally likes

Jennifer Blackhurst (Ph.D. University of Iowa) is an
associate professor of supply chain management at
Iowa State University. Her research is focused in the
area of supply chain risk management, investigating
not only how ﬁrms can respond to disruptive events
in their supply chains, but also how they can proac-
tively anticipate and plan for these disruptive events.
Dr. Blackhurst has also been actively involved in the
national and international supply chain management
discipline by serving on a variety of editorial review
boards; she is associate editor for Decision Sciences
Journal and Journal of Purchasing and Supply Chain
Management, and she serves on the editorial review
boards for Journal of Operations Management, Journal of
Business Logistics, Journal of Supply Chain Management,
and IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management.

David E. Cantor (Ph.D. University of Maryland) is
an associate professor of supply chain management at
Iowa State University. His primary research interest is
in supply chain management with a particular focus
on safety and environmental management issues. Dr.
Cantor also is interested in human decision making
in the supply chain. His research on these topics has
been published in many academic outlets including
the Journal of Business Logistics, the Journal of Operations
Management, Decision Sciences Journal, the Transporta-
tion Journal, Transportation Research (Logistics and Trans-
portation Review), the International Journal of Physical
Distribution and Logistics Management and the Interna-
tional Journal of Logistics Management.

Michael R. Crum (Ph.D. Indiana University) is a
professor of supply chain management at Iowa State
University. Dr. Crum’s research interests are strategic
supply chain relationships,
supply chain security,
motor carrier employee issues, and motor carrier
safety. He has authored or co-authored more than
100 research publications, and he has been principal
investigator on three U.S. Department of Transporta-
tion research projects. He is the former editor of two
academic journals and is currently on the editorial
review boards of ﬁve academic journals. In 1988–89
he was a Fulbright Scholar at the Warsaw School of
Economics in Warsaw, Poland.

Xxxx 2014

15


I

X
D
N
E
P
P
A

S
M
E
T

I

T
N
E
M
E
R
U
S
A
E
M

Journal of Supply Chain Management

d
e
t
p
a
d
A

m
o
r
F

s
’
h
c
a
b
n
o
r
C

e
c
n
a
i
r
a
V

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

d
e
t
c
a
r
t
x
E

a
h
p
A

l

d
e
z
i
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

r
o
t
c
a
F

i

s
g
n
d
a
o
L

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
D

n
a
e
M

m
e
t
I

l

e
b
a
L

t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

l

e
v
e

l

r
u
o
y

o
t

s
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

t
a
h
t

)
e
e
r
g
a

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

7

,
e
e
r
g
a
s
i
d

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

1
(

r
e
b
m
u
n

e
h
t

g
n

i
l

c
r
i
c

y
b

s

m
e
t
i

f
o

t
e
s

i

g
n
w
o

l
l

o
f

e
h
t

l

e
t
e
p
m
o
c

e
s
a
e
P

l

w
o
e
b

l

s
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
s

e
h
t

f
o

h
c
a
e

n
o

t
n
e
m
e
e
r
g
a

f
o

.
l
a

t
e

i

k
n
w
S

5
6
.
0

6
8
.
0

1
8
.
0

3
4
.
1

5
4
.
5

l

y
p
p
u
s

s
’
t
n
e
m

t
r
a
p
e
d

r
u
O

I

1
S
C

)
7
0
0
2
(

7
8
.
0

8
6
.
0

1
5
.
1

7
2
.
5

i

c
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

i

n
a
h
c

l

y
p
p
u
s

r
u
O

I

2
S
C

3
8
.
1

4
2
.
4

i

s
e
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

i

n
a
h
c

l

y
p
p
u
S

I

3
S
C

e
r
a

s
e
v
i
t
c
e
b
o

j

d
n
a

s
l
a
o
g

d
e
n
ﬁ
e
d

y
l
r
a
e
c

l

l
l

e
w
s
i

y
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

i

n
a
h
c

y
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

e
t
a
r
o
p
r
o
c

r
u
o

h
t
i

w
d
e
n
g

i
l

a

6
8
.
0

0
3
.
1

4
3
.
5

s
l
a
o
g

i

c
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

s
’

m
r
ﬁ

r
u
O

I

4
S
C

l
l

a

o
t

i

d
e
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c

e
r
a

s
l
a
o
g

d
n
a

s
e
e
y
o
p
m
e

l

e
t
a
r
o
p
r
o
C

i

c
g
e
t
a
r
t
S

n
o
i
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

I

l

e
v
e

l

r
u
o
y

o
t

s
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

t
a
h
t

)
e
e
r
g
a

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

7

,
e
e
r
g
a
s
i
d

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

s
’
y
n
a
p
m
o
c

r
u
o

e
g
a
r
e
v
e

l

s
e
i
t
i
l
i

b
a
p
a
c

g
n
i
t
s
i
x
e

1
(

r
e
b
m
u
n

e
h
t

g
n

i
l

c
r
i
c

y
b

s

m
e
t
i

f
o

t
e
s

i

g
n
w
o

l
l

o
f

e
h
t

l

e
t
e
p
m
o
c

e
s
a
e
P

l

w
o
e
b

l

s
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
s

e
h
t

f
o

h
c
a
e

n
o

t
n
e
m
e
e
r
g
a

f
o

16

Volume 0, Number 0

)
7
0
0
2
(

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

9
6
.
0

5
7
.
1

9
1
.
4

e
t
a
e
r
c

l

y
e
v
i
t
c
a

e
W

I

2
C
S

e
r
a

s
y
e
v
r
u
s

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

l
l

a

h
t
i

w
d
e
r
a
h
s

s
e
e
y
o
p
m
e

l

r
e
m
o
t
s
u
c
–
e
e
y
o
p
m
e

l

r
o
f

s
e
i
t
i
n
u
t
r
o
p
p
o

4
7
.
0

0
0
.
2

8
5
.
4

l

a
m
r
o
f

a

e
v
a
h

e
W

I

3
C
S

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

i

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

r
e
m
o
t
s
u
c

e
c
a
p

l

n

i

m
a
r
g
o
r
p

.
l
a

t
e

i

k
n
w
S

5
5
.
0

8
7
.
0

0
8
.
0

0
0
.
2

5
4
.
4

r
e
m
o
t
s
u
c

f
o

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

I

1
C
S

r
e
m
o
t
s
u
C

i

c
g
e
t
a
r
t
S

n
o
i
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

I


Strategic Supply Chain Integration and Performance

h
s
e
r
u
S

d
n
a

n
a
v

,
)
9
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

k
e
o
H

d
n
a

,
)
1
0
0
2
(

r
e
h
p
o
t
s
i
r
h
C

)
0
0
0
2
(

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

0
8
.
0

5
8
.
0

1
7
.
3

l

e
b
a

s
i

i

n
a
h
c

l

y
p
p
u
s

r
u
O

2
R
D

n

i

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

o
t

d
n
o
p
s
e
r

o
t

s
e
a
s

l

t
s
o

l

r
o

s
k
c
o
t
s
r
e
v
o

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
d
n
a
m
e
d

3
6
.
0

7
7
.
0

9
9
.
0

2
1
.
3

s
i

i

n
a
h
c

l

y
p
p
u
s

r
u
O

3
R
D

0
9
.
0

1
7
.
3

s
i

i

n
a
h
c

l

y
p
p
u
s

r
u
O

4
R
D

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r

f
o

l

e
b
a
p
a
c

d
n
a
m
e
d

t
e
k
r
a
m

l

a
e
r

o
t

g
n
i
t
s
a
c
e
r
o
f

f
o

l

e
b
a
p
a
c

d
n
a
m
e
d

t
e
k
r
a
m

o
t

d
n
o
p
s
e
r

o
t

s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

r
u
o

f
o

i

s
e
c
n
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

s
d
n
a
m
e
d

t
e
k
r
a
m

e
h
t

e
g
a
r
e
v
e

l

o
t

d
e
t
p
a
d
A

m
o
r
F

s
’
h
c
a
b
n
o
r
C

e
c
n
a
i
r
a
V

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

d
e
t
c
a
r
t
x
E

a
h
p
A

l

d
e
z
i
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

r
o
t
c
a
F

i

s
g
n
d
a
o
L

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
D

n
a
e
M

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

S
M
E
T

I

T
N
E
M
E
R
U
S
A
E
M

m
e
t
I

l

e
b
a
L

t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

r
u
o
y

o
t

s
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

t
a
h
t

)
e
e
r
g
a

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

7

,
e
e
r
g
a
s
i
d

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

1
(

r
e
b
m
u
n

e
h
t

g
n

i
l

c
r
i
c

y
b

s

m
e
t
i

f
o

t
e
s

i

g
n
w
o

l
l

o
f

e
h
t

l

e
t
e
p
m
o
c

e
s
a
e
P

l

)
7
0
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

i

k
n
w
S

1
5
.
0

5
7
.
0

8
6
.
0

2
5
.
1

0
5
.
5

y
t
i
l

a
u
q

d
n
a

t
s
o
c

h
t
o
b

f
o

s

m
r
e
t

n

i

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

e
k
a
m
o
t

s
r
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

n
o
i
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

I

w
o
e
b

l

s
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
s

e
h
t

f
o

h
c
a
e

n
o

t
n
e
m
e
e
r
g
a

f
o

l

e
v
e

l

j

r
o
a
m
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

e
W

I

1
S
S

r
e

i
l

p
p
u
S

i

c
g
e
t
a
r
t
S

0
8
.
0

0
8
.
1

3
9
.
4

l

y
p
p
u
s

e
m

i
t

l

a
e
r

e
r
a
h
s

e
W

I

2
S
S

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i

i

n
a
h
c

l

)
s
e
u
d
e
h
c
s

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
p

,
.

g
.
e
(

s
r
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

5
6
.
0

1
9
.
1

0
4
.
4

r
u
o

e
g
a
r
u
o
c
n
e

e
W

I

3
S
S

l

e
v
e

l

r
u
o
y

o
t

s
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

t
a
h
t

)
e
e
r
g
a

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

5

,
e
e
r
g
a
s
i
d

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

e
m
o
c
e
b

o
t

s
r
e

i
l

p
p
u
s

t
c
u
d
o
r
p

n

i

d
e
v
o
v
n

l

i

n
g
i
s
e
d

1
(

r
e
b
m
u
n

e
h
t

g
n

i
l

c
r
i
c

y
b

s

m
e
t
i

f
o

t
e
s

i

g
n
w
o

l
l

o
f

e
h
t

l

e
t
e
p
m
o
c

e
s
a
e
P

l

w
o
e
b

l

s
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
s

e
h
t

f
o

h
c
a
e

n
o

t
n
e
m
e
e
r
g
a

f
o

l

i

e
d
e
h
c
s
n
u
a
r
B

6
5
.
0

3
8
.
0

7
7
.
0

0
0
.
1

4
4
.
3

l

e
b
a

s
i

i

n
a
h
c

l

y
p
p
u
s

r
u
O

1
R
D

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R

d
n
a
m
e
D

Xxxx 2014

17


Journal of Supply Chain Management

d
e
t
p
a
d
A

m
o
r
F

s
’
h
c
a
b
n
o
r
C

e
c
n
a
i
r
a
V

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

d
e
t
c
a
r
t
x
E

a
h
p
A

l

d
e
z
i
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

r
o
t
c
a
F

i

s
g
n
d
a
o
L

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
D

n
a
e
M

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

S
M
E
T

I

T
N
E
M
E
R
U
S
A
E
M

m
e
t
I

l

e
b
a
L

t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

l

e
v
e

l

r
u
o
y

o
t

s
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

t
a
h
t

)
e
e
r
g
a

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

7

,
e
e
r
g
a
s
i
d

l

y
g
n
o
r
t
s

=

1
(

r
e
b
m
u
n

e
h
t

g
n

i
l

c
r
i
c

y
b

s

m
e
t
i

f
o

t
e
s

i

g
n
w
o

l
l

o
f

e
h
t

l

e
t
e
p
m
o
c

e
s
a
e
P

l

w
o
e
b

l

s
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
s

e
h
t

f
o

h
c
a
e

n
o

t
n
e
m
e
e
r
g
a

f
o

.
l
a

t
e

t
l
u
H

)
2
0
0
2
(

4
6
.
0

3
8
.
0

3
6
.
0

2
5
.
1

4
3
.
4

n
a

n
e
e
s

e
v
a
h

e
W

1
P
P
T
C

7
8
.
0

7
8
.
0

1
5
.
1

8
7
.
3

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
d
e
ﬁ
s
i
t
a
s

e
r
a

e
W

2
P
P
T
C

3
4
.
1

0
0
.
4

l

e
g
d
e
w
o
n
k

r
u
o

n
o

d
e
s
a
B

3
P
P
T
C

l

y
p
p
u
s

e
h
t

f
o

i

s
s
e
n
d
e
e
p
s

s
s
e
c
o
r
p

i

n
a
h
c

l

y
p
p
u
s

e
h
t

f
o

e
m

i
t

l

e
c
y
c

y
l
t
n
e
c
e
r

s
s
e
c
o
r
p

i

n
a
h
c

e
h
t

n

i

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

s
i

t
i

k
n
h
t

i

e
w

,
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

i

n
a
h
c

l

y
p
p
u
s

e
h
t

f
o

i

t
n
e
c
ﬁ
f
e

d
n
a

t
r
o
h
s

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P

e
m
T

i

l

e
c
y
C

s
s
e
c
o
r
P

18

Volume 0, Number 0

