In Search of Meaning: Does the Fortune 
Reputation Survey Alter Performance 
Expectat ions? 

W.  Glenn Rowe 
University of Western Ontario 

Ira C.  Harris 
University of Notre Dame 

Albert A.  Cannella, Jr. 
Texas A&M  University 

Tony Francolini 
University of  Western Ontario 

Abstract 
Our study  theoretically and  empirically  examines per- 
formance antecedents and  consequences  of  the Fortune 
annual  Survey  of  Corporate  Reputation.  Accounting- 
and market-based measures of performance are used to 
predict  the ratings, and  investor reactions to the publi- 
cation of the ratings are predicted  to be associated  with 
the extent to which the ratings diverge from antecedent 
predictions. Lower-than-predicted ratings should gener- 
ate a negative response while higher-than-predicted rat- 
ings  should  generate  a  positive  response.  Contrary  to 
expectations, we found a negative relationship.  In addi- 
tion, this negative  relationship  was only for the  lower- 
than-predicted  ratings.  For  higher-than-predicted  rat- 
ings  the  relationship  with  investor  reaction  was 
insignificant. 

Does Fortune's  annual corporate  reputation  survey 
influence investor behaviour? Certainly, Fortune's annu- 
al  survey  coronets  "America's  Most Admired  Compa- 
nies"  and has attained a prominent status among readers 
of Fortune magazine. It has also attracted the attention of 
strategic management scholars (Ballen,  1992; Brown & 
Perry, 1994; Davidson, 1990; Dollinger, Golden, & Sax- 
ton,  1997; Fombrun & Shanley, 1990; Fryxell & Wang, 
1994; Hammond  & Slocum,  1996; McGuire,  Schnee- 
weis,  & Branch,  1990). The level of  research focus  on 
the survey suggests that the results are not only popular, 
but are also important. 

Address  correspondence  to W.  Glenn  Rowe,  Richard  Ivey  School  of 
Business, University of  Western Ontario, London,  ON, Canada N6A 
3K7. E-mail: growe@ivey.uwo.ca 

0 ASAC 2003 

187 

Rbsumb 
Notre  dude  consiste  en  un  examen  the'orique  et 
empirique des facteurs influencant le classement annuel 
du magazine Fortune et des cons&quences de ce classe- 
ment  sur  la  performance  des firmes  fvalukes.  Nous 
utilisons  des  mesures  comptables  et financitres pour 
examiner le lien entre la pegormance et la re'putation de 
la prme. La facon dont les investisseurs re'agissent a ces 
e'valuations  doit  en  principe  Ztre  proportionnelle  au 
degre'  de  divergence  par  rapport  aux  predictions 
ante'rieures.  ThPoriquement,  les  e'valuations  qui  sont 
moins fleve'es que pre'vues entrainent une re'action ne'ga- 
live des investisseurs, tandis que les &valuations qui sont 
plus deve'es que pre'vues entrainent une re'ponse positive 
des investisseurs. Mais dans la re'alitt?, on observe plut6t 
une  relation  inverse,  en  l'occurrence  dans  le  cas  des 
e'valuations  qui  sont  moins  fleve'es  que  pre'vues.  Les 
e'valuations  qui  sont  plus  e'levkes  que  pre'vues  n'ont 
qu'un impact limit6 sur la re'action des investisseurs. 

The research can be divided into two groups. Some 
research  interest  focuses  on  the  content  of  the  survey 
(i.e., what is actually measured). These researchers have 
evaluated  the  accuracy  and  design  of  the  reputation 
scales. For example, Fryxell and Wang  (1994) suggest 
the  survey  is  one-dimensional  (referring  to  the  high 
intercorreIation of the items in the survey). 

On the other hand, the importance of the survey may 
be independent of the question of  survey content. Other 
research has focused on determining whether the reputa- 
tion survey is beneficial due to its accessibility. Does the 
survey provide new  information? Or, conversely, is the 
survey simply redundant because it provides previously 
available  information?  This  prompted  us  to  question 
whether the business market values the information dis- 
seminated in the published survey. From a strategic man- 
agement perspective, this question is important because 

Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de I'administration 
- 20(3), 187-195 


DOES THE FORTUNE REPUTATION SURVEY ALTER  PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS? 

ROWE ET AL. 

it can govern internal resource allocation (Barney, 2002) 
decisions (e.g., efforts to trumpet the results to potential 
employees,  customers,  and  suppliers;  initiatives  to 
change functional strategies in response to favourable or 
unfavourable ratings). 

A  large amount of information (e.g. annual reports, 
proxy  statements, news reports)  is  widely  available for 
virtually  all  of  the  firms  rated  in  the  Fortune  survey. 
Commonly held assumptions of semi-strong market effi- 
ciency imply that investors continuously incorporate this 
financial  information  into  their  expectations  of  future 
firm performance (Brown & Warner,  1985). Yet, several 
authors  (Brown  &  Perry,  1994;  Fombrun  &  Shanley, 
1990;  Fryxell  &  Wang,  1994;  Hammond  &  Slocum, 
1996) have concluded that  the ratings are of  negligible 
value  beyond  describing  past  financial  performance. 
Brown  and  Perry  (1994) refer  to  the  influence of  past 
performance on future performance as a halo effect that 
negates the impact of reputation on future performance. 
By  extension,  this  suggests  that  the  survey  simply 
restates existing financial performance  information and 
condemns the survey as meaningless because its publi- 
cation would represent the release of “old news.” Clear- 
ly,  this raises validity questions for research uses of  the 
survey as an outcome variable. 

The aim of our study is to go beyond the debate on 
the  content  of  the  survey  and  investigate  whether 
investors value the publication of  the results. A signifi- 
cant response to this question would suggest that the rat- 
ings provide new  and  unique information that  is valued 
by  investors and reflected in their investment decisions 
and would, therefore, be strategically important to firms’ 
top  management  teams.  This  would  certainly  seem  to 
reflect the intent of the publisher in designing and imple- 
menting  the  annual  series. Accordingly, our  study  was 
guided by  the research question: Does the Fortune repu- 
tation survey represent new information to investors and, 
by  implication,  to  practicing  managers?  We  sought  to 
examine this question by  observing how  investors react 
to the publication of  the Fortune reputation survey. For 
example,  if  investors  alter  their  performance  expecta- 
tions based on information from the survey (as a signifi- 
cant  investor  reaction  would  indicate)  then  it  suggests 
that  they  draw substantive meaning from the survey. A 
significant investor reaction would be clear evidence that 
the survey is valuable to investors and that the informa- 
tion  revealed in  the  survey is  not  available from  other 
public sources. 

Background and Theory 

Our  approach  is  twofold. First,  we  begin  with  the 
assertion that accounting and market measures of perfor- 

mance  are  important  antecedents  to  the  ratings  a  firm 
receives  in  the  Fortune  survey.  We  expand  on  the 
accounting-  and  market-based  measures  that  have 
already  established  this  antecedent  effect  in  previous 
research by  using year-length measures as antecedents. 
Second,  we  predict  that  publication  of  the  survey  will 
initiate  a  measurable  response  from  investors  to  the 
extent  that  the  survey’s  reputation  ratings  differ  from 
what  would  be  predicted  by  performance  information 
available before the survey is published; the unexpected 
portion of the reputation ratings will comprise new infor- 
mation to which investors will react.’ 

Performance Antecedents of Reputation 

Several studies (Brown & Perry,  1994; Fombrun & 
Shanley, 1990; Hammond & Slocum,  1996; McGuire et 
al.,  1990) empirically suggest that accounting measures 
of  risk and return are important antecedents to the For- 
tune ratings. Because these associations are well estab- 
lished, we  use accounting returns and risk as controls in 
our analyses. 

In  contrast  to accounting-based  measures, market- 
based  measures  signal  current  information,  which 
includes  expectations  regarding  the  firm’s  future 
prospects (Fombrun & Shanley,  1990). High returns to 
shareholders,  measured  as the  wealth  increase  experi- 
enced  by  shareholders  who  held  the  stock  during  the 
previous  year,  are  expected  to  send  favourable signals 
and  lead  to  higher  reputation  ratings.  McGuire  et  al. 
(1990) note that the market based riskheturn  measures 
may  be  more  accurate  than  accounting  measures 
because  they  are  free  of  managerial  manipulation. 
While McGuire et al. and Fombrun and Shanley exam- 
ined market-based measures in their studies, there is lit- 
tle empirical evidence available regarding the effects of 
year-length  investor returns  as  antecedents  of  Fortune 
reputation ratings. 

Conceptually,  Hammond  and  Slocum  (1996) 
argued  that  favourable  reputations  are  a  result  of  the 
generation  of  above  average  returns.  Fombrun  and 
Shanley (1990) posited that  high  levels of  market  per- 
formance  lead  to  firms  and  their  managers  being 
favourably assessed by their external analysts, creditors, 
and  investors. They  argued  that  market  returns  signal 
present  information  regarding  firms’ current  activities, 
results,  and  prospects  to  these  stakeholders.  Fama 
(1970) and  Fombrun  and  Shanley  (1990) have  argued 
that external analysts,  creditors,  and  investors are very 
aware of  firms’ market performance  and  include  these 
data in their  investment decisions. It  makes sense  that 
they  would  include  the  same data  in  their  rating  of  a 
firm for the Fortune annual survey. 

Capital  market  risk  captures  the  uncertainty  con- 

188 

Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de I’administration 
20(3), 187-195 
- 


DOES THE FORTUNE REPUTATION SURVEY ALTER  PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS? 

ROWE ET AL. 

fronting investors who own the firm’s stock. The essence 
of corpofate reputation is beliefs about the firm-what 
it 
stands for, how it will act and react. A firm that has react- 
ed well in the past to unexpected negative events or com- 
petitive  challenges  will  be  viewed  as  less  risky.  Con- 
versely,  firms  that  responded  poorly  in  the  past  to 
unexpected  events  or  competitive  challenges  will  not 
inspire  investor confidence  in  their  abilities  to  handle 
such  contingencies  in  the  future,  leading  investors  to 
view such firms as risky. A company that is less risky is 
one  that  outsiders  and  insiders alike  trust to  behave  in 
certain  ways,  responding  effectively  to  challenges. 
Therefore, raters  will  give higher  ratings to  firms with 
low risk and lower ratings to firms with high risk. Thus, 
we  expect firms with  a strong return to  investors to  be 
rated  higher  by  respondents  to  the  Fortune  survey.  In 
addition, we expect firms with a low capital market risk 
to be rated higher by  respondents to the Fortune  survey. 
Of  course, the converse is  also the case for  firms with 
low  market return and high capital market risk. 

H1:  The  level  of  market  return  will  be  positively 
associated with subsequent overall reputation rating. 
H2:  The level of market risk will be negatively asso- 
ciated with subsequent overall reputation  rating. 

Reputation Effects  on Investor Performance 
Expectations 

A  number  of  authors  have  suggested  that  reputa- 
tions, a theoretical construct, are an intangible or invisi- 
ble asset that a firm may cultivate or utilize to influence 
its  ability  to  capture  future  rents  (Black,  Carnes,  & 
Richardson,  2000;  Caves  & Porter,  1977; Dollinger  et 
al., 1997; Fombrun & Shanley, 1990; Weigelt & Camer- 
er,  1988). A firm’s reputation may influence future rents 
by limiting its competitors’ market access and/or by gen- 
erating greater premium-price flexibility, greater access 
to  capital,  greater  access  to  top  quality  employment 
applicants, and greater customer brand awareness or loy- 
alty. Through the use of strong product branding, adver- 
tising  strategies,  pricing  strategies,  visible  competitive 
moves,  and  high  profile  employees  firms  can  develop 
and maintain reputations to facilitate the capture of these 
rents. Dollinger et al. (1997) found that firms receiving 
higher  Fortune  reputation  ratings  were  more  likely  to 
engage  in joint  venture activity, an  activity designed to 
increase  future rents.  Reputation  is  particularly  impor- 
tant  to firms competing in industries where incomplete 
or  ambiguous  information  or  diverse  public  demands 
exists (Fombrun & Shanley, 1990; Weigelt & Camerer, 
1988). 

Fombrun  and  Shanley  (1990)  indicate  the  public 
constructs reputations from a mix of signals from a vari- 
ety  of  available  sources  (e.g.,  market  information,  the 

firms themselves, the media, analysts). Investors also uti- 
lize  this  intangible  or  invisible  asset  to  value  a  firm. 
Using an  index he  developed called a “reputation quo- 
tient”,2 Fombrun  (2001)  found  that  firms  with  higher 
reputation  ratings  attracted  investors  who  bid  up  the 
value of the stock-an 
event Fombrun  labeled a “value 
spiral” (p. 14); weak reputation ratings lowered the value 
of  the  stock.  Under  semi-strong assumptions of  capital 
market  efficiency,  investors  respond  quickly  to  new 
information  about  investments.  If  the  Fortune  ratings 
provide valuable new  information to investors, then the 
investor reaction will reflect these future rent and cost of 
capital implications. Higher rated firms will experience a 
positive investor reaction and  vice versa. In  the context 
of  our  study,  when  the  Fortune  reputation  ratings  are 
published, investors are already privy to accounting- and 
market-based  information  about  publicly  traded  firms. 
summary opin- 
Accordingly, the reputation ratings-the 
ion  of  experts  about corporate reputation-will 
consti- 
tute  new  information  to  investors only  when  it  differs 
from what is expected, given public information on risk 
and returns. 

This  new  information  will  generate  investor reac- 
tion. We predict that survey ratings higher than expected 
will  generate  a  positive  response  while  survey  ratings 
lower than expected will generate a negative response. In 
more formal terms: 

H3:  Investor reaction  to  publication  of  the  Fortune 
ratings  will be  positively associated  with the differ- 
ence between the actual published rating and the rat- 
ing  predicted  by  publicly  available antecedent  mea- 
sures of  risk and r e t ~ r n . ~  

Methods 

Sample 

Since  1982, Fortune  has annually asked executives, 
outside  directors,  and  business  analysts to  rate  the  10 
largest  companies  in  their  own  industries. Ratings  are 
gathered  on  eight  attributes  that  relate  to  reputation: 
quality of management; quality of products and services; 
innovativeness;  long-term  investment  value;  financial 
soundness; ability to attract, develop, and keep talented 
people;  community  and  environmental  responsibility; 
and use  of  corporate  asset^.^  Each attribute was  scored 
on a scale of 0 (poor) to  10 (excellent). An  overall com- 
pany  score  was  calculated by  averaging a firm’s rating 
on the eight attributes. 

Approximately 8,000 surveys are mailed out by For- 
rune each year. The response rate ranged from 40 to 50% 
in  the early years,  but  has  not  been  reported since the 
publication of  the  1986 data. Further, Forrune publishes 

189 

Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de 1:adrninistration 
- 20(3), 187-195 


DOES THE FORTUNE REPUTATION SURVEY ALTER  PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS? 

R O W  ET AL. 

only  summary data-the 
average rating  across respon- 
dents on  each dimension and the overall average rating. 
We  selected-a six-year interval,  1986 to  1991, for 
testing our hypotheses. We selected  1986 as the starting 
year  because it  was  the fifth  year  of  the survey and  so 
respondents were familiar with the survey and investors 
were familiar with  the published results  in  form, if  not 
the specifics of content. The inclusion of six years in the 
study  permitted  us  to  gather  a  reasonable  number  of 
observations upon which to conduct statistical analyses. 
In the six years we selected, Fortune published a total of 
1,828 ratings, corresponding to firm-years. Missing data 
reduced the number of usable observations to  1,241. 

Fortune implements the reputation survey from Sep- 
tember  through  November  of  each  year  and  publishes 
the results in January or February of the following year. 
We  gathered the accounting-  and  market-based perfor- 
mance measures from COMPUSTAT and CRSP, respec- 
tively. About 77% of sample firms have fiscal years cor- 
responding  to  calendar  years.  For  these,  accounting- 
based  numbers reflect the firm’s published data for the 
fiscal year that ended December 31 of the year prior to 
that in which the ratings were published. For the remain- 
der, we  used  fiscal year data for the nearest fiscal year 
end prior to the publication of the ratings. 

Measures 

Reputation.  Reputation  was  operationalized  as the 
mean of the eight attributes measured by  Fortune. Fryx- 
ell and Wang (1994) provided very strong evidence that 
these eight attributes represent a single, latent construct. 
The reliability associated with the overall rating is very 
high (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.97), suggesting that the mean 
of  the eight dimensions is an  appropriate substitute for 
the individual ratings (Carmines & Zeller,  1979). In our 
study, the current year’s reputation is the key dependent 
variable. The  previous  year’s  reputation,  because  it  is 
part  of  the public  information available to  investors, is 
included as a control variable. 

Market-based prior performance. We used two indi- 
cators to  measure  market-based performance.  We  used 
daily firm returns and equally-weighted  market returns 
to generate measures of total risk (market risk) and mar- 
ket-adjusted shareholder return (market-adjusted refurn). 
Market risk is the standard deviation of  the firm’s daily 
returns over the fiscal year. Market-adjusted return was 
estimated  by  compounding  the  daily  returns  to  share- 
holders over the firm’s fiscal year, and subtracting from 
that figure what  shareholders would  have made  if  they 
had invested in a fully diversified portfolio rather than in 
the firm’s stock. Conceptually, this measure is similar to 
industry-adjusted  performance  (Dess,  Ireland,  &  Hitt, 
1990). 

Investor  reaction.  Investor response to the Fortune 
survey publication  was  assessed  with  a  financial event 
methodology  (Brown  & Warner,  1985). We  began  by 
identifying  the  date  on  which  each  Fortune reputation 
issue  became available to  the  public. This  is usually  a 
simple process in event studies, as the Wall Srreet Jour- 
nal is used as the data source, and the date of each issue 
represents  the date  of  publication. With Fortune maga- 
zine, the issue is a bit more complex. Each issue of For- 
tune has a date associated with it, but the date references 
an  approximate  publication  date  of  the  next  issue.  In 
effect, this date is more akin to an expiration date than a 
publication date. To resolve this problem, we  identified 
as day zero (the date when the information became wide- 
ly  available  to  the  public)  as  the  date5 on  which  our 
library received each Fortune reputation issue. Investor 
reaction was then  gauged with  a window running from 
day -12 through day +3. (We examined a number of time 
intervals, ranging from -20  to +3, to -5  to +3. All yield- 
ed the same signs as those reported here, and virtually all 
had  similar  significance  levels.) Following the  method 
discussed in detail by McWilliams and Siegel (1997), we 
summed the prediction errors over our observation win- 
dow.  We  refer  to  this  measure  as  investor  reaction. 
McWilliams and Siegel recommend that “an event win- 
dow should be as short as possible” (p. 636) but also sug- 
gest  that  the  nature of  the  event  should determine  the 
length of the window, and they provide an example using 
a larger window when leakage of information is likely. In 
this situation, they argue for a window that commences 
well  prior  to  the  announcement  of  the  event  so  that 
abnormal returns related to the event are captured. Given 
that  the  corporate  reputation  issue  must  be  assembled 
and sent to the printer well in advance of actual delivery, 
our relatively wide window seems appropriate. 

Control  variables. Prior research  has  very  strongly 
supported two conclusions about the Fortune reputation 
survey. First,  although the  survey  purports  to  measure 
eight independent dimensions of reputation, factor analy- 
ses clearly indicate that there is only one factor present, 
and that single factor accounts for some 80% of the vari- 
ance in the ratings (Fryxell & Wang,  1994). McGuire et 
al. (1990), using  1983 data, also concluded high intercor- 
relations among these eight attributes (average = 0.75), 
but  noted that social responsibility had  a lower correla- 
tion  of  0.67.  Second, the  single factor  captured by  the 
mean of the eight dimensions is very strongly associated 
with prior financial performance. For instance, Fombrun 
and Shanley (1990) concluded that accounting measures 
of  profitability  are  strongly  associated  with  Fortune’s 
overall reputation rating. Brown and Perry (1994), Ham- 
mond and Slocum (1996), and McGuire et al. also report 
very strong and positive associations between accounting 
returns and the overall Fortune reputation rating. 

190 

Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de I’administration 
a(3),187-195 


DOES THE FORTUNE REPUTATION SURVEY ALTER  PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS? 

ROWE ET AL. 

Table 1 
Descriptive Statistics 

Mean  Std Dev 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Investor Reaction 
Reputation 
Reputation(t- 1) 
Mkt Adj Return 
Market Risk 
ROE 
Debt-to-equi ty 
Log(Citations) 
Log(Emp1oyees) 

-.06 
6.41 
6.45 
-.08 
.02 
.12 
.82 
2.57 
3.52 

.08 
.93 
.89 
.35 
.o 1 
.I 1 
.95 
1.44 
1.09 

-.27*** 
-.20*** 
-.30*** 
.02 
-.22*** 

-.Ol 
-.09** 

. 
.go*** 
.21*** 
-.42*** 
.47*** 
-.38*** 
.19*** 
.19*** 

. 
.09** 
-.07** 
-.38*** 
.36*** 
.38*** 
..33***  _, 17*** 
-.07** 
.22*** 
.05* 
.21*** 

..29*** 
- 
,37*** 
‘.11*** 
- 
‘.17*** 
- 

. 
-.25*** 
.02 
.04 

. 
- .05. 
-.08** 

.62*** 

* p<.05 
** p<.o1 
*** p<.Ool 

Beyond profitability, Brown and Perry (1994) report 
a significant, negative  association between overall For- 
tune rating and firm-level risk, measured as debt-to-equi- 
ty  ratio.  Fombrun  and  Shanley  (1990) also  concluded 
that their measure of accounting risk, the coefficient of 
variation  of  return  on  invested capital  over  a nine-year 
period, was negatively related to Fortune reputation rat- 
ings. These results suggest that accounting measures of 
risk and return are important antecedents to the Fortune 
ratings. Because these associations are well established, 
we  use  accounting  returns  and  risk  as  controls  in  our 
analyses. Accounting-based performance  was measured 
in two ways: return on equity (ROE), and debt to com- 
mon equity (debt-to-equity). ROE, defined as net income 
before extraordinary  items  divided  by  common  equity, 
measured profitability. The ratio of total debt to common 
stockholder’s equity measured accounting risk. 

Firm size was included as a control variable and was 
measured  as  the  number  of  employees.  Fombrun  and 
Shanley (1990) and Brown and Perry (1994) found size 
(measured as sales) to be  positively related to the  For- 
tune reputation rating. In  addition, year was included to 
remove any variance related to a year-to-year effect. Five 
dichotomous variables were included for the years  1986 
to  1990. We  also included a measure of media exposure 
to remove the effect of name familiarity. This was oper- 
ationalized as the number of media citations reported in 
ABVInform during the calendar year in which the ratings 
were gathered. We refer to this measure as citations, and 
it is similar to  the visibility measure used  by  Fombrun 
and  Shanley  (1990). The  distributions  for  number  of 
employees and  number of citations were quite  skewed, 

so both  were log transformed. Because it  is part  of  the 
publicly  available  information,  we  also  included  the 
firm’s previous ratings in the Fortune survey, that is, the 
firm’s average rating for year t- 1. Finally, we included 30 
dummy variables to control for any fixed effects due to 
industry (at the 2-digit SIC level). All variables in regres- 
sion analyses were examined for multicollinearity using 
the variance inflation factor (VIF). In all of our analyses, 
the VLFs ranged from  I. I  to 2.1, suggesting that  multi- 
collinearity was not a problem. Table  1  provides means, 
standard deviations, and a correlation matrix for the vari- 
ables used in the analyses. Because the data analyzed in 
Table  2  represent  a  pooled  cross-sectional  time  series 
(Dielman, 1983) we tested for the presence of autocorre- 
lation. For the model in Table 2, the Durbin-Watson sta- 
tistic was  1.9, suggesting that autocorrelation was not  a 
concern in the analysis. 

One interesting and surprising statistic in Table 1 is 
the mean  of  the investor reaction  measure.  Recall that 
this  measure  cumulates  the  investor  reaction  from 
day  -12  to day  +3 (a  16-day window).  This  measure 
indicates  a  mean  negative  response  to  the  survey 
(mean = -0.06; std dev = 0.081). A t-test indicates that 
this  measure  is  significantly  different  from  zero 
(t = 27.6; p < 0.001). This negative reaction implies that 
investors,  on  average,  react  negatively  to  the  survey. 
This is surprising since the mean rating  of  6.41 repre- 
sents an “above midpoint” rating for the  10-point scale 
used.  Prior  to  running  the  analysis,  we  expected 
(though we did not hypothesize) that investors, on aver- 
age,  would  react  favourably  to  the  publication  of  the 
ratings. 

191 

Canadian Journal of Administrative  Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de I’adrninistration 
‘20(3), -  187-195 


DOES THE FORTUNE REPUTATION SURVEY ALTER  PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS? 

ROWE ET AL. 

Predicting the Fortune Reputation Rating 

Hypotheses 1 and 2 require a multivariate regression 
analysis with  the  Fortune  rating as the dependent  vari- 
able, and Hypothesis 3 requires that we create estimates 
of  what  we  expect the  Fortune  reputation rating  to  be, 
given publicly available information prior to the release 
of  the ratings. We  used  a regression  model  to estimate 
coefficients for our independent and control variables (to 
test  Hypotheses  1  and  2) and  subsequently to  generate 
predicted  values  of  the  reputation  ratings  to  compare 
with  the  actual  ratings.  The  residuals  (actual  ratings 
minus  predicted  ratings)  from  the  regression  model 
became our measure of the extent to which the actual rat- 
ings differed from expectations (i.e., predicted ratings). 
We correlated the residuals with investor reaction to test 
Hypothesis  3.  If  there  was  no  new  information  in  the 
Fortune  ratings then there should be no significant cor- 
relation  between  the  residuals  and  investor  reaction. 
However, a significant correlation between the residuals 
and investor reaction means that there is something over 
and above the variance explained by  the financial infor- 
mation being used to explain variance in the ratings. The 
regression model appears in Table 2. 

The coefficients in Table 2  hold no surprises. First, 
the previous year’s reputation rating received by  the firm 
is positive and highly significant (B = 0.83, p < 0.001). 
As  prior  researchers  have  reported,  we  found  a  very 
strong and positive coefficient for ROE  (B = 1.03, p < 
0.001) and a very significant and negative coefficient for 
debt-to-equity  ratio  (B  =  -0.06;  p  <  0.001).  The 
explained  variance,  assessed  by  adjusted  r-squared,  is 
over 86%, suggesting  that  the  model  is  well  specified. 
Hypothesis 1, which predicted that the return sharehold- 
ers achieved during the fiscal year prior to the publica- 
tion  of  the ratings  would  be  positively associated  with 
the published ratings, was strongly supported. The coef- 
ficient for market-adjusted return is positive and strong- 
ly significant (B = 0.27; p < 0.001). The coefficient for 
market risk is negative and highly significant (B = -8.10; 
p < 0.001), providing strong support  for  Hypothesis 2. 
High levels of capital market risk are clearly associated 
with lower Fortune  reputation ratings. 

We  turn  now  to  investor reaction  to  the  survey’s 
publication.  Table  3  provides  the  correlation  between 
investor  reaction  and  the  residual  from  the  regression 
model reported in Table 2. Recall, the residuals from the 
regression model of Table 2 (calculated as actual ratings 
minus predicted or expected ratings) are measures of the 
extent to which the reputation ratings differ from predic- 
tions  formed  by  noting  publicly  available  accounting- 
and market-based profitability and risk  measures. Con- 
trary to Hypothesis 3, the correlation is significantly neg- 
ative (r = -0.101;  p < 0.001). 

Table 2 
Regression Model: DV = Reputation Rating 

Independent Variables 

Coefficient Estimates 

1.33*** 
.83*** 
.27*** 
-8.10*** 
1,03*** 
-.06*** 
.02 
.03t 
-. 15*** 
-.07t 
-.11** 
-.13** 
-.29*** 
.86 

183.87*** 
42,  1198 

1241 

Intercept 
Reputation (t- 1 ) 
Market-adjusted return 
Market risk 
ROE 
Debt-to-Equi ty 
Log(citations) 
Log(emp1oyees) 
Year  1986 
Year  1987 
Year  1988 
Year 1989 
Year  1990 
Adjusted R2 
F 
df 
N 

t p<. 10 
* p<.05 
** p<.o1 
*** p<.oo1 

The negative correlation across all firms in the sam- 
ple surprised us, so we split the sample into positive and 
negative  deviations  from  expectations  to  see  if  the 
results  were driven by  firms with  actual  survey ratings 
higher than  predicted,  or  those  with  actual  survey rat- 
ings lower than predicted. As can be seen from Panels 2 
and  3  of  Table  3,  the  negative  correlation  persists 
regardless of  whether the deviation from predicted rat- 
ings is higher-than-predicted (r = 4.01 3) or lower-than- 
predicted (r = -.086;  p c 0.05). However, only the firms 
receiving actual survey ratings lower than expected have 
a  significant  correlation  between  the  divergence  (in 
actual  survey rating  and predicted  rating) and  investor 
reaction.  In  other words,  the Fortune  corporate  reputa- 
tion survey prompted investors to reshuffle  a portion of 
their portfolios if the actual ratings were lower than the 
expected  ratings.  Stocks  of  firms  that  received  actual 
ratings  higher  than  predicted  by  financial  and  market 
performance  measures  were  neither  bought  nor  sold. 
However,  stocks  of  firms  that  received  actual  ratings 
lower  than  predicted  by  financial  and  market  perfor- 
mance measures were bought, with  more  being bought 
the greater the actual ratings were lower than the expect- 
ed ratings. 

192 

Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de I’administration 
a ( 3 ) ,  187- 195 


DOES THE FORTUNE REPUTATION SURVEY ALTER  PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS? 

ROWE ET AL. 

Table 3 
Correlation Between Investor Reaction and Divergence of Actual from Expected Ratings 

Panel  1:  Full sample (N = 1241) 

Divergence from expectations 

Investor Reaction 

-. 101 *** 

~~ 

~ 

Panel 2: Actual survey ratings higher than expected ratings (N = 674) 

Divergence from expectations 

Investor Reaction 

-.013 

Panel 3: Actual survey ratings lower than expected ratings (N = 567) 

Divergence from expectations 

Investor Reaction 

-.086* 

* p<.05 
*** p<.oo1 

Discussion 

Because of  the  importance  associated  with  corpo- 
rate reputation, Fortune’s reputation survey has attracted 
attention  from  both  practitioners  and  researchers.  The 
purpose  of  our  study  was  to  simultaneously  examine 
accounting- and market-based performance  antecedents 
to reputation ratings, and the investor reaction to the pub- 
lication of the ratings so as to isolate whether new infor- 
mation,  if  any,  was  being  revealed to  investors by  the 
survey. While the hypotheses associated with the former 
goal were substantiated as expected, the hypothesis asso- 
ciated  with  the  latter  purpose  revealed  significant  and 
surprising results. 

Our results suggest that these summary evaluations 
are valuable, but for reasons opposite to those proposed 
by  Fortune  magazine.  Our  evidence  implies  that 
investors use the survey to identify firms with survey rat- 
ings greater than expected and firms with survey ratings 
lower than expected, and alter their investment outlook 
accordingly. This result was surprising to us because the 
widespread view on the Fortune reputation survey is that 
a  high  reputation  rating  is  desirable.  The  semi-strong 
market  efficiency argurnent (Fama,  1970,  199 1;  Muth, 
1960) holds that a company’s share price reflects all pub- 
licly available information. This suggests that any finan- 
cial  performance  information  embedded  in  the  survey 
will be of little worth to investors as it reflects old news. 
Conversely,  we  expected  that  the  survey  itself  would 
reveal  important  information  to  investors  because  the 

summary evaluations of  company  and  industry  experts 
shoild be of value to investors. 

If Fombrun and Shanley (1990) are correct in argu- 
ing that  the survey reflects  financial health  alone, then 
the ratings should be merely an affirmation of previous- 
ly  available information, and should lead to no reaction 
at all; that is, the relationship between investor reaction 
and divergence from expectation should not  be  signifi- 
cant,  as reported  in Table 3. Fryxell and Wang  (1994) 
posit that the survey may be a measure of  a firm’s repu- 
tation as an investment, but clearly expect that the rating 
would  be  positively  interpreted.  The  strong  negative 
investor  reaction  that  we  found  requires  a  different 
explanation.  Our  findings  suggest  that  investors  are 
expecting  future cash  flows to  remain steady for firms 
with  survey ratings  higher than  expected, and  increase 
for those with survey ratings lower than expected. 

The Icurus Paradox Explanation 

We offer several potential explanations for this phe- 
nomenon. First,  investors may be  expecting firms with 
survey ratings higher than expected to behave in a man- 
ner  consistent  with  Miller’s  Icarus  Paradox  assertion. 
Miller (1990) argues that a company’s greatest assets can 
lead  to  its  demise.  He  states:  “Companies extend  and 
amplify the strategies to which they credit their success 
... Strategies become  less balanced. They  center more 
around  a  single  core  strength  that  is  amplified unduly 
while other aspects are forgotten almost entirely” (p. 314) 

193 

Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de I’administration 
- 20(3),  187-195 


DOES THE FORTUNE REPUTATION SURVEY ALTER  PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS? 

ROWE ET AL. 

Becoming  one  of  America’s  “Most  Admired  Compa- 
nies’’  does  appear  to  epitomize  corporate  success  and 
typically highlights  one  or  two  activities  that  the  firm 
does  very  well. Therefore,  if  the Fortune  survey repre- 
sents a proxy for success (irrespective of what is actual- 
ly being measured), then Miller’s theory would predict a 
subsequent  deterioration  in  performance-a 
prediction 
consistent with our results. 

The Hubris Explanation 

Second,  the  strong  negative  association  between 
reputation  rating  and  investor  reaction  suggests  that 
investors  may  expect highly  rated  firms to act  in  ways 
consistent with Hayward and Hambrick’s ( 1997) theory 
on CEO hubris. Hayward and Hambrick found that the 
hubris  factor  is  positively  associated  with  acquisition 
premiums  and  negatively  associated  with  performance 
and  shareholder  returns.  Because  of  its  prominence  in 
the  business  community,  the  Fortune  survey  may  be 
viewed as a grand ego booster for management. There- 
fore, a survey rating higher than  expected may  prompt 
investors to  fear  that  managers  will  undertake  unprof- 
itable projects or at least projects with a lesser potential 
to generate cash flow. 

The Prospect  Theory Explanation 

Third,  the  inverse  relationship  between  unantici- 
pated  reputation  rating  and  market  response  is  also 
consistent  with  prospect  theory.  Kahneman  and Tver- 
sky  (1979) argue  that  decision-makers  are more  risk- 
averse  under  conditions  of  negative  returns.  Shapira 
(1986) and  MacCrimmon  and  Wehrung  (1986) found 
support for this theory whereby managers believed that 
fewer  risks  should  be  taken  when  things  are  going 
well. Likewise, March  and  Shapira  (1987)  found  that 
the relation between current position  and some critical 
reference points (the survey results provide very clear 
reference  points)  is  affected  by  risk  taking.  Further- 
more,  the  survey  results  convey  a  particular  meaning 
(i.e., whether the firm is considered one of  “America’s 
Most Admired  Companies”)  and  therefore  may  influ- 
ence  strategic  decision-making  (Dutton  &  Jackson, 
1987). 

Fourth, to the extent that managers view their repu- 
tation rating as a “report card,” a survey rating lower than 
expected  could  prompt  riskier  decisions.  March  and 
Shapira  ( 1987)  argue  that  decision-makers  engage  in 
such behaviour independent of  the actual probability of 
success. Conversely, companies that score a survey rat- 
ing higher than expected may “hunker down” in an effort 
to  retain  their  status.  Such  a  risk-averse  posture  may 
result  in  a  failure  to  be  proactive  in  scanning  and 

responding to the external environment. Our results may 
reflect an  effect in which the market anticipates a man- 
agerial reaction consistent with prospect theory and esti- 
mates  future  performance  accordingly.  In  the  para- 
phrased  words  of  a  former  investment  analyst-it 
is 
more  important  to  safeguard  what  you  already  have  if 
you are doing well. He went on to say that, first and fore- 
most, one must  conserve the trust;  it  is much  worse  to 
lose money than to not make money (Saparito, 2003). 

The Reputation  versus Essential Activities 
Explanation 

Finally,  Perrow  (1961)  argues  that  the  generation 
and maintenance of a reputation may create internal con- 
flicts  and  deflection  from  organizational  goals:  that  is, 
emphasis  upon  reputation  may  divert  resources  away 
from essential activities. Investors may  perceive higher 
than expected ratings as a signal of  long-range commit- 
ments that are contrary to employee or shareholder val- 
ues; therefore, investors may take a wait and see attitude 
and not make any changes in their investment portfolios. 

Conclusion 

With  regard  to  whether  the  Fortune  survey  pro- 
vides new information  to investors, our results suggest 
that  it is indeed  a source of new  information. Howev- 
er, the information  may not lie in the ratings alone, but 
rather in what  implications the ratings hold for subse- 
quent  firm  performance.  This is an  interesting  contri- 
bution in several  ways. First, the results are surprising 
and we, as researchers,  should be careful not to assign 
an inappropriate  meaning  to the annual  survey results. 
While  the  question  of  what  the  survey  actually  mea- 
sures  will  no  doubt  continue  to  be  debated,  our  find- 
ings suggest that the survey results are important. Sec- 
ond, the investment community, a key stakeholder that 
managers  typically  watch  carefully,  has  apparently 
found  value  in the Fortune  survey  as a source of  new 
information.  The  value  they  have  found,  however, 
causes them  to act differently  than  we expected-they 
seem  to  ignore  firms  with  survey  ratings  higher  than 
expected  and  increase  the  value  of  firms  with  survey 
ratings  lower  than  expected.  Finally,  based  on  our 
study,  we  would  caution  managers  of  firms  to  view 
their rank in the Fortune ratings with a critical eye and 
not  make  any  investment  decisions  that  would  try  to 
change their position  in the ratings. What may be more 
appropriate is to strive to provide the best products and 
services  to  customers,  to  treat  managers  and  employ- 
ees  with  respect,  and  to  let  the  ratings  take  care  of 
themselves. 

194 

Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de I’administration 
- 
20(3),187-195 


DOES THE FORTUNE REPUTATION SURVEY ALTER  PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS? 

ROW ET AL. 

Notes 

As one anonymous  reviewer pointed out, it may be that 
the  information  is  also  valuable  because  it  is in  a  more 
accessible format. 
Fombrun’s reputation quotient measures reputation on six 
dimensions:  corporate  appeal;  products  and  services; 
financial  performance;  vision  and  leadership;  workplace 
environment;  and  social  responsibility.  Each  respondent 
uses a different ratio of these six dimensions depending on 
their  personal  view of  what is  important.  Fombrun  indi- 
cates that the maintenance of one’s reputation depends on 
five principles: maintaining distinctiveness  in the view of 
respondents; showing a focus of actions and communica- 
tions; maintaining  a consistency  of  action and communi- 
cations;  providing  an  identity  that  is  genuine  and  not 
based on hype; communicating in a transparent manner. 
As  used  here,  the  word  difference  refers  to  the  value 
obtained when the predicted  rating is subtracted from the 
actual rating subsequently published in Fortune. 
For more survey details, please consult any Fortune  cor- 
porate reputation issue or Ballen (1992). For a discussion 
of the survey‘s limitations, please see Fombrun and Shan- 
ley (1990) andor Fryxell and Wang (1994). 
Our library stamps a date of receipt on all periodicals, and 
care is taken to assure that the date stamped matches the 
actual date of receipt. 
The model also ircludes 30 indicator variables (not shown 
below) to control  for industry  effects at the 2-digit  level. 
Without the industry controls, the R-squared of the model 
is 0.858 versus the 0.861 of the model below. A full ver- 
sus restricted  F-test  indicated  that  the  industry  controls 
added marginally to the explanatory  power of  the model, 
so they were retained. 

References 

Ballen,  K.  (1992, February  10). America’s most  admired cor- 

porations. Fortune. 

Barney,  J.B.  (2002).  Gaining  and  sustaining  competitive 

advantage. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Black, E.L., Cames, T.A., & Richardson, V.J. (2000). The mar- 
ket  value of  corporate reputation.  Corporate  Reputation 
Review, 3 (l), 31-42. 

Brown, B.  & Perry S. (1994). Removing the financial perfor- 
mance  halo  from  Fortune’s  “most  admired’ companies. 
Academy of  Management Journal, 37 ( 3 ,  1347- 1359. 

Brown, S.J. & Warner, J.B.  (1985). Using daily stock returns: 
The case of  event studies. Journal of  Financial Econom- 
ics, 14, 3-3 1. 

Carmines, E.G. & Zeller, R.A.  (1979). Reliability and validiiy 

assessment. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 

Caves,  R.E.  & Porter,  M.E.  (1977).  From  entry  bamers  to 
mobility  bamers.  Quarterly  Journal  of Economics,  91, 
42 1-434. 

Davidson,  D.K.  (1990,  Spring).  On  corporate  reputation:  A 

reply to Dobson. Business and Society, 39-41. 

Dess, G.G., Ireland, R.D., & Hitt, M.A. (1990). Industry effects 
and  strategic management research. Journal  of  Manage- 
ment, 16, 7-27. 

Dielman,  T.  (1983).  Pooled  cross-sectional  and  time  series 
data: A survey of  current  statistical methodology. Ameri- 
can Statistician, 37, 11 1-122. 

Dollinger,  M.J., Golden, P.A.,  & Saxton, T. (1997). The effect 
of  reputation  on  the  decision  to joint  venture.  Strategic 
Management Journal, 18 (2). 127-140. 

Dutton,  J.E.  & Jackson,  S.E.  (1987).  Categorizing  strategic 
issues: Links to organizational  action. Academy  of  Man- 
agement Review,  12.76-90. 

Fama, E. (1970). Efficient capital markets: A review of theory 

and empirical work. Journal of Finance, 25, 383-417. 

Fama,  E.F.  (1991).  Efficient  capital  markets:  11.  Journal  of 

Finance, 46,  1575-1617. 

Fombrun,  C.  (2001).  Reputations:  Measurable,  valuable, and 

manageable. American Banker, 166, 14-18. 

Fombrun, C. & Shanley, M. (1990). What’s in a name? Repu- 
tation  building  and corporate  strategy. Academy  of  Man- 
agement Journal, 33 (2), 233-258. 

Fryxell, G.E. & Wang, J. (1994). The Fortune corporate “repu- 
tation’  index:  Reputation  for  what? Journal  of  Manage- 
ment, 20 ( l), 1 - 14. 

Hammond, S.A. & Slocum, J.W. Jr. (1996). The impact of prior 
firm financial performance on subsequent corporate repu- 
tation. Journal of Business Ethics,  15, 159-165. 

Hayward,  M.L.A.  & Hambrick,  D.C.  (1997).  Explaining  the 
premiums  paid  for  large acquisitions:  Evidence of  CEO 
hubris. Administrative  Science Quarterly, 42,  103-127. 

Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1 979). Prospect theory: An  analy- 

sis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47,263-291. 

MacCrimmon,  K.R.  & Wehrung,  D.A.  (1986).  Taking  risks: 

The management of uncertainty. New York: Free Press. 

March, J.G.  & Shapira, Z. (1987). Managerial perspectives on 
risk and risk taking. Management Science, 33, 1404-141 8. 
McGuire, J.B., Schneeweis, T., & Branch,  B. (1990). Percep- 
tions  of  firm  quality:  A  cause  or  result  of  firm  perfor- 
mance. Journal of  Management, 16 (I ),  167- 180. 

McWilliams, A. & Siegel, D. (1997). Event studies in manage- 
ment research: Theoretical and empirical issues. Academy 
of Management Journal, 40 (3), 626-657. 

Miller, D.  (1990). The lcarus paradox: How exceptional com- 
panies bring about their own downfall. New York: Harper 
Collins. 

Muth, J. F. (1960). Optimal properties of exponentially weight- 
ed forecasts. Journal of  the American  Statistical Associa- 
tion, 55, 299-306. 

Perrow,  C.  (1961).  Organizational  prestige:  Some  functions 
and dysfunctions. American Journal of Sociology, 66 (4). 
335-341. 

Saparito, P.  (2003). Personal conversation, January 3 1. 
Shapira,  Z.  (1986).  Risk  in  managerial  decision  making. 
Unpublished manuscript, Hebrew University, Jerusalem. 
Weigelt,  K.  & Camerer, C. (1988).  Reputation  and corporate 
strategy:  A  review  of  recent  theory  and  applications. 
Strategic Management Journal, 9, 443-454. 

195 

Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 
Revue canadienne des sciences de I’administration 
20(3), 187-195 

