Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology (2009). 82, 465-489
©  2009  The British Psychological  Society

465

The
British
Psychological
Society

www.bpsjournals.co.uk

Leadership  predictors  of innovation  and task
performance: Subordinates' self-esteenn  and
self-presentation  as  moderators

Johannes Rank'*, Nicole E. Nelson^ Tammy D. Allen^ and Xian Xu^
'University  of  Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
^University  of Giessen, Giessen, Germany
^University  of South  Florida, Tampa, USA

that 

This  study  examined  self-related  subordinate  variables  as moderators  of  relationships
between  supervisors'  leadership  behaviours  (transformational  as  well  as  active-
corrective  transactional  leadership)  and  subordinates'  innovative  behaviour  and  task
performance.  Based  on  behavioural  plasticity  and  self-monitoring 
theory,  we
hypothesized 
these  associations  would  be  moderated  by  subordinates'
organization-based  self-esteem  and  by  their  propensity  to  modify  self-presentation, a
major  facet of the  self-monitoring  construct.  Field survey  data (N =  161) collected  in
research  and  development,  marketing  and  human  resources  departments  of  several
German companies revealed that transformational  leadership positively predicted  both
criteria,  whereas  active-corrective 
leadership  negatively  predicted
innovation.  As  hypothesized,  transformational  leadership  related  more  strongly  and
positively to  innovation for  subordinates  low  in organization-based  self-esteem. When
subordinates  were  low  in  self-presentation  propensity, active-corrective  transactional
leadership  was  negatively,  and  transformational  leadership  was  positively  associated
with  task  performance.

transactional 

For  several  decades,  leadership  researchers  have  attempted  to  identify  subordinate
characteristics  that  may  moderate  the  relationships  between  various  supervisory
behaviours and subordinate performance (Vüla, Howell, Dorfman, & Daniel, 2003). For
example,  contingency  theories  such  as  situational  leadership  theory  (Hersey  &
Blanchard,  1969),  path-goal  theory  (House,  1971)  and  leadership  substitutes  theory
(Kerr  & Jermier,  1978)  explicated  potential  moderating  influences  of  subordinates'
maturity, locus of control and need for independence, respectively. However, empirical
studies  have  frequently  failed  to  support  the  proposed  interaction  effects  or  led  to
inconclusive  results  (Blank,  Weitzel,  &  Green,  1990;  Fernandez  & Vecchio,  1997;

* Correspondence  should be addressed  to  Dr Johannes  Rank, University of  Konstanz, Department  of  Psychology,  78457
Konstanz,  Germany (e-maii: johannes.rank@uni-konstanz.de).

DOI; 10.1348/096317908X371547


466  Johannes Ronk et al.

Podsakoff,  MacKenzie,  Ahearne,  & Bommer,  1995). In their  review  of 73 published
studies  of moderator  effects  specified  in path-goal  theory  and leadership  substitutes
theory, Podsakoff et al  found that only about  11%  of more than 4,300 moderator tests
yielded significant  results and that these findings did not even replicate across studies,
concluding that the 'attempt to find this 'needle in a haystack' has failed'  (p. 457).

Fortunately,  considerable  progress  in this  domain  has recently  been  achieved by
scholars  who  discussed  mediating  and  moderating  effects  of  self-concept  and  self-
regulatory  subordinate  variables  based  on  a  consideration  of  social  psychological
theories (Lord & Brown, 2001, Lord, Brown, & Freiberg,  1999; van Knippenberg, van
Knippenberg,  De Cremer,  & Hogg,  2004).  Lord  and colleagues  (1999)  argued  that
subordinates'  self-concepts  function  as powerful  determinants  of  their  reactions  to
leaders. In their integrative review, van Knippenberg and co authors (2004) noted that
most  studies  of  self-concept  moderators  considered  subordinates'  collective  self-
construal, i.e. the extent to which they define  themselves as members of the leader's
group. For example, a few studies informed by social identity theory revealed that leader
group  prototypicality  (the  degree  to  which  the  leader  possesses  characteristics
representative of the group) more positively predicted outcomes such as subordinates'
perceptions  of leadership  effectiveness  when  subordinates  conceived  their  selves in
terms  of group  membership  (Hogg,  Hains, & Mason,  1998; Van Knippenberg  et  ai,
2004). However, 'aspects of the self-concept other than self-construal have hardly been
studied as moderators of leadership processes' (Van Knippenberg et al,  2004, p. 844).
Therefore,  'research  may develop  theoretical  and empirical  analyses of the potential
moderating role of other aspects of follower  self-concept'.

The present  study  responds to this call by explicating  and examining  moderating
influences  of one self-concept  variable  (organization-based  self-esteem)  and one self-
regulatory variable (the propensity  to modify  self-presentation)  that  have been  rarely
considered as leadership moderators. Organization-based self-esteem (OBSE) reflects an
employee's  self-perceived  value  as  an  organization  member  (Pierce,  Gardner,
Cummings, & Dunham,  1989). The propensity  to modify  self-presentation  represents
a major  facet  of the self-monitoring  construct  (Snyder,  1987) and reflects  'individual
differences  in the extent to which  people  regulate their  self-presentation  by tailoring
their  actions in accordance with  immediate  situational  cues'  (Lennox  & Wolfe, 1984,
p.  1347). The primary  objective  of this  research  is to investigate  whether  these two
subordinate variables moderate relationships between supervisors' transformational as
well  as  active-corrective  transactional  leadership  and  two  important  subordinate
outcomes, namely task performance  and innovative behaviour.

To date, leadership researchers have considered self-esteem  mainly as a mediator or
outcome rather than as a moderating variable (De Cremer, van Knippenberg, Van Dijke,
& Bos, 2006;  Shamir,  House,  & Arthur,  1993; Van Knippenberg  et al,  2004). One
exception is a study by Pierce, Gardner, Dunham, and Cummings (1993) who found that
general supervisory support positively predicted subordinates' job performance only for
subordinates low in OBSE. The present study extends this approach, as it includes more
specific  leadership variables, incorporates self-presentation  as a second moderator and
examines whether  the hypothesized  interactions  apply  to two specific  performance
outcomes. With respect to self-presentation, some previous leadership studies included
the  leader's  rather  than  the  subordinate's  self-monitoring  as  a  moderating  variable
(Gangestad  & Snyder,  2000;  Sosik  & Dinger,  2007).  However,  it  is astonishing  that
subordinate  self-esteem  and self-presentation  have not been  included in more studies
of leadership moderators, because both low self-esteem and a high propensity to engage


Leadership,  self-related  variables  and  innovation 

467

in self-presentation  may imply behavioural plasticity, i.e. responsiveness to  meaningful
social influences such as one's supervisor's leadership behaviours (Anderson & Toison,
1989; Brockner,  1988; Pierce et al., 1993).

The  present  research  also  adds  significantly  to  the  literature  on  innovation  and
job  performance.  The  consideration  of  innovative  behaviour,  a previously  neglected
criterion  in  research  on  leadership  moderators,  reflects  the  growing  emphasis  on
constant  improvement,  innovation  and  change  Qung,  Chow,  & Wu,  2003;  King &
Anderson,  2002). Innovation  is typically deñned  as the intentional implementation of
new  and  beneficial  work  products,  processes,  or  procedures  (West  & Farr,  1990).
Individual  innovation  encompasses  behaviours  such  as  idea  championing  and  the
development  of plans  and  schedules  for  idea implementation  (Scott  & Bruce,  1994).
Psychological research has traditionally focused on creativity (i.e. the generation of new
and  useful  ideas; Amabile,  1996)  rather  than  idea  implementation.  In  comparison  to
creativity,  innovation  may  be  regarded  as  a  social  process  involving  the  need  to
overcome resistance (Anderson & King, 1993; Farr & Ford, 1990). Because of its social
nature, innovation  may be strongly affected  by leadership behaviours and subordinate
variables reflecting  responsiveness to situational influences. As Bunce and West (1995,
p. 565) argued,  'individual  innovation  remains one of the least understood  aspects of
human behaviour at work'. Whereas a few innovation studies have explored mediators
(Jung  et  al.,  2003;  Scott  & Bruce,  1994),  there  is  a  surprising  lack  of  research  on
moderators of the relationship between leadership and innovation.

Additionally,  this  study  considers  subordinates'  task  performance,  i.e.  their
fulfillment  of prescribed performance requirements related directly to the organization's
technical core (Borman & Motowidlo,  1993; Williams & Anderson,  1991). Hence, this
research  addresses  the  necessity  to  consider  different  performance  components
separately (Campbell,  Gasser, & Oswald,  1996). Innovation  and task performance  are
conceptually  different,  because  task  performance  does  not  necessarily  involve  novel
ideas, while innovation  may sometimes encompass voluntary behaviours that fall into
the domain of contextual rather than task performance  (Borman & Motowidlo, 1993).
In  addition  to examining  moderators,  this study  also investigates  direct  relationships
between the leadership predictors and the criteria. In the subsequent sections, we  first
develop  hypotheses  regarding  these  associations  before  explicating  the  expected
interaction  effects.

leadership

Leadership predictors  of  innovation  and  task  performance
Transformational 
As  House  (1995,  p. 441)  concluded  in  his  paper  on  leadership  in  the  twenty-first
century,  'the  role  of  leaders  in  introducing  and  implementing  change  remains  an
important topic for future research'. House explicitly mentioned intellectual stimulation
and  other  transformational  leadership  facets  as potential  facilitators  of  subordinates'
change- oriented  behaviour.  According  to  Bass and  Avolio  (1993,  1995),  transforma-
tional  leadership  encompasses  inspirational  motivation  (articulating  visions  and
displaying  enthusiasm),  intellectual  stimulation  (encouraging  followers  to  question
old assumptions and adopt new approaches), individualized consideration (considering
individual  needs  and  providing  personalized  coaching),  and  idealized  influence
(charismatic behaviour eliciting follower perceptions of trust and  confidence).

Numerous  studies  have  revealed  positive  relationships  between 

transfor-
mational  leadership  and  individual-level  productivity  as  well  as  unit  effectiveness


468  Johannes  Rank et al.

(e.g. Howell  & Avolio,  1993; Lowe, Kroeck,  & Sivasubramaniam,  1996). For example,
Howell and Avolio (1993) found that transformational leadership positively predicted unit
effectiveness, operationalized as the percentage of performance goals achieved by the unit
over a one-year period.  Obviously,  such positive effects  may be at least in part  due  to
enhancements  in subordinates'  task performance.  Podsakoff,  MacKenzie, and Bommer
(1996)  found  significant  positive  associations  between  two  transformational  factors
(individualized  support  and  fostering  the  acceptance  of  group  goals)  and  individuals
prescribed  in-role  performance.  Therefore,  we  also  expected  a  positive  relationship
between transformational leadership and task performance.

A group-level laboratory study on brainstorming performance  (Jung, 2000) showed
that transformational leadership facilitated both fluency (number of unduplicated ideas)
and  flexibility  (number  of  different  types  of  ideas).  Keller  (1992)  found  positive
relationships  between  transformational  leadership  and the project  quality of research
and development  (R&D) groups. Recently, Jung, and colleagues (2003) also  identified
transformational  leadership  as a positive  predictor  of organizational-level  innovation.
Although little research has related transformational leadership to individual innovation,
high-quality  leader-member-exchange,  which  is  typically  highly  correlated  with
transformational  leadership (Howell & Hall-Meranda,  1999), predicted  individual R&D
employees' innovative  behaviour (Scott  & Bruce,  1994). Similarly, we  hypothesized a
positive  relationship  between  transformational  leadership  and  individual  innovation,
because behaviours such as intellectual stimulation and inspirational motivation appear
to be instrumental in motivating employees to be innovative (House, 1995).

Hypothesis la  and  Ib:  Transformational  leadership  will  be  positively  related  to  (a)  innovation
and (b) task  performance.

leadership

transactional 

Active<orrective 
Active-corrective  transactional  leadership,  also  known  as  active  management-by-
exception, is exhibited by supervisors who spend much of their time closely monitoring
subordinates  to  detect  errors  and  deviations  from  standards  and  to  take  corrective
action  (Bass & Avolio,  1993; Howell  & Avolio,  1993). According  to Amabile's  (1996)
comprehensive  theory  of  creativity,  controlling  extrinsic  motivation  involving
surveillance  and  critical  evaluation  is  detrimental  to  creativity.  Similarly,  cognitive
evaluation  theory  (Deci  & Ryan,  1987)  suggests  that  external  events  perceived  as
controlling  reduce  intrinsic  motivation  and  elicit  an  external  perceived  locus  of
causality.  Considering  the  positive  association  between  intrinsic  motivation  and
individual  innovation  (Bunce  & West,  1995),  one  may  argue  that  active-corrective
leadership  diminishes  innovation.  Oldham  and  Cummings  (1996)  demonstrated  that
controlling supervision was negatively associated with subordinate creativity. This type
of  leadership  may  also  undermine  innovative  attempts  to  implement  new  work
processes,  which  frequently  yield  a potential  for  errors  and  deviations  that  may  be
reprimanded by active-corrective supervisors.

It  should  be  noted  that  we  deliberately  did  not  include  a  specific  hypothesis
regarding the relationship  between  active-corrective  transactional  leadership  and task
performance.  Previous findings regarding  associations  between  this leadership  factor
and  measures  of  productivity  that  may  largely  reflect  task  performance  have  been
inconclusive  (e.g. Howell & Avolio,  1993; Howell & Hall-Meranda,  1999; Lowe et al.,
1996).  Because  task  performance  refers  to  the  adequate  fulfilment  of  technical


Leadership,  self-related  variables  and innovation  469

requirements,  active-corrective  leadership  does not necessarily  impede  this  perform-
ance outcome, which may sometimes benefit  from a focus on the avoidance of errors
and  failures.  However,  Howell  and Avolio (1993)  found  a negative  impact  of active-
corrective  leadership  on  overall  unit  effectiveness  in  an  organization  undergoing
change, when innovation may have been important. Previous research and our rationale
clearly  suggest  that  active-corrective  transactional  undermines  innovative  behaviour,
but not necessarily task  performance.

Hypothesis 2:  Active-corrective  transactional leadership will be negatively related to innovative
subordinate  behaviour.

Subordinate  self-esteem  and  self-presentation  as  moderators

Organization-based  self-esteem  as a  moderator
Organization-based  self-esteem  (OBSE)  refers  to  employees'  self-perceived  value as
organization members (Pierce etal.,  1989 p. 625). 'People with high OBSE have a sense
of personal adequacy as organizational members and a sense of having satisfied  needs
from their organizational roles in the past'. Employees high in OBSE perceive themselves
as important,  meaningful,  and worthw^hile members of their  employing  organization.
Studies have shown that OBSE is more strongly related to work-related criteria than is
global self-esteem  (Pierce et al., 1989,  1993). In particular,  OBSE positively predicted
overall job performance  and organizational  citizenship behaviour (Pierce et al,  1993;
Van Dyne, Van de Walle, Kostova, & Latham, & Cummings, 2000).

According to behavioural plasticity theory (Brockner, 1988; Pierce etal.,  1993), low
self-esteem individuals tend to seek the approval of others and respond more strongly to
social influences. As Brockner (pp. 49-50) noted,  'the plasticity hypothesis states that
low  SEs' work  behaviours  and attitudes  are affected  by their  social  environments
to  a  greater  extent  than  are high  SEs' behaviours  and attitudes'.  Several  scholars
(Mossholder, Bedeian, & Armenakis,  1981; Pierce et al., 1993) argued that  employees
high  in  self-esteem  rely  more  on  their  skills  to  perform  their  jobs,  whereas  their
counterparts  rely  more  on their  •work  environments.  Drawing  on this  proposition.
Pierce  et  al.  (1993)  showed  that  supervisor  support  was  positively  related  to
subordinate  performance  for low OBSE  subordinates  and unrelated  for  those  with
high  OBSE.  Their  measures  of individual  performance  (e.g. sales  performance  and
ratings of performance  quality and quantity)  clearly  overlapped  at least in part  with
task performance. They concluded that low OBSE subordinates passively accept lack of
leader  support,  as  self-consistency  theory  (Korman,  1976) predicts  that  low  SE
individuals behave in a marmer consistent with their negative self-image.

Low OBSE employees may doubt whether  their efforts  to introduce new ideas are
valuable  to the organization,  particularly  when  they  face  resistance  to their  change
efforts.  Hence, low OBSE subordinates may particularly benefit  from  transformational
leaders who instil optimism and confidence in them. Klein and House (1995) suggested
that  transformational  leadership  may compensate  for low self-esteem  subordinates'
feelings  of  insecurity.  Particularly  when  pursuing  novel  courses  of  action,  such
subordinates may be uncertain of their capabilities to overcome barriers. According to
self-verification  theory (Swann, Stein-Seroussi, & Giesler,  1992), potent  self-discrepant
feedback from an influential  source may lead to changes in self-confidence  in situations
involving only moderate self-concept certainty. Based on this theory, one may argue that
transformational  leaders  may help  low OBSE  subordinates  overcome  their  doubts
regarding  their  capabilities  to  implement  new  ideas.  Without 
transformational


470 

johar^nes  Rank  et al.

leadership,  low  OBSE  individuals  may  be  considerably  less  likely  to  engage Ln
innovation. If environment support is inadequate, 'those individuals are less likely than
people with high organization-based self-esteem to try to influence their environments'
(Pierce et al,  1993, pp. 275-276).

Another  reason  for  the  proposed  interaction  may be  the  proclivity  of  low self-
esteem  subordinates  to  model  their  supervisors'  behaviours.  Weiss  (1977)  found
greater  similarity between  the behaviours  of superiors  and subordinates for low self-
esteem  subordinates.  'High  SEs, in sharp  contrast,  did not imitate  their  superior  as a
function  of the model's  attributes'  (Brockner,  1988, p. 6G). Transformational  leaders
may serve  as models  for innovation,  because  they  engage  in intellectual  stimulation
and  idea  championing  (Howell & Higgins,  1990). Additional  indirect  support  for our
rationale  comes  from  research  demonstrating  that  low self-esteem  individuals  more
strongly  consider  authorities'  procedural  justice  than  high  self-esteem  individuals
(Vermunt,  van  Knippenberg,  &  Blaauw,  2001).  Considering  the  strong  positive
correlation  between  transformational 
leadership  and  procedural  justice  (Pillai,
Schriesheim,  & Williams,  1999),  this  also  indicates  that  subordinates  low in OBSE
may  respond  more  strongly  to  transformational  leadership.  This  and  other  studies
(e.g.  De Cremer  et al,  2006)  also  suggest  that  there  may be various  arguments for
and  against  a  consistent  moderating  effect  of  OBSE  on  the  relationship  between
active-corrective  transactional  leadership  and the  criteria.  For example,  because of
their  greater  social  anxiety, need for social  approval and sensitivity to evaluations by
others  (Vermunt  et  al,  2001),  low  self-esteem  individuals  may  be  attentive  and
responsive  to  a  leader's  surveillance  and  threat  of  punishment,  but  also  become
overly  fearful  when  exposed  to  corrective  supervision.  Overall,  our  rationale
suggests  that  OBSE  moderates  effects  of  transformational 
leadership  on  task
performance  as well  as innovative  behaviour.

Hypothesis 3a and 3b:  Organization-based self-esteem will moderate the relationships  between
transformational leadership and subordinates' (a) innovation as well as (b) task performance such
that transformational  leadership will be more strongly and positively associated with the criteria
for  subordinates  low in OBSE than for subordinates  high in OBSE.

Propensity  to  modify  self-presentation  as a  moderator
The  propensity  to  modify  self-presentation,  a  core  facet  of  the  self-monitoring
construct (Snyder, 1987), reflects  'individual differences  in the extent to which people
regulate  their  self-presentation  by tailoring  their  actions  in  accordance  with  imme-
diate  situational  cues'  (Lennox  & Wolfe,  1984, p. 1349). This  self-regulatory  variable
represents  acquisitive  self-monitoring,  i.e. the proclivity  to actively  cultivate  desired
public  images  by  engaging  in  impression  management  (Lennox  & Wolfe,  1984).
According  to  self-monitoring  theory  (Gangestad  & Snyder,  2000),  high  self-monitors
tend to control the images they present to better fit with their social climate, whereas
low self-monitors are less concerned with situational appropriateness (Day, Schleicher,
Unckless, & Hiller,  2002). In their  meta-analysis. Day and colleagues  found  a modest
0.09 mean sample-weighted correlation between general self-monitoring and measures
of overall job performance.  However,  little is known  about  the potential  moderating
role of this self-regulatory  subordinate variable.

The  most  relevant  theoretical  contribution  to  this  issue  comes  from  an  appli-
cation of self-monitoring  theory to organizational settings (Snyder & Copeland,  1989).
According to this view, low self-monitors will perform best when leaders allow them to


Leadership,  self-related  variables and  inrtovation  471

become  involved  with  the organization  in a manner  consistent  with  their  personal
beliefs. This suggests that subordinates low in self-presentation propensity may respond
positively to transformational leaders, who consider their individual strengths and needs
(Bass  & Avolio,  1993).  Furthermore,  transformational  leaders'  use  of  intellectual
stimulation (Howell & Avolio, 1993) may  also be appealing to low self-monitors, because
it enables them to develop and pursue own approaches consistent with their beliefs and
does not force them to follow prescribed routines. Furthermore, low self-monitors are
more  strongly  persuaded  by  value-driven  appeals,  which  emphasize  that  certain
proposed  actions  reflect  their  true  underlying  values  (Lavine  &  Snyder,  1996).
Therefore, subordinates low in self-presentation  may respond positively to transforma-
tional leaders high in idealized influence who articulate value-driven appeals and ethical
considerations (Bass & Avolio, 1993). Even under transformational leaders, subordinates
high  in self-presentation  may give up  attempts  to innovate  prematurely  if they  face
resistance to change, whereas those low in self-presentation  may persist, because they
are less concerned about creating functional  social images and exhibit more consistent
behaviour across situations (Day et al,  2002).

Subordinates  low  in  self-presentation  propensity  may  respond  negatively  to
restrictive  active-corrective  transactional  leaders, who tend to streamline  subordinate
behaviour  by  criticizing  deviations  from  standards  (Hovi^ell  & Avolio,  1993). The
contribution  by  Snyder  and  Copeland  (1989)  suggests  that  low  self-monitors  will
react  aversely  when  leaders  are overly  prescriptive  and do not allow  them  to  ftiUy
express  their  individual  true  self. This view  is also  consistent  with  a previous  study
(Anderson  & Toison,  1989) showing  that  supervisors'  task-oriented  leadership  less
strongly  and positively  predicted  job performance  among  subordinates  low in  self-
monitoring.  As  the  rationale  for  Hypothesis  2  suggested,  we  have  strong  reason
to  believe  that  active-corrective  transactional  leadership  may undermine  innovation
for  both  high  and  low  self-monitors.  However,  it  may  be  detrimental  to  task
performance  only  for  subordinates  low  in  self-presentation  who  tend  to  react
aversely  to  overly  controlling  behaviour  (Snyder,  1987).  Subordinates  high  in  self-
presentation  propensity  may respond  less  negatively  or  even  positively  to  active-
corrective  transactional  leadership,  because  they  tend  to appreciate  clear  situational
cues  indicating  which  behaviours  are  considered  inappropriate  (Gangestad  &
Snyder,  2000).

Hypothesis  4a and 4b:  Self-presentation  will  moderate  the relationships  between  transforma-
tional  leadership  and  (a)  Innovation  and  (b)  task  performance  such  that  transformational
leadership  will  be more  strongly and positively  related  to  both  criteria for subordinates  low in
self-presentation  than for subordinates  high in self-presentation.

Hypothesis 4c:  Self-presentation  will  moderate  the  relationship  between  active-corrective
transactional  leadership  and task  performance  such  that  active-corrective  leadership  will  be
more  strongly  and  negatively  related  to  task  performance  for  subordinates  low  in  self-
presentation  than for subordinates  high in self-presentation.

Method
Sample
The sample consisted of l6l matched pairs of employees and their supervisors. The data
were collected in 24 different  companies in Germany. The companies' lines of business


472  Johannes  Rank et al.

were industry  (15 companies),  services (6 companies),  and sales (3 companies). The
industrial  companies  were  in  the  chemical,  pharmaceutical,  engineering,  and
construction  domains.  Ninety-five  of  the  l6l  participating  employees  (59%  of  the
final sample)  worked  in  research  and  development  departments.  The  remaining  66
employees worked in human resources, service, or marketing departments. Eighty-three
(51%) ofthe employees were male, and 77 (48%) were female (one missing value). More
than  two-thirds  (70.9%) were  between  26 and  45 years old. Their  average  total  work
experience (including experience in other organizations) was 13.09years (50=10.34),
and their average tenure in their present  organization was 7.48 years (5Z?=8.67). The
supervisors  indicated  the  total  number  of  subordinates  who  reported  to  them
(M=  14.60;  SD=21.75y  and  the  duration  of  their  supervision  of  each  specific
participating subordinate (M=  3.28years; 5D=3.00).

Procedure
Due to the study's focus on innovation, the inclusion criterion for participation was that
the  employees  worked  either  in  research  and  development  departments  or  in  other
units yielding potential for innovative behaviour,  e.g. marketing departments. Initially,
176  supervisors  in  40  companies  (an  average  of  four  supervisors  per  company)
throughout Germany were called and asked if they would like to participate in a study
about  leadership  behaviours  and  the  performance  and  innovative  behaviour  of  their
subordinates.  In  return  for  participation,  reports  about  the  different  leadership
behaviours and the overall findings were promised. If we learned during the telephone
call that innovation  was not desirable  or possible  in the supervisor's  department,  we
told  the  respective  supervisors  that  they  could  not  participate.  This  occurred  in  20
cases, reducing  the  number  of supervisors  eligible  for  participation  to  156. Of those
eligible,  91  supervisors  agreed  to  participate  during  the  telephone  call.  These  91
supervisors  and  their  subordinates  received  the  survey  packages.  After  up  to  three
reminders  given  by  e-mail  and  telephone,  we  received  complete  datasets  from  49
supervisors  and  l6l  subordinates  who  worked  in  24  different  companies.  The final
response rate was 53.9% based on the number of supervisors who agreed to participate
during the first telephone call, and 31.4% based on the number of all supervisors who
would have been eligible for participation (156).

Survey distribution  was organized  as follows:  Supervisors were  asked  for the total
number of subordinates who directly reported to them (M —  14.6; 5£)=21.75). Because
it  was  unrealistic  to  expect  supervisors  to  provide  ratings  for  15  subordinates  and
because we aimed to include about 50 different  supervisors and about 150 subordinates
in  our  sample,  we  asked  each  supervisor  to  distribute  three  to  four  employee
questionnaires among their subordinates. Overall, each supervisor provided ratings for
an average of three subordinates (ranging from 2 to 5). To encourage survey completion
and  the  inclusion  of  subordinates  with  different  performance  and  innovation  levels,
supervisors and subordinates were given assurance that their information w^ould be kept
strictly confidential  and that neither individual responses nor aggregated  performance
indices for supervisors' units •would be reported to the organizations. Supervisors who
expressed  interest received a set of supervisor and subordinate questionnaires, which
included  code  numbers  for  matching  purposes.  Before  handing  out  the  subordinate
surveys, the supervisors wrote down the code number and name of each participating
subordinate  to  ensure  that  they  rated  the  correct  subordinate  on  the  respective
supervisor survey. To ensure maximum confidentiality,  a stamped return envelope with


a seal was attached to each single questionnaire, and all participants were instructed to
use it immediately after filling out the survey.

Leadership,  self-related variables  and innovation  473

/Measures
All variables were assessed with previously developed scales. The supervisors rated each
subordinate's  task performance  and innovative behaviour.  Each subordinate rated  the
supervisor's  transformational  and  active-corrective  transactional  leadership.  Further-
more, the subordinates rated their own organization-based  self-esteem  and propensity
to  modify  self-presentation.  Because  all  of  the  scales were  originally  developed  and
published in English, the scales were translated into German and then back translated
into  English by two  bilingual researchers  to  ensure  maximum  convergence  with  the
original items.

Measures  completed  by  supervisors
Task performance.  Task performance was measured with the 7-item in-role behaviour
scale by Williams and Anderson (1991). Cronbach's a  in the present  study was .90. A
sample item is, 'this subordinate adequately completes assigned duties.' Responses -were
given on a 5-point scale that ranged from  1 ('do not agree at all') to 5 ('strongly agree').
The  reliability  and  validity  of  this  scale  has  been  demonstrated  in  several  previous
studies (e.g. Podsakoff ei a/.,  1995, 1996; Williams & Anderson, 1991).

Innovation. 
Innovation  was  measured  with  the  6-item  individual  innovation  scale
designed  by Scott  and Bruce (1994). The six items represent  the major  stages in  the
individual innovation process. Two sample items are, 'promotes and champions ideas to
others'  and  'develops  adequate  plans  and  schedules  for  the  implementation  of  new
ideas'. The items were presented with a 5-point response scale that ranged from  1 ('do
not agree at all') to 5 ('strongly agree'). Cronbach's a  in the present study was .91.

Although  the  reliability  and  validity  of  this  scale  is  already  established  to  some
extent (Scott & Bruce, 1994; Scott & Bruce,  1998), we gathered additional convergent
validity evidence by examining the relationships between the innovation scale and two
other  measures  of  individual  innovation,  i.e.  supervisor  ratings  of  the  number  and
effectiveness  of the innovations  that were  actually implemented  by each  subordinate
during the past 12 months (Bunce & West, 1995). The supervisors were asked to write
down  the  number  of  innovations  implemented  by the  subordinate  (range: 0-18),  to
briefly indicate the nature of these innovations, and to rate their average  effectiveness
(M =  3.37; 5£»= 1.08)  on a scale ranging from  1 ('not  at all effective')  to 5 ('extremely
effective').  Complete  responses  to  this  set  of  questions  were  available  for  120
subordinates. The innovation scale score was significantly and positively associated with
the  reported  number  of  innovations  (r =  .44, p  < .01^  and  with  the  innovation
effectiveness  rating (r =  .64, p  < .01), which itself yielded a.  .40 (p < .01) correlation
with the reported number of innovations. Because the predictor and criterion data were
collected  at  the  same  time,  but  the  innovation  number  and  effectiveness  measures
referred  to  the  past  twelve  months,  we  did  not  consider  the  latter  two  innovation
measures  as  performance  criteria.  However,  the  substantial  positive  relationships
between  these  three  innovation  measures  provide ftirther evidence  of  the  construct
validity of the innovation scale (Scott & Bruce, 1994).


474  Johannes  Rank et al.

Measures  completed  by  subordinates
leadership.  Transformational  leadership  was  assessed  with
Transformational 
subordinate  ratings  of  the  supervisor's  leadership  behaviours,  using  the  20-item
transformational leadership scale from the German version (Felfe & Goihl, 2002) of the
Multifactor  Leadership Questionnaire  (MLQ) Form 5X (Bass & Avolio, 1995). Previous
German  studies  provided  evidence  of  the  construct  validity  and  high  internal
consistency  of this  scale. For example,  Felfe  and  Schyns (2002)  reported  an  internal
consistency of 0.91 based on 175 transformational leadership ratings and demonstrated
meaningful  relationships with  other  variables. The  scale includes items pertaining  to
idealized influence, inspirational motivation, intellectual stimulation, and individualized
consideration.  Sample  items  are  'my supervisor  talks optimistically  about  the  future'
(inspirational motivation) and  'my supervisor gets me to look at problems from  many
different  angles' (intellectual stimulation). Responses were given on a 5-point scale that
ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (frequently if not always). In the present study, Cronbach's a
of the transformational  leadership scale was .94.

Active-corrective transactional leadership.  Active-corrective transactional leadership
was  assessed  via  subordinate  ratings  using  the  4-item  scale  'Active  management-by-
exception'  from  the  German  version  of the  MLQ (Felfe  & Goihl,  2002). In  the MLQ
literature (e.g. Bass & Avolio, 1993; Howell & Avolio, 1993), the terms 'active-corrective
transactional 
'active  management-by-exception'  are  used
interchangeably. Responses are given on a 5-point scale that ranged from  0 (never) to
4 (frequently if not always). A sample item is, 'my supervisor keeps track of all mistakes'.
Cronbach's a  in the present study was .71, which is similar to previous studies (Bass &
Avolio, 1995).

leadership'  and 

Organization-based  self-esteem.  Subordinates  rated  their  organization-based  self-
esteem (OBSE). OBSE was measured with the  10-item scale developed by Pierce et al.
(1989).  The  internal  consistency  was  0.90.  The  scale  was  presented  with  a 5-point
response scale (1 = do not agree at all; 5 = strongly agree). A sample item is, 'I am a valuable
part of this place'. Reliability and validity evidence for this scale has been provided in
several previous studies (e.g. Pierce etal,  1989, 1993; Van Dyne et al,  2000).

Propensity  to  modify  self-presentation.  Subordinates  completed  the  7-item  scale
Ability to modify  self-presentation'  scale, one of the two subscales of the Revised Self-
Monitoring scale by Lennox and Wolfe (1984). We slightly modified the scale by adding
'in  this organization'  to  each  item  in order  to tailor them  towards  the  organizational
setting. A sample item is, 'I have trouble changing my behaviour to suit different  people
and different  situations in this organization' (negatively worded). The response options
on the 5-point answer scale ranged from  1  ('do not agree at all') to 5 ('strongly agree').
Meta-analytic research has shown that the reliability of the Lennox and Wolfe Revised
Self-Monitoring Scale (0.81) is greater than that of two self-monitoring scales developed
by Snyder and associates (Day et al,  2002). In the present  study, the reliability of the
'Ability  to  modify  self-presentation'  scale  was  .78.  Further  reliability  and  validity
evidence  is provided  in  previous  publications  (e.g.  Lennox  & Wolfe,  1984; Miller &
Cardy, 2000).


Leaderstiip,  self-related variables and innovation  475

Control variables.  Due to the  diversity  of organizations  and  supervisor-subordinate
dyads  included  in  this  study,  flve  control  variables  were  considered.  Eirst,  type  of
department  was  dummy  coded  (1= research  and  development;  0=other),  because
innovative behaviour may be more prevalent in research and development departments.
Taking  into  account  previous  research  demonstrating  that  innovation  varies  with
employees' overall work experience and organizational tenure (King & Anderson, 2002;
Scott & Bruce, 1994), these two variables were also considered. Due to the considerable
variance in the number of subordinates supervised by each participating supervisor and
in the  duration  of the  supervisor-subordinate  relationships,  these two variables  were
also included as control variables, because unit size covaries w^ith innovation (Anderson
&  King,  1993),  and  because  the  intensity  and  type  of  managerial  influences  on
subordinates  may vary based  on these  two factors.  Eor example,  Graen  and Uhl-Bien
(1995) argued that leader-member relationships are transactional in the early phases, but
may become more transformational  in later stages.

Results
The means, standard  deviations and  zero-order  intercorrelations  of all study variables
are  reported  in  Table  1.  As  can  be  seen  in  the  table,  transformational  leadership
yielded  significant  positive  correlations  w^ith both  innovation  and  task  performance.
Active-corrective  transactional  leadership  was  significantly  and  negatively  correlated
with  innovation,  but  unrelated  to  task  performance.  It  should  also  be  noted  that
organization-based  self-esteem  was  positively  and  significantly  correlated  with  both
criteria, whereas self-presentation  propensity was not significantly  correlated with the
criteria.

Hypothesis  1 and  2,  specifying  direct  relationships  between  the  two  leadership
predictors  and  the  criteria,  were  tested  by  assessing  the  standardized  regression
coefficients  obtained  from  multiple  hierarchical  regression  analyses  (see  Table  2).
The  control  variables were  entered  into  the first block,  the  leadership  variables  into
the second block, and the subordinate self-related  variables into the third block of the
regression  equations  (Pedhazur,  1997).  Hypothesis  la  and  lb  predicted  that
transformational  leadership  would  be  positively  related  to  subordinates'  innovation
and  task  performance,  respectively.  As  can  be  seen  in  Table  2,  transformational
leadership was positively and significantly associated with innovation (ß =  .33,/? <  .01)
and task performance (ß =  .29, p  < .01). Hence, the results fully support Hypothesis 1.
Hypothesis  2  predicted  that  active-corrective  transactional  leadership  v^^ould  be
negatively  associated  with  innovation.  As  can  be  seen  in  Table  2,  active-corrective
leadership  was  negatively  and  significantly  associated  with  innovation  (ß =  -  .23,
p < .01). Therefore, Hypothesis 2 also received support. With respect to the self-related
subordinate variables, OBSE related positively and significantly  to innovation, whereas
self-monitoring  related  negatively  and  significantly  to  innovation  in  the  regression
equation (see Table 2).

The  interaction  hypotheses  (3  and  4)  were  tested  with  moderated  hierarchical
regression analyses (Aiken & West,  1991). The product of the z-standardized  predictor
and the z-standardized  moderator was entered  into the final block of each regression,
after  the control variables, the predictor,  and the moderator. If the product  term was
significant (p < .05), we created a graph illustrating its nature by plotting two predictor-
criterion regression lines on the basis of moderator scores one standard deviation above


476  Johannes  Rank et al.

J3

•O

(U
C
-o
c
re

I

<u

00 (Nro m

ON  -«r  00
rv  ro  iN

(N  O  r  o
o  — o  o

— 
(N  <N  <N  h-
—  O  O  O  —

(N  LO —  —  00  -r
rv>  —  O  O  O  O

I 

I

s

(N  IO  00  LO
o 
(N

<^  LO
o  —

f
itIf
ro  —  CN

r^  ^  LO  LO
o  o  o  o

ro  o

t^  t^  U1  Ö  LO  O^  00
(N  o  — (N — o  o

I 

I 

I

jf. 
* 

jf. 
* 
* 
O O O IV 
L O rq  — 
I 

jt
¥

jt 
* 

jf. 
* 

ji 
* 
( N r o l V i N c N LO
(N  —  f N ( N (N  —
I

I 

I 

I 

-^  rv  O  LO
ro  so p  h^
Ö  00  rn —
— 
(N

(N  vO  O  LO
—  ro vO  p
f»i  ^  oi r-i

vO  (N  ON  O^  00  00
tv.  LO  LO  p  Tf  rs

o 
IN  0^  rv
NO  LO  -^  LO

n  LO  00
LO  l/>  LO

<U
-a
<u
—  V

(U

¡il

u

(/>

-s  &
o
c
£íí2ti:< SO

c  (U

IIIIV)

c
(U
Q.
O

XI

3

(/)

Ä!  -D

(U  O

Q)  re

c  °

o
'i3  !..
re re
c  g-
O 
(U
y  ais. °
S  E
3  3
•  <u
Q  Z
a= a.
.  <.j  —
on H
vO  ^^  00  ON  ^—  —

^ o

T3
<U

(U
Q.
3

3
•O
TD
C
re

c

<u
Q.
X
<u

(U

S"
oc:

Q

c
<u
t
re
o.
<u
T3

Q.

P
V

V

I.Ç


Table  2.  Multiple  hierarchical  regression  analyses of the  criteria  on the  predictors.

Leadership,  self-related variables and innovation  477

Hierarchical  block
Variables

Block  1 :  Controls

Type of  department
Work  experience
Organizational  tenure
Duration  of  supervision
Number  of  subordinates

Block  2: Leadership
Transformational
Active-corrective

Block  3:  Subordinate

Organization-based  self-esteem
Self-presentation  propensity

Total R^

Note.**p  <  .0\.*p< 

.05.

Innovation

Task

performance

AR^

.15**

.14**

.06**

.35

ß

-
-
-

.29**
.04
.21
.12
.08

.33**
.23**

—

.26**
.21**

-

AR^

.05

.08**

.01

.14

ß

.11
- . 10
- . 07
- . 06
.13

29**

- . 06

.15
- . 01

and below the mean (Aiken & West, 1991). The innovation and task performance scores
displayed in the graphs are scale sum scores. Hypothesis 3a and 3b predicted  stronger
positive  relationships  between  transformational  leadership  and  both  innovation  and
task performance for subordinates low than for those high in OBSE. As shown in Table 3,
the  interaction  term  explained  a  significant  amount  of  variance  in  innovation
(ß =  -  .19, AjR^=.04,p < .05) beyond that accounted for by the controls and the two
main effects. The interaction accounted for an additional four per cent ofthe variance in
innovation.  The  nature  of  this  interaction  is  depicted  in  Figure  1. As hypothesized,
transformational  leadership  more  strongly  and  positively  predicted  innovation  for
subordinates Iow in OBSE. Subordinates exhibited the lo^vest level of innovation w^hen
both  transformational  leadership  and  OBSE were  low.  The  interaction  term  did  not
significantly  predict  task  performance,  although  the  regression  w^eight  for  task
performance  approached  the  significance  criterion  (ß =  -.14,  p=  .08,  A/?^ = .O2).
Overall, these findings support Hypothesis 3a.

Hypothesis 4a and b predicted  stronger positive relationships between  transforma-
tional  leadership  and  both  innovation  and  task  performance  for  subordinates  low
in  self-presentation  propensity.  The  interaction  term  of  transformational  leadership
and  self-presentation  propensity  explained  a  significant  amount  of  variance  in  task
performance  (ß =  - . 2 1,  AR^=.O6,  p  < .01),  but  not  in  innovation  (see  Table  4).
The  interaction  term  accounted  for  an  additional  six  per  cent  of  the  variance  in
task  performance.  Transformational  leadership  was  positively  associated  w^ith  task
performance for subordinates low in self-presentation propensity (see Figure 2). Aniong
their high self-presentation  counterparts, transformational  leadership was unrelated  to
task  performance.  Subordinates  exhibited  the  lowest  task  performance  when  both
transformational  leadership  and self-presentation  propensity were low. In conclusion,
the results support Hypothesis 4b, but not 4a.

Finally,  Hypothesis  4c  predicted  a stronger  negative  relationship  between  active-
corrective transactional leadership and task performance  for subordinates low than for
those  high  in  self-presentation  propensity.  The  interaction  term  of  active-corrective


478  Johannes  Rank et al.

Table 3. Moderated hierarchical regressions of the criteria on supervisors' transformational  leadership
and subordinates'  organization-based  self-esteem.

Hierarchical  block
1 llwl  dl  ^1 II\*<XI  L/lw^lV
Variables

Block  1: Controls

Type of  department
Work  experience
Organizational  tenure
Duration  of  supervision
Number  of  subordinates

Block 2:

Transformational  leadership  (TL)
Organization-based  self-esteem  (OBSE)
Block  3:  Interaction
TL  X  OBSE

Total R^

Note. **p <  .01. *f) <  .05.

Innovation

Task

performance

AR^

.16**

.12**

.04*

.32

ß

.32**
.04
.29*
.16
.11

.28**
.17

.19*

AR^

.06

.09**

.02

.17

ß

.12
-.06
-.11
-.08
.14

.22*
.15

-.14

transactional  leadership  and  self-presentation  propensity  explained  a  significant
incremental  amount  of  variance  (ß =  .15,  Ai?^ = .O3, p  < .05)  in  task  performance
(see Table 5). For the innovation  criterion,  the interaction  terms were not  significant.
As expected and illustrated in Figure 3, active-corrective transactional leadership nega-
tively predicted  task  performance  for  employees  low  in  self-presentation  propensity.
For their  counterparts,  this leadership  behaviour was unrelated  to  task  performance.
Subordinates  exhibited  the  lowest  task  performance  when  active-corrective  transac-
tional  leadership  was  high  and  self-presentation  propensity  was  low.  Therefore,
Hypothesis 4c was fully  supported.

25 n

2 2-

§  19H

o
I  16H

1 3-

10

— -•  —  Low self-esteem
— •—  High self-esteem

Low 

High

Transformational  leadership

Figure  I. Interaction effect of supervisors'transformational  leadership and subordinates'organization-
based self-esteem  on  innovation.


Leadership,  self-related variables and innovation  479

Table  4.  Moderated  hierarchical  regression  analyses of  the  criteria  on  supervisors'  transformational
leadership  and subordinates'  propensity  to  modify  self-presentation.

Innovation

Task

performance

Variables

Block  1 : Controls

Type of  department
Work  experience
Organizational  tenure
Duration  of  supervision
Number  of  subordinates

Block  2:

Transformational  leadership  (TL)
Self-presentation  propensity  (SP)
Block  3:  Interaction
TL  X  SP

Total R^

Note. **p<  .0\.*p< 

.05.

AR^

.16**

.05

.00

.21

ß

.29**
.03
.22
.14
.10

.34**
.11

.07

-
-
-

-

-

AR^

.05

.07**

.06**

.18**

ß

.10
- . 09
- . 07
- . 06
.14

.26**

- . 04

- . 2 1 **

Discussion
The  purpose  of  the  present  study  was  to  investigate  relationships  of  supervisors'
transformational  as well as active-corrective transactional leadership with subordinates'
innovative behaviour and task performance and to examine whether these associations
are contingent upon two subordinate characteristics, i.e. organization-based  self-esteem
(Pierce et al,  1993) and the propensity to modify  self-presentation  (Lennox & Wolfe,
1984). With respect to the direct relationships between the leadership predictors and
the criteria, the correlational  and regression  analyses fully supported  all hypothesized
associations. Transformational leadership was positively and significantly related to both
task  performance  and  innovation.  These  individual-level  results  complement  recent

35 n

3 2-

1 29-
I
?  26H

2 3-

20

— •• —  Low self-presentation
— •—  High self-presentation

Low 

High

Transformational  Leadership

Figure  2.  Interaction  effect  of supervisors' transformational  leadership  and subordinates'  propensity
to  modify  self-presentation  on task  performance.


480  Johannes  Rank et al.

Table  5.  Moderated  hierarchical  regression  analyses of the  criteria  on  supervisors'  active-corrective
transactional  leadership  and subordinates'  propensity  to  modify  self-presentation.

Hierarchical  block
Variables

Block  1 : Controls

Type of  department
Work  experience
Organizational  tenure
Duration  of  supervision
Number  of  subordinates

Block 2:

Active-corrective  leadership  (AC)
Self-presentation  propensity  (SP)
Block  3:  Interaction
AC  X  SP

Total R^

Note. **p<  .0\.*p< 

.05.

Innovation

Task

performance

AR^

.16**

.05*

.00

.21

D
O
"

.28**

- . 10
- . 18
- . 10
.11

- . 2 1*
- . 10

- . 06

AR^

.07

.00

.03*

.10

D
O
"

.10
- . 13
- . 07
- . 07
.14

- . 04
.06

.15*

findings  of  positive  relationships  between  this  leadership  variable  and  overall
productivity  (Lowe  et  al,  1996)  as  well  as  group-level  creativity  (Jung,  2000)  and
organization-level innovation  (Jung et al,  2003). Particularly interesting is the finding
that active-corrective  transactional leadership differentially  predicted  the two types of
criteria,  as  it  was  unrelated  to  task  performance,  but  negatively  associated  with
innovation.  This finding reflects  the  necessity  to  identify  distinctive  associations  of
leadership  predictors  with  different  performance  facets,  which  addresses  the  'major
need  to begin  thinking  of performance  in terms of its major  components'  (Campbell
et al,  1996, p. 277). Drawing on cognitive evaluation theory (Deci & Ryan,  1987), we

35 n

3 3-

§
I  3H

29-1

2 7-

25

Low self-presentation
High self-presentation

Low 

High

Active-corrective transactional  leadership

Figure 3. Interaction effect of supervisors' active-corrective transactional leadership and subordinates'
propensity  to  modify  self-presentation  on task  performance.


Leadership, self-related  variables and  innovation  481

argued  that  a work  environment  characterized  by surveillance  and critical  evaluation
may be perceived as controlling, thus stifling  innovative behaviour.

Although relationships between the self-related  variables and the criteria were not
explicitly hypothesized, it should be noted that both the correlational and the multiple
regression  analyses identified  OBSE as a positive  predictor  of innovation.  This  result
complements previous findings of positive relationships between OBSE and overall job
performance,  organizational  citizenship  behaviour,  and an innovative  cognitive  style
(Goldsmith & Matherly, 1987; Pierce etal,  1989; Van Dyne etal,  2000). The propensity
to  modify  self-presentation,  on  the other  hand,  emerged  as a negative  predictor of
innovation in the regression analysis, possibly because low self-monitors tend to be true
to themselves and may adhere to their  ideas even when  they encounter  resistance to
change (Day  etal,  2002). Together, the predictor variables explained an impressive  35%
of the variance in innovation  compared  to  14% of the variance  in task  performance,
which suggests that the predictors may be particularly critical to innovation.

EoUowing the call for more studies on self-concept and self-regulatory moderators of
leadership  effects  (Lord  et al,  1999; Van Knippenberg  et al,  2004),  we  modelled
subordinates'  organization-based  self-esteem  and  their  propensity  to  modify  self-
presentation  as moderators. Several of our interaction  hypotheses were supported by
the  analyses,  which  suggests  that  these  two variables  may be  added  to  the  list of
previously identified moderators such as those included in leadership substitutes theory
(e.g.  need  for independence,  indifference  to organizational  rewards;  Kerr  & Jermier,
1978)  and  those  identified  in  more  recent  self-concept  studies  (e.g.  follower
identification  with  the group; positive  and negative  affectivity;  Epitropaki  & Martin,
2005; Van Knippenberg ei a/., 2004). Considering the statistical difficulties  of detecting
significant  interactions in field studies and the fact  that most  methodological  experts
consider  even a 1 to 2% increase in explained  variance as meaningful  (Champoux &
Peters, 1987;  McClelland &Judd,  1993;  Villa etal,  2003), the effect sizes associated with
our significant  interaction terms (increments in R^  from 3 to 6%) w^ere substantial, thus
suggesting that we can have a fair degree of confidence in these results. Many previous
studies  of  subordinate  moderators  only  found  an  increase  of  1 to  2% in  explained
variance per significant interaction (De  Vries, Roe, & Taillieu, 2002; Epitropaki & Martin,
2005; Pierce etal,  1993; Podsakoff  ei a/., 1996).

Transformational  leadership  more  strongly  and  positively  related  to  innovation
among subordinates low rather than high in OBSE. The pattern of findings suggests that
high OBSE may function  not only as a neutralizer (Podsakoff ei al,  1995), but even as a
substitute for transformational  leadership, because it also yielded an independent main
effect  for the innovation  criterion. The interaction  effect  is consistent  with  the core
proposition  of  behavioural  plasticity  theory  (Brockner,  1988; Pierce  ei  al,  1993),
asserting  that  low  self-esteem  individuals  respond  more  strongly  to  positive  social
influences, but passively accept a lack of support when such influences are missing. It is
also concordant  with the theories  of self-consistency  (Korman,  1976) as well as self-
verification  (Swann etal,  1992) and with the notion that low self-esteem  subordinates
tend  to  model  their  supervisors'  behaviours  (Weiss,  1977),  as  explained  in  the
introduction.

Interestingly,  self-esteem  moderated  relationships  between  leadership  and
innovation,  whereas  self-presentation  moderated  relationships  between  leadership
and  task  performance.  The fact  that  OBSE  emerged  as  a  significant  moderator  for
innovation but not task performance may be explained w^ith the notion that lack of self-
confidence  combined with lack of inspiring leadership may be more detrimental to the


482  Johannes Rank et al.

introduction of novelties, which typically involves the need to overcome  considerably
more obstacles (e.g. resistance  to change; Farr & Ford,  1990)  than  task  performance.
Because task performance  is clearly prescribed and involves less novelty and risk than
innovation (West  & Farr, 1990), low OBSE subordinates'  task performance  may not be
hampered  as substantially  by lack  of transformational  leadership.  Compared  to self-
esteem,  self-presentation  propensity  may  have  greater  implications  for  explicitly
prescribed task performance, because it is typically clearly indicated by situational cues
attended to by high self-monitors. Some previous research suggests that  self-monitoring
is less relevant in unfamiliar contexts when individuals are more uncertain about what is
seen as appropriate behaviour (Caliguiri & Day,  2000), a condition that may occur when
employees engage in innovation.

This study also suggests that the assumption  that low self-monitors  tend to ignore
any type of leadership (Anderson & Toison, 1989) is too simplistic, because it identified
stronger leadership-performance  associations for subordinates low in self-presentation
propensity (i.e.  stronger positive associations for transformational and stronger negative
associations  for  active-corrective  transactional  leadership).  Interestingly,  these
interactions  may be  explained  not  only  with  the  classical  depiction  of  low  self-
monitors  as individuals  indifferent  to  situational  appropriateness  and  motivated  by
value-driven appeals, as suggested by traditional self-monitoring  theory (Snyder, 1987),
but  also with  recent  reconceptualizations  of the construct. As Gangestad  and Snyder
(2000, p. 547) asked, 'are low self-monitors, far from  being unconcerned  about public
opinion,  in  fact  highly  concerned  that  they  have  reputations  of  being  genuine and
sincere  people  who  act  on  their  beliefs?'.  In  an  attempt  to  appear  as  authentic
nonconformists,  low  self-monitors  may reject  the  controlling  influences  of  active-
corrective  transactional  leaders,  but embrace  the value-driven  appeals  articulated by
transformational  leaders.  Gangestad  and  Snyder  argued  that  the  self-monitoring
construct  is largely  independent  of  self-esteem  and should  not  entail  the  defensive
behaviours or appeasement  gestures typical for low self-esteem  individuals. The facts
that low self-esteem  yielded a moderate positive .32 correlation  with low (rather than
high) self-presentation  propensity and that these two variables emerged  as leadership
moderators for different  criteria also indicate that both of them should be considered in
organisational research.

Strengths and  limitations
Compared  to  previous  studies  using  subordinate  self-ratings  of  their  performance
(e.g.  DeVries,  Roe, & Taillieu,  2001; Pierro,  Cicero,  Bonaiuto,  van  Knippenberg &
Kruglanski,  2005)  or innovation  (e.g. Bunce  & West,  1995), the present  study  used
different  sources (subordinates  and supervisors) to assess the predictor and criterion
variables, an approach considered  particularly critical in individual-level  creativity and
innovation  research  (Amabile,  1996; Baer & Oldham,  2006; Madjar,  Oldham, & Pratt,
2002; Scott & Bruce, 1994). The external validity achieved by the inclusion of different
companies  operating  within  different  industries  and  ftmctional  domains  may  be
considered  an advantage,  because  it suggests  that  the findings may be generalizable
across  industries  and  beyond  R&D departments.  The  relevance  of  the  sample was
further enhanced by our careftil communication with potential managerial participants
in  initial  conversations,  in  which  we  gauged  the  potential  for  innovation  in  their
departments. The regression analyses involved several control variables, hence indicating
that the significant  relationships were not due to factors  such as type of department.


Leadership,  self-related variables  and innovation  483

tenure or the number of employees supervised by each supervisor. With regard to the
direct associations between the leadership variables and the criteria, the correspondence
in significance  levels between  the  regression  weights and  the  zero-order  correlations
demonstrates  the  consistency  of  the  findings.  Another  advantage  is  that  we  used
well-established  measures  that  were  either  back  translated  or  available  in  German.
We provided additional construct validity evidence for the only measure that had been
used  less  frequently,  the  individual  innovation  scale  (Scott  & Bruce,  1994),  which
correlated substantially with the effectiveness and number of implemented innovations.
The strength of using different  rating sources comes at an expense because of the
relatively modest participation rate of the supervisors, their contribution in distributing
the  surveys  and  the  fact  that  each  supervisor  rated  the  performance  of  two  to five
subordinates,  while  two  to  five  subordinates  rated  the  leadership  behaviours  of
one supervisor. This implies that, consistent with other research in this area (e.g. Baer
&  Oldham,  2006;  Madjar  et  al,  2002;  Pierce  et  al,  1993),  the  data  are  not  fully
independent. In the previous study of OBSE as a moderator (Pierce etal,  1993, p. 277),
19 supervisors rated the performance of 145 subordinates. As Pierce etal  argued, 'data
provided  by  a  manager  for  more  than  one  subordinate  would,  of  course,  not  be
independent.  However,  inasmuch  as  these  ratings  are  predicted  by  data  from  other
sources  (the  respondents),  this  lack  of  independence  should  not  pose  a  problem'.
Although their explanation may not fully address the issue, one should keep in mind our
study focused  on interaction  effects,  which  are unlikely to result from  independence
issues.  Furthermore,  transactional  and  transformational  leadership  may  reflect
individual-level  dispersion  phenomena  (Klein,  Conn,  Smith,  &  Sorra,  2001),  i.e.
supervisors may exhibit them vis-à-vis some but not all of their subordinates. This idea
corresponds to the 'heterogeneity of charisma' proposition (Klein & House, 1995) and is
substantiated  by the  high  correlation  between  transformational  leadership  and dyad-
specific leader-member exchange quality (Howell & Hall-Meranda, 1999).

The participation  rate (31.4% based on the number of all eligible supervisors) was
relatively  modest,  with  time  constraints  mentioned  as  the  main  reason  for
non-participation. The response rate based on those who actually received the survey
after  expressing  interest  in  participation  was  53.9%. It  is  unlikely  that  selection  or
independence issues accounted for the significant findings. A disproportionate number
of positive leadership, performance  or innovation ratings would have limited predictor
and  criterion  variance,  hence  making  the  detection  of  significant findings less likely
(McClelland &Judd,  1993). In fact, the means of our study variables (see Table 1) were
similar or even slightly less positive (e.g. lower for  OBSE; higher for  active-corrective
transactional leadership) than in most previous studies (e.g. Bass & Avolio, 1995; Howell
& Avolio, 1993; Jung et al,  2003; Pierce et al,  1993; Scott & Bruce, 1994). We also took
considerable measures and precautions to avoid self-selection  issues (e.g. by stressing
that neither individual nor aggregated results of the supervisor's unit would be reported
and by providing a stamped return envelope with a seal to each single subordinate).

Finally, due  to  the  cross-sectional  nature  of our  research  design,  we  cannot  draw
definitive  conclusions  regarding  causality.  Reverse  or  reciprocal  causation  may  be
possible,  e.g.  if  supervisors  exhibit  transformational  leadership  in  response  to  high
levels of employee innovation. Because of our focus on subordinate moderators, which
is consistent w^ith previous work on leadership  substitutes  and follower  self-concepts
(e.g. Kerr & Jermier,  1978; Van Knippenberg et al,  2004), it was logical to model the
leadership variables as predictors. The cross-sectional survey method is by far the most
widespread  approach to the study of leadership moderators and individual innovation


484  Johannes  Rank et al.

(e.g. Bunce & West,  1995; Epitropaki & Martin, 2005; Pierce et al,  1993; Pierro et al.,
2005; Podsakoff  eí fl/., 1996; Scott  & Bruce,  1994), although  longitudinal  research  is
certainly  desirable  to  demonstrate  causality  and  patterns  of  leadership-subordinate
interactions over time.

Implications  for practice  and future  research
Although caution is always needed when interpreting the practical implications that can
be  derived  from  cross-sectional  research,  our findings suggest  that  transformational
leadership  facilitates  innovation  and  task  performance,  whereas  active-corrective
transactional  leadership  undermines  innovation.  Considering  field  experiments
demonstrating that effective management development programs may lead to enhanced
subordinate perceptions of their supervisors' transformational leadership (Barling etal.,
1996), organizations may train their supervisors to exhibit these behaviours, particularly
when  dealing  with  subordinates  low  in  self-esteem  or  self-presentation  propensity.
It  appears  that  transformational  leadership  may  compensate  for  lack  of  subordinate
self-esteem  when  innovation  is  the  desired  outcome  and  for  a  lack  of  subordinate
self-presentation  for  task  performance  as the  criterion.  From  a different  perspective,
the  findings  suggesting  that  high  OBSE may  neutralize  and  even  substitute  for  the
beneficial effect of transformational leadership on innovation highlights the importance
of measures to enhance OBSE as identified  in previous studies (e.g. via job complexity
and  non-mechanistic  organizational  designs; Pierce et al,  1989). One  may also argue
that  individuals'  innovation  (e.g.  idea  championing)  may  contribute  to  group  and
organizational innovation.  Hence, multi-level research  (Klein et al,  2001) aggregating
individuals'  contributions  and  assessing  their  combined  effect  on  higher-level
innovation outcomes is a desirable future  research avenue.

Future research may also incorporate additional leadership and self-related variables.
Our  study  examined  transformational  leadership  (including  its  idealized  influence
components)  and  thus  socialized  rather  than  destructive  forms  of  charisma  (Bass &
Avolio,  1993).  On  the  contrary,  personalized  or  narcissistic  types  of  charismatic
leadership may inhibit creativity and innovation, because these leaders tend to impose
their own ideas on organization members rather than enabling them to be innovative
(Conger & Kanungo, 1998). Particularly interesting would be an analysis of subordinate
moderators of the effects of passive avoidant laissez-faire leadership. Although this factor
is usually detrimental,  subordinates with  certain  characteristics  (eg, high  self-esteem,
self-efficacy,  need  for  achievement,  internal  locus  of  control)  may  compensate  for
absence of leadership.

In concordance with the propositions put forward by other researchers (Lord et  al,
1999; Van Knippenberg  et al,  2004), we  agree  that  additional  self-concept  and  self-
regulatory moderators suggested in social psychological theories should be considered.
For example, fantasy  realization  theory  (Oettingen,  Pak,  & Schnetter,  2001)  includes
three  self-regulatory  approaches  to  future-oriented  thinking  (indulging  in  desirable
fantasies, dwelling on present barriers, and mentally contrasting the desired future with
present  barriers).  Since  thoughts  about  future  success  are  relevant  to  innovation
endeavours with uncertain outcomes, these variables may be considered as innovation
predictors  as well  as leadership  moderators.  Researchers  may also  examine  whether
previously  identified  predictors  of  individual  innovation  such  as  rule  indepen-
dence  (Bunce  & West,  1995)  and  growth  need  strength  (West,  1987)  moderate  the
relationships  between  leadership  and  innovation.  Transformational  leadership  may


Leadership,  self-related variables and innovation  485

more  positively  predict  innovation  for  subordinates  high  in  growth  need  strength.
Active-corrective  transactional  leadership  may more negatively predict  innovation  for
subordinates high in rule independence.

In conclusion, future  research should not only examine leadership and subordinate
predictors  separately,  but  rather  consider  these  variables  simultaneously  to  identify
theoretically and practically meaningful interaction effects such as those revealed in the
present  investigation.  Organization-based  self-esteem  and  self-presentation  propensity
may be added  to the expanding  list of self-concept  and  self-regulatory  moderators of
leadership  effects  (Van Knippenberg  et al,  2004). Fortunately, we can  conclude  that
we did not only find a needle in a haystack (Podsakoff et al,  1996), but that the majority
of our predicted  interaction  effects  was statistically significant,  practically  meaningful
and  theoretically  justified.  Eventually,  the  argument  that  followers'  self-concepts  do
indeed function as powerful determinants of their reactions to leaders (Lord et al,  1999)
may prevail.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Natalie J. Allen and three anonymous reviewers for exceptionally  detailed
and helpful  feedback.  This research ^vas supported  by a scholarship granted  to Johannes  Rank by
tbe  German  Academic  Excbange  Service.  A  previous  version  of  a  portion  of  this  paper  was
presented  at tbe  2004  conference  of the  Society for  Industrial  and  Organizational  Psycbology  in
Chicago, Illinois.

References
Aiken,  L.  S.,  & West,  S.  G.  (1991).  Multiple  regression:  Testing  and  interpreting 

interactions.

London: Sage.

Amabile,  T.  M.  (1996).  Creativity  in  context:  Update  to  the  'social psychology  of  creativity'.

Boulder,  CO: Westview  Press.

Anderson,  L. R., & Toison, J. (1989). Group  members' self-monitoring  as a possible neutralizer  of

leadersbip. Smalt  Group  Research,  20,  24-36.

Anderson,  N., & King, N. (1993). Innovation  in  organizations.  In  C. L. Cooper  & I. T.  Robertson
(Eds.), International  review  of industrial  and  organizational  psychology  (Vol. 8, pp. 1-34).
Chicbester,  UK: John  Wiley

Baer, M., & Oldbam, G. R. (2006). The curvilinear relationship bet^veen experienced  creative time
pressure  and  creativity:  Moderating  effects  of  openness  to  experience  and  support  for
creativity. Journal  of Applied  Psychology,  91,  963-970.

Barling, J., Weber, T., & Kellow^ay, E. K. (1996). Effects  of transformational  leadership  training  on
attitudinal  and  financial  outcomes:  A  field  experiment./owrMßZ  ofAppiied  Psychology,  81,
827-832.

Bass,  B.  M.,  &  Avolio,  B.  J.  (1993).  Transformational  leadership:  A  response  to  critiques.
In  M.  Cbemmers  &  R.  Ayman  (Eds.),  Leadership:  Perspectives  and  research  directions
(pp. 49-80). New York, NY: Academic  Press.
Bass,  B.  M,,  & Avolio,  B. J.  (1995).  Multifactor 

leadership  questionnaire.  Redwood  City,  CA:

Mind  Garden.

Blank, W,  Weitzel, J. R., & Green,  S. G. (1990). A test  of situational  leadership  theory.  Personnel

Psychology,  43,  579-597.

Borman, W  C,  & Motowidlo, S. J. (1993). Expanding the criterion  domain  to include elements of
in

contextual  performance.  In  N.  Schmitt  &  W.  C.  Borman  (Eds.),  Personnel  selection 
organizations 

(pp. 71-98). San Francisco,  CA: Jossey-Bass.


486  Johannes Ronk et o/.

Brockner,  J.  (1988).  Self-esteem at  work: Research,  theory,  and  practice.  Lexington,  MA:

Lexington Books.

Bunce, D., & West, M.  A.  (1995). Self perceptions and perceptions of group climate as predictors
of individual innovation at work. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 44, 199-215.
Caliguiri,  P. M.,  & Day,  D. V. (2000).  Effects  of  self-monitoring  on  technical,  contextual,  and
assignment-specific  performance: A study of cross-national work performance ratings. Group
and  Organization Management, 25, 154-174.

Campbell, J.  P, Gasser,  M. B., & Oswald,  F. L. (1996). The  substantive  nature  of  performance
variability.  In  K.  R. Murphy  (Ed.), Individual  differences and  behavior  in  organizations
(p. Jossey) San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Champoux, J. E., & Peters, W. S. (1937). Form, effect  size, and power  in moderated  regression

Ana.\ys\s. Journal  of Occupational Psychology,  60, 243-255.

Conger, J. A., & Kanungo, R. N. (1998). Charismatic leadership in organizations. London: Sage.
Day, D. Y, Schleicher,  D. J., Unckless, A. L., & Hiller, N. J. (2002). Self-monitoring  personality at
work: A meta-analytic investigation of construct validity./OMrna/ of Applied Psychology,  87,
390-401.

De  Cremer,  D.,  van  Knippenberg,  D.,  van  Dijke,  M.,  & Bos,  A.  E.  R.  (2006).  Self-sacrificial
leadership and follower self-esteem: When collective identification matters. Group Dynamics:
Theory, Research,  and Practice,  10, 233-245.

De Vries, R. E., Roe, R. A., & TaUlieu, T. C. B. (2002). Need for leadership as a moderator of the

relationships  between  leadership  and  individual  outcomes.  leadership  Quarterly,  13,
121-137.

Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1987). The support of autonomy and the control of behavior./oMrwß/

of Personality and Social Psychology, 53,  1024-1037.

Epitropaki,  C,  & Martin,  R. (2005). The  role of individual  differences  in  the  relation  between
leadership  and  organizational  identification.  Leadership

transformational/transactional 
Quarterly, 16, 569-589.

Farr, J. L., & Ford, C. M.  (1990). Individual innovation. In M.  A. West & J. L Farr (Eds.), Innovation

and  creativity at work  (pp.  64-80). Chichester: John Wileys.

Felfe,  J.,  &  Goihl,  K.  (2002).  Deutsche  überarbeitete  und  ergänzte  Version  des  Multifactor
Leadership  Questionnaire  (MLQ)  [German  revised  and  complemented  version  of  the
Multifactor  Leadership Questionnaire]. In A.  Glöckner-Rist (Ed.),  ZUMA-Informationssystem.
[ZUMA Information  system]. Mannheim:  Zentrum  für  Umfragen,  Methoden  und  Analysen
[Center for surveys, methods, and analyses].

Felfe, J.,  & Schyns, B. (2002). The relationship between employees' occupational self-efficacy  and
perceived transformational leadership: Replication and an extension of recent results. Current
Research in Social Psychology,  7, 137-162.

Fernandez, C. F, & Vecchio, R. P (1997). Situational leadership theory revisited: A test of an across-

jobs perspective. Leadership Quartely, 8, 67-84.

Gangestad, S. W, & Snyder, M. (2000). Self-monitoring: Appraisal and reappraisal. Psychological

Bulletin,  126, 530-555.

Psychology,  127, 351-352.

Goldsmith, R. E., & Matherly, T. A.  (1987). Adaption-innovation and self-esteem./owr««/ of Social

Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: Development of
leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years. Leadership Quarterly,  6,
219-247.

Hersey,  P., & Blanchard,  K. H. (1969)- Life  cycle  theory  of  leadership: Is there  a best  style of

leadership? Training and Development Journal, 33, 26-34.

Hogg,  M. A.,  Hains,  S. C,  & Mason,  I.  (1998).  Identification  and  leadership  in  small  groups:
Salience, frame of reference, and leader stereo typicality effects on leader evaluations./owr««/
of Personality and Social Psychology,  75, 1248-1263.

House, R. J. (1971). A path goal theory of leader effectiveness. Adtninistrative Science Quarterly,

16, 321-338.


Leadership, self-related  variables and  innovation  487

House,  R. J. (1995). Leadership in the twenty-first  century: A speculative inquiry. In A. Howard

(Ed.), The changing nature of work (pp. 500-549). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Howell, J.  M.,  «& Avolio, B. J. (1993). Transformational leadership, transactional leadership, locus of

control,  and  support  for  innovation:  Key  predictors  of  consolidated-business-unit
performance. Journal  of Applied Psychology,  78,  891-902.

Howell, J. M., & Hall-Meranda,  K. E. (1999). The ties that  bind: The impact  of  leader-member-
exchange, transformational  and transactional leadership, and distance on predicting follower
performance./owrn«/  of Applied Psychology, 84, 680-694.

Howell, J.  M.,  & Higgins,  C. A.  (1990).  Leadership  behaviours,  influence  tactics,  and  career
experiences of champions of technological innovation. Leadership Quarterly, 1990, 249-264.
Jung, D. 1. (2000). Transformational  and transactional leadership and their effects  on creativity in

groups. Creativity Research Journal,  13, 185-195.

Jung,  D. L, Chow, C,  & Wu, C. (2003). The  role  of transformational  leadership  in  enhancing
organizational innovation: Hypotheses and some preliminary findings. Leadership Quarterly,
14, 523-544.

Keller,  R.  T.  (1992).  Transformational  leadership  and  the  performance  of  research  and

development project  groups. Journal of Management,  18, 489-501.

Kerr,  S., & Jermier, J.  M. (1978). Substitutes  for  leadership: Their  meaning  and  measurement.

Organizational Behavior and Human  Performance,  22, 375-403.

King,  N.,  & Anderson,  N.  (2002).  Managing  innovation  and  change: A  critical guide  for

organizations. London: Thomson.

Klein,  K. J.,  Conn,  A.  B., Smith,  D.  B., & Sorra, J.  S.  (2001).  Is  everyone  in  agreement? An

exploration  of within-group  agreement  in employee perceptions  of the work  environment.
Journal  ofAppiied  Psychology, 86, 3-16.

Klein,  K. J.,  & House,  R. J.  (1995).  On  fire:  Charismatic  leadership  and  levels  of  analysis.

Leadership Quarterly,  6, 183-198.

Korman,  A. K. (1976).  Hypothesis  of  work  behavior  revisited  and  an  extension. Academy of

Management Review, 1, 50-63.

Lavine,  H.,  & Snyder,  M. (1996).  Cognitive  processing  and  the  functional  matching  effect  in
persuasion:  The  mediating  role  of  subjective  perceptions  of  message  quality. Journal  of
Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 580-604.

Lennox, R. D., & Wolfe, R. N.  (1984). Revision of the self-monitoring seule. Joumal  of Personality:

and Social Psychology, 46, 1349-1364.

Lord, R. G., & Brown, R. J. (2001). Leadership, values and subordinate self-concepts. Leadership

Quarterly, 12, 133-152.

Lord, R. G., Brown, R. J., & Ereiberg, S. J.  (1999). Understanding the dynamics of leadership: The
role of follower  self-concepts  in the  leader/follower  relationship.  Organizational Behavior
and Human  Decision Processes,  78, 167-203-

Lowe,  K.  B.,  Kroeck,  K.  G.,  &  Sivasubramaniam,  T.  (1996).  Effectiveness  correlates  of
transformational  and transactional  leadership: A meta-analytic review of the MLQ literature.
Leadership Quarterly, 7,  385-425.

Madjar, N. A., Oldham, G. R., & Pratt, M.  G. (2002). There's no place like home? The contributions

of work  and  nonwork  creativity  support  to employees'  creative  performance.  Academy of
Management Joumal,  45,  I'bl-lGl.

McClelland,  G.  H.,  & Judd,  C.  M. (1993).  Statistical  difficulties  of  detecting  interactions  and

moderator effects. Psychological Bulletin,  114, 376-390.

Miller, J.  S., & Cardy, R. L. (2000). Self-monitoring and performance appraisal: Rating outcomes in

project  teams. Joumal  of Organizational Behavior, 21, 609-626.

Mossholder, K. W., Bedeian, A. G.,  & Armenakis, A. A. (1981). Role perceptions, satisfation,  and
performance:  Moderating  effects  of  self-esteem  and  organizational  level.  Organizational
Behavior and Human  Performance, 28, 224-234.


488  Johannes Rank et al.

Oettingen, G., Pak, H., & Schnetter, K. (2001). Self-regulation of goal setting: Turning free  fantasies
about  the  future  into  binding  goals. Joumal  of  Personality and  Social Psychology, 80,
736-753.

Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A. (1996). Employee creativity: Personal and contextual  factors at

work. Academy of Management foumal,  39, 607-634.

Pedhazur, E. J.  (1997). Multiple regression in behavioral research: Explanation and prediction.

Eort Worth: Harcourt Brace.

Pierce, J. L., Gardner, D. G., Cummings, L. D., & Dunham, R. B. (1989). Organization-basedself-

esteem:  Construct  definition,  measurement,  and  validation.  Academy  of  Management
Journal, 32(3}, 622-648.

Pierce, J. L., Gardner, D. G., Dunham, R.  B.,  & Cummings, L. L. (1993). Moderation by organization-

based  self-esteem  of  role  condition-  employee  response  relationships.  Academy  of
Management foumal,  32, 622-648.

Pierro, A.,  Cicero, L., Bonaiuto, M.,  van Knippenberg, D.,  & Kniglanski, A.  W. (2005). Leader group
prototypicaiity  and  leadership  effectiveness:  The  moderating  role  of  need  for  cognitive
closure. Leadership Quarterly, 2005, 503-516.

Pillai, R., Schriesheim, C. A., & Williams, E. S. (1999)- Fairness perceptions and trust as mediators
for  transformational  and  transactional  leadership: A two-sample  study, foumal  of Manage-
ment, 25, 897-933.

Podsakoff, P M., MacKenzie, S. B., Ahearne, M., & Bommer, W. H. (1995). Searching for a needle in
a  haystack:  Trying  to  identify  the  illusive  moderators  of  leadership  behaviors, foumal  of
Management, 21, 422-470.

Podsakoff, P M.,  MacKenzie, S. B.,  & Bommer, W.  H. (1996). Transformational leader beliaviors and
substitutes for leadership as determinants  of employee satisfaction,  commitment,  trust, and
organizational citizenship behaviors./owrw«/ of Management, 22, 259-298.

Scott, S. G., & Bruce, R. A. (1994). Determinants of innovative behavior: A path model of individual

innovation in the workplace. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 580-607.

Scott, S. G., & Bruce, R. A. (1998). Following the leader in RálcD:  The joint effect  of subordinate
problem-solving style and leader-member relations on innovative behavior. IEEE Transactions
on Engineering Management,  45, 3-10.

Shamir, B.,  House, R. J.,  & Arthur, M.  B. (1993). The motivational effects of charismatic leadership:

A self-concept  based theory. Organization Science,  4, 577-594.

Snyder,  M. (1987).  Public appearances/private  realities: The psychology  of  self-monitoring.

New York, NY: Freeman.

Snyder,  M.,  &  Copeland,  J.  (1989).  Self-monitoring  in  organizations.  In  R.  A.  Giacalone  &
P Rosenfeld  (Eds.), Impression management  in  the organization  (pp.  7-28). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Sosik, J. J., & Dinger, S.  L. (2007). Relationships between leadership style and vision content: The
moderating  role  of  need  for  social  approval,  self-monitoring,  and  need  for  social  power.
Leadership Quarterly,  18, 134-153.

Swann,  W.  B.,  Stein-Seroussi,  A.,  &  Giesler,  B.  (1992).  Why  people  self-verify,  foumal  of

Personality and Social Psychology,  62, 392-401.

Van Dyne, L., Van de Walle, D., Kostova, T.,  Latham, M.  E., & Cummings, L. L. (2000). Collectivism,

propensity to trust and self-esteem  as predictors of organizational  citizenship in a non-work
seilin%. foumal  of Organizational Behavior, 21, 3-23.

Van Knippenberg, D.,  van Knippenberg, B.,  De Cremer, D.,  & Hogg, M. A. (2004). Leadership, self,

and identit)': A review and research agenda. Leadership Quarterly,  15, 825-856.

Vermunt,  R., van  Knippenberg,  D., van  Knippenberg,  B., & Blaauw, B. (2001). Self-esteem  and

outcome faimess. Joumal  of Applied Psychology, 86, 621-628.

Villa, J.  R.,  Howell,  J.  P,  Dorfman,  P  W,  & Daniel,  D.  L.  (2003).  Problems  with  detecting
moderators  in  leadership  research  using  moderated  multiple  regression.  Leadership
Quarterly, 14, 3-23.


Leadership,  self-related  variables  and  innovation 

489

Weiss,  H. M. (1977).  Subordinate  imitation  of  supervisory  behavior;  The  role  of  modeling  in
organizational  socialization.  Organizational  Behavior  and  Human  Performance,  19,
89-105.

West, M. A. (1987). Role innovation in the world of work. British fournal  of Social Psychology,

26, 305-315.

West, M. A., & Fan-, J. L. (1990). Innovation at work. In M. A. West & J. L. Fan- (Eds.), Innovation

and creativity at work (pp. 3-13). Chichester: John Wileys.

Williams,  L. J.,  & Anderson,  S. E. (1991). Job  satisfaction  and  organizational  commitment  as
predictors  of organizational  citizenship and in-role behaviors./owr««/ of Management,  17,
601-617.

Received  21  September  2005;  revised  version  received  20  August  2008


