PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY
1996,49

ATTITUDES AND EFFECTIVENESS: EXAMINING
RELATIONS AT AN ORGANIZATIONAL  LEVEL

ANN MARIE  RYAN

Bowling Green  State  University

MARK J.  SCHMIT
University of  Florida

RAYMOND  JOHNSON

Ford  Motor  Company

Recent evidence has suggested that altitudes-organizational  effective-
ness relations may exist.  Relations between employee attitudes, orga-
nizational unit performance, customer satisfaction, and turnover were
examined at the branch level for a large autotnobile finance company.
Using data from 142 branches in 2 consecutive years, several significant
relations between attitude factors and performance were observed. In
addition, causal analyses conducted at the branch level suggested that
customer satisfaction led to employee attitudes, rather than the oppo-
site. Additional analyses to explain this result suggested that economic
conditions and related  factors might be the causal mechanism  at the
aggregated level. Other potential interpretations of these findings and
caveats about generalizing organizational-level findings to the individ-
ual level are discussed.

Recognizing that  relations between job attitudes and individual  ef-
fectiveness are often weak (Iaffaldano  & Muchinsky, 1985), researchers
have begun to focus  on organizational-level  links between  satisfaction
and performance.  For example, several researchers have reported em-
ployee attitude-customer  satisfaction  relationships at the  organization
or  group  level  (e.g.,  Ashworth,  Higgs,  Schneider,  Shepherd  & Carr,
1995;  Schneider,  Chung, & Yusko,  1993; Tornow & Wiley,  1991;  Wi-
ley, 1994). Attitudes also have been linked to other indicators of organi-
zational performance, such as rating of administrative performance of
schools, turnover,  contract  retention,  and financial  performance  (e.g.,
Ostroff, 1992; Paradise-Tornow, 1991; Tornow & Wiley, 1991).

The purpose of this study was to examine how employee attitudes re-
late to organizational effectiveness using multiple criteria (performance,
customer satisfaction, turnover), attending to the relevant levels of anal-
ysis and  aggregation  issues.  A second  goal was to assess the  stability

Address  all  correspondence  to  Ann  Marie  Ryan,  at  the  Department  of  Psychology,
Michigan  State  University, East Lansing, MI 48824.  Email:  annmarie.ryan@ssc.msu.edu.
We wish to thank the reviewers for  their  helpful  comments.

COPYRIGHT  ©  1996PERSONNELPSYCHOLOGV.INC.
853


854 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

of  these  relations  over  time.  A  third  purpose  was  to  examine  the  di-
rection of causality in the attitude-organizational performance  relation.
We provide  a short  summary  of  the  theoretical  rationale  for  the  study,
the relevant  organizational-level  research,  and  a brief  review of  the is-
sues associated with the aggregation of  data.

Theoretical Rationale

In  this  study,  we  examined  the  relation  of  attitudes  and  organiza-
tional effectiveness.  Prior  to discussing the  theoretical  basis for  such  a
relation, we would  like  to clarify  the  nature  of  the  constructs.  Produc-
tivity is viewed  as existing at  the group,  unit, or  organizational-level;  it
is not an individual-level concept.  Pritchard  (1992) defined  productivity
as involving both efficiency,  the ratio of outputs to inputs, and  effective-
ness, outputs relative  to some  standard.  The  operationalizations  of  or-
ganizational unit productivity used in this study were common indicators
in the industry examined  and included both efficiency  and  effectiveness
measures.

It is also important to clarify the concept of shared attitudes. A group
or organizational  unit can develop shared meaning because of social in-
teractions  (James, Joyce, & Slocum,  1988).  For example,  the  attitudes
of  individuals within  a group  may eome  to  be  shared  because  of  com-
mon experiences.  An  intolerable  supervisor,  poor  working conditions,
or inadequate salaries may often be a shared experience of a group, and
will be reflected  through shared attitudes of those group members.  The
development  of  shared  attitudes within  a unit  is also  supported  by  the
job satisfaction  research on environmental influences  (Gutek & Winter,
1992; Judge  & Hulin,  1993; Watson & Slack,  1993).  This research sug-
gests that because members of the same organizational  unit are  subject
to many of the same situational influences,  similarity of attitudes within
a  unit  is expected.  As  Kozlowski  and  Hattrup  (1992)  noted,  individu-
als within a bounded  context  are presented with relatively  homogenous
situational  factors  and  events that  lead  to collective interpretation  and
response  tendencies.

The  existence  of  unit  shared  attitudes  is also supported  by  Schnei-
der's attraction-selection-attrition  (ASA) model  (Schneider,  1987; Sch-
neider,  Goldstein  & Smith,  1995).  The ASA model proposes that  over
time  people  in  organizational  settings  become  increasingly  homoge-
neous  in  disposition  (see  Schneider  et  al.,  1995 for  a review  of  empir-
ical research supporting this homogeneity hypothesis).  This homogene-
ity in disposition is likely paralleled by an increasing homogeneity in at-
titudes,  as  dispositional  views  of  job  satisfaction  propose  personality-
attitude  links  (Judge  &  Hulin,  1993;  Watson  &  Slack,  1993;  see  also


ANN MARIE RYAN ET AL. 

855

Jaekson,  1992  for  a  discussion  of  heterogeneity,  cohesion  and  affect).
George  (1990)  noted  that  because  of  the  ASA process, groups ean de-
velop homogenous affective  tones (see also George and James,  1993 for
a summary of the theoretical rationale for homogeneity in group  affeet).
Thus,  the  coneept  of  shared  group attitudes has been supported  by  the
work on climate  and  the development  of shared  meaning,  environmen-
tal influences on satisfaction,  the ASA model, and empirical research on
group affective  tone.

In this study, we examined the  relation between the shared  attitudes
of  an  organizational  unit  and  the  productivity  of  that  unit.  Given  that
so  much  research  has  indicated  that  the  relation  between  individual
satisfaction  and  individual  performance  is not  large  (see  Iaffaldano  &
Muchinsky,  1985 for  a summary), why propose  a relationship  between
organizational unit attitudes and organizational  unit performance?  The
theoretical  rationale  for  a link is based  on the  recognition  that  produc-
tivity (or  organizational  performance)  is not simply a sum of  individual
performance  (Guzzo, 1988; Guzzo & Shea, 1992) and therefore  maybe
influenced  by factors other than those affecting individual  performance.
Ostroff  (1993)  noted  that  positive  employee  attitudes  in  an  organiza-
tional unit should relate to norms of cooperation and collaboration (e.g.,
Isen & Baron,  1991; Jackson, May, & Whitney, 1995). This is supported
by a meta-analysis by Organ  and  Ryan  (1995)  that  demonstrated  a  link
between  job  satisfaction  and  organizational  citizenship  behavior  (i.e.,
helping others,  volunteering).  More  positive  interpersonal  norms  like
cooperation  are  theorized  to enhance  the productivity of  a group or  or-
ganizational  unit  (see  Guzzo  & Shea,  1992, for  a review  on  precursors
of  group  effectiveness),  although  there would  likely be  no  appreciable
effect  on individual performance.  Thus, cooperation  and  collaboration
are seen as mediators of  the relation between shared  attitudes and pro-
ductivity.

Attitude-Performance  Links  at the Organizational Unit Level

Relations  between  organizational  unit  performance  and  employee
attitudes have been reported by a number of researchers,  (e.g., Paradise-
Tornow,  1991; Schneider  & Bowen,  1993; Tornow & Wiley,  1991; Wiley
1991).  However,  much of  this research  must  be  interpreted  cautiously
because of possible aggregation bias in collapsing of individual employee
attitude  data  into  the shared  view of  organizational  units.  Aggregation
bias in perceptual measures was defined  by James (1982) as interpreting
estimates based  on functions  of  means  as if  they applied  to  agreement


856 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

among individuals  (e.g., treating the mean  satisfaction  score  for  an  or-
ganizational  unit  as the view of  that  unit).  Tlius,  any study that  opera-
tionalizes shared attitudes as an aggregation of attitudes measured at the
individual level must consider whether sufficient  theoretical  and  empir-
ical support exists for treating the aggregation as an organizational level
variable.

In the  previous  section, we  addressed  the  theoretical  basis for  con-
sidering shared  attitudes as a meaningful  unit level construct.  Only one
study on attitude-performance  links at the organizational-level reported
data  regarding  the  empirical  appropriateness  of  the  aggregation  of  at-
titudes  to  the  organizational-level.  Ostroff  (1992)  found  relations  be-
tween  satisfaction  and  other  job  attitudes  and  12  indicators  of  school
performance,  with a mean of  10% and  a median of 6%  of the  variance
in school performance  accounted  for  by the job attitudes of  the staff  in
the  schools.  However,  the  nature  of  educational  systems makes  many
of  the performance  indicators reported  by Ostroff  unique to school set-
tings.  The  study  reported  here  attempts  to  examine  these  links  using
productivity indicators common in for-profit  organizations  (e.g.,  profit,
marketshare).

Attitudes  and Customer  Satisfaction

Although often viewed as an indicator of organizational  performance,
we  discuss  and  present  analyses  regarding  customer  satisfaction  sepa-
rately  for  several  reasons.  First,  this measure  was used  by the  organi-
zation under study quite differently  from other  indicators of  a unit's  ef-
fectiveness.  Campbell  and Campbell  (1988) noted that the  components
of  productivity or  performance  and their  relative importance  are  value
judgments  by a firm.  In this particular  firm,  customer  satisfaction  was
viewed as a unique and highly valued indicator of performance.  Second,
the relation of customer satisfaction  to other indicators of organizational
performance  has not been consistently demonstrated  (Schneider, 1991).
Third, although there are a few studies reporting an employee  attitude-
customer  service  link  (e.g.,  Desalnick  &  Detzel,  1993;  Tornow  &  Wi-
ley,  1991; Wiley  1991; Wiley,  1994),  most  of  the  focus  has  been  on  a
climate for service as a means of increasing customer satisfaction  (John-
son,  1995; Lundby,  Dobbins,  & Kidder  1995; also see  Schneider  et  al.,
1993 for  a summary) rather  than on employee attitudes per  se as a cor-
relate of customer  satisfaction.  Schmit and Allscheid  (1995) found  that
the relation  of employee  attitude.s and  customer  satisfaction  was medi-
ated  by  service  intentions.  Fourth,  there  is some  evidence  to  suggest
that the attitude-customer  satisfaction  relation may depend on the  facet
of  employee  satisfaction  examined  (e.g., Tornow & Wiley, 1991, Wiley,


ANN MARIE RYAN ET AL. 

857

1991 reported  no relation of customer satisfaction  to employee  satisfac-
tion with compensation).  Others  have  suggested  that  training  (Schnei-
der,  Wheeler,  & Cox,  1992; Weaver,  1994), teamwork  (Berry,  Parasur-
aman, & Geisha,  1994), and empowerment  (Schneider  & Bowen, 1993;
Weaver,  1994)  are  related  to  customer  satisfaction.  Further,  Ostroff
(1992)  suggested  examining  more  specific  facets  of  job  satisfaction  as
predictors  of  effectiveness.  Given  the  nature  of  the  attitude  measures
used  in  this  study,  we  could  explore  potential  links  between  specific
facets of  the shared  attitudes and customer  satisfaction.

Causality

The  question  of  causality  between  employee  satisfaction  and  indi-
vidual  performance  has  received  considerable  research  attention  (Iaf-
faldano  & Muchinsky,  1985).  Petty,  McGee,  and  Cavender  (1984),  in
summarizing  the  empirical  research  on  this question,  noted  that  there
is  little  support  for  the  view  that  satisfaction  causes  performance,  or
for  the view that  performance  causes satisfaction.  The causal nature of
the  relation  between  organizational-level  concepts  of  shared  attitudes
and organizational effectivene.ss  has not yet been  examined.  Further, if
customer  satisfaction  is assumed  to be an indicator  of  the  performance
of  service  employees,  then  research  on  the  causal  direction  of  the  job
satisfaction-customer  satisfaction  relation  is also  tenuous.  The  belief
currently  held  by  many  is  that  employee  satisfaction  causes  customer
satisfaction  (Tompkins,  1992;  Weaver,  1994),  although  empirical  sup-
port  of this directionality  is lacking.  Thus, one goal of the present  study
was to explore  shared  attitude-organizational  performance  and  shared
attitude-customer  satisfaction  causality using data over a 2-year  period.

Summary

Based  on  the  theoretical  rationale  that  organizational-unit  shared
attitudes  are  related  to cooperative  behaviors,  which  in  turn  influence
unit performance, we examined  the following hypothesis:

Hy(X)theHis  1:  Organizational  unit  attitudes wiii be jxisitively related  to
unit produclivity and customer satisfaction.

Given  the  lack  of  research  on  the  causal  relation  of  attitudes  and
performance  at  the organizational-unit  level of  analysis, we did  not  hy-
pothesize  a specific  direction  of causality  but explore  the  causal  nature
of  the  relation  by  examining  data  over  a  2-ycar  period.  Ideally,  one


858 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

would measure cooperative behaviors as a mediator of the proposed atti-
tude—effectiveness  relation; however, such a measure was unavailable.

Method

Subjects

Data from  142 North American branches of a financial services or-
ganization were collected.  However, because of  branch closures dur-
ing the 2-year period of the study, most analyses were conducted on 131
branches.  Branch size (i.e., personnel level) varied from 9 to 127 with
an average size of 41.

Branch was considered the organizational unit of analysis for several
reasons. First, the organizational structure treated these units as distinct
and comparable entities, regardless of variability in size. Branches were
geographically isolated  from one another,  and work was distributed by
geographical region. Thus, customers were assigned to only one branch
and would not be customers of any other branch. All customer transac-
tions were handled by phone or mail.

Measures

Klein, Dansereau, and Hall (1994) noted that specifying that the level
of  a theory as a group-level implies that group members are homoge-
neous on the construct(s) in question so that they may be characterized
as a whole.  Based on our discussion of the development of shared  at-
titudes in organizational  units, we felt  there was sufficient  theoretical
rationale for treating organizational branches as the unit of analysis. Be-
sides a theoretical rationale, one can provide empirical evidence to jus-
tify aggregation.  James (1982) stated that the aggregation of individual
perceptions  to a group level is acceptable if one  can show  agreement
within organizational units and reliable differentiation  between organi-
zational units.

Techniques such as hierarchical  linear  modeling (Bryk & Rauden-
bush, 1992) and WABA (Dansereau, Alutto, & Yammarino, 1984) are
frequently used to determine what is the appropriate level for analyzing
a multi-level dataset.  In the case of the issue under  study here, HLM
and WABA II are not useful because our dependent variables are con-
ceptually and empirically group-level variables and are not  aggregates
of individual-level data (Scanclura & Williams, 1995). That is, we take a
nonreductionist position with regard to the indicators of organizational


ANN MARIE RYAN ETAL. 

8^

performance  we examined,  as entities such as unit market share are  not
simply  individual-level  variables  expressed  at  a  higher  level.  Further,
variables  such  as customer  satisfaction  were  not collected  in  a  manner
that  allowed  expression  as linked  to individuals as entities.  We  address
the issue of  the appropriateness of aggregating job attitudes through  an
examination of  agreement  and  reliability.

Shared  attitudes.  Employee  attitude  data  were  collected  in  June,
1992,  and  September,  1993.  Survey  data  were  collected  as  part  of  a
worldwide  employee  attitude  survey  system  developed  by  the  parent
company  as  a  tool for  organizational  development.  Items were  devel-
oped from previous surveys conducted by the organization, focus groups,
and from The Mayflower  Group, a consortium of major  companies  that
conduct employee attitude surveys. All items went through extensive pi-
lot testing. The survey is administered  at least every 2 years lo all hourly
and  salaried  employees using organization-wide  core questions plus lo-
cally developed supplemental  items. Our  analyses here are restricted  to
those  organization-wide  core  questions.  Five-point,  Likert-type  scales
were used  for  responses.

A  principal  component  factor  analysis  with  varimax  rotation  con-
ducted  on a separate  sample  of  1,513  corporate  employees  (Johnson  &
Slade, 1992) indicated eight factors  (coefficient  alphas in  parentheses):
Supervision,  20  items  (.96);  Job  and  Company  Satisfaction,  16  items
(.93);  Work  Group  and  Teamwork,  15 items  (.89);  Quality  Emphasis,
8  items  (.83);  External  Customer  Focus,  4  itenxs  (.90);  Workload  and
Stress, 5 items (.78); Empowerment, 2 items (.76); and Training and De-
velopment,  4 items  (.82).  A  sample  item  from  each  factor  is  ineluded
in the Appendix.  Note that  some changes were  made  to items between
1992 and  1993 survey  administrations,  ostensibly  to improve  scale  reli-
abilities and  to eliminate  redundancies.  Six items were  added  and  one
was dropped.

In the data for both years analyzed here, the eight factors were signif-
icantly intercorrelated  (for  1992, .45 to  .85; for  1993, .50 to  .86).  These
factors  were  also  highly  related  to  a  single,  general  satisfaction  ques-
tion  (hereafter  referred  to as Overall Satisfaction),  "Considering every-
thing,  how would you  rate  your  overall  satisfaction  in  the  Company  at
the present  time?"  (.63 to .93 in 1992; .55 to .93 in 1993).

The  appropriateness  of  aggregation  to  a unit  level was assessed  via
several  procedures.  First,  the James,  Demaree,  and Wolf  (1984,  1993)
method  of  assessing within  group  agreement,  r^.g, was calculated.  Ko-
zlowski and Hattrup  (1992) demonstrated  that r^g  is a meaningful  indi-
cator  of  agreement,  but  users should  make  clear  the distribution of ex-
pected variance that is most useful  for a particular application.  Based on
our observed data, we used a normal distribution in our r^g  estimations;


860 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

TABLE 1

r^g and 1CC(2) for Attitude Factors

Attitude  measure

Supervision  1992
Supervision  1993
Job/Company satisfaction  1992
Job/Company  satisfaction  1993
Tfeamwork  1992
Tfeamwork  1993
Quality  1992
Quality  1993
External  customer  1992
External  customer  1993
Stress  1992
Stress  1993
Empowerment  1992
Empowerment  1993
TJ-aining 1992
Ti-aining  1993
Overall satisfaction  1992
Overall satisfaction  1993

.72
.70
.73
.73
.86
.81
.79
.74
.79
.75
,76
,66
,58
,51
.71
,65
.52
,57

r«,g slight

negative skew

ICC(2)

.58
.55
,59
.59
.79
,72
.68
.62
.69
.62
.64
.49
.37
.27
.56
.48
.28
.36

,69
.72
.78
.78
.81
.81
.78
.80
.65
.73
.85
.80
,66
.70
.79
.77
,75
,76

however, because some research (James et al., 1984) has sug^sted that
attitude data are often skewed, we also report values for a slight nega-
tive skew.  We calculated an r^g value for eaeh variable for each of the
branches and then averaged across branches to get an average.  Table 1
shows the average r^^g values for all eight factors in both years of data.
Low interrater agreement is indicated for the Empowerment factor and
the Overall Satisfaction item. Branch size showed no consistent relation
to r^g across the 2-year period. Table 1 also shows intraclass correlations
(ICC (2) values according to James, 1982) that provide an estimate of re-
liability at the level at which the data will be analyzed. As Kozlowski and
Hattrup (1992) explained, the intraclass correlation indicates interrater
reliability or proportional consistency of variance among raters, whereas
r^jg indicates agreement or interchangeability among raters. As most of
the r^g values were at a .65 level or higher (with a normal distribution
assumed), we felt there was sufficient  agreement to justify  aggregation.
In the case of Empowerment and Overall Satisfaction, we present anal-
yses for completeness but feel  that  interpretation  of finding  involving
these variables may not be appropriate.

Productivity Measures.

Ten indicators, used as the primary performance  and operating data
for each branch, were collected for 1992 and 1993. in addition, the per-
sonnel level at each branch was used to indicate braneh size.  Year-end


ANN MARIE RYAN ETAL. 

861

values  (i.e., based  on January  through  December  data) were  used.  The
indicators were;  (a)  total  dollar  profit,  before  deducting  taxes  and  fu-
ture loss provisions; (b) market share, the actual number of units sold as
a  percent  of  possible;  (e)  volume,  number  of  units  purchased  as  per-
cent  of  budget;  (d)  controllable  operating  costs;  (e)  personnel  level
higher/lower  than  authorized,  which  compares  actual  with  authorized
personnel  levels,  (f)  probability  of  payment  under  S5%,  an  indicator
of  the  risk  associated  with  making  a  loan;  (g)  net  Ltr%,  which  shows
credit losses as percent of net receivables (referred  to hereafter  as credit
losses); (h) repossession ratio, expressed as the number of  repossessions
as a percentage of the average number of outstanding accounts; (i) over
30-day  delinquency;  and  (j)  over  60-day  delinquency  rates,  which  are
the percentage of loans that are delinquent by a certain time period.  As
measures  of  loss, relations were  expected  among credit  loss,  reposses-
sion ratios, and delinquency rates (30- and 60-day).

Customer Satisfaction (CSl).  Customer satisfaction was measured us-
ing  an  overall  satisfaction  indicator,  the  percentage  of  customers  re-
sponding that  they were  completely  or very  satisfied  in response  to  the
question:  "All  things considered,  please  rate  your  overall  satisfaction
with the service provided by Company X." Note that although the ques-
tion  asks  about  satisfaction  with  the  entire  organization,  respondents
only had contact with one  branch of that organization  and would  be re-
sponding in reference  to that  branch.  Data  are collected monthly  from
500 customers per branch, randomly selected to sample  representatively
from four customer segments.  Averages of the monthly data for the 1992
and  1993 years were  used  for  analyses  reported  here.  An  examination
of  1992 CSI data for the same month as survey data collection (June) in-
dicated  no major  differences  from  those  using the  annual  figure,  which
would be a much more  stable estimate of customer  satisfaction.

For  1993, data  were  available  on  evaluations  of  specific  aspects of
customer service  (e.g., ease of contacting, knowledge  of service  person-
nel, courtesy of service personnel). These ratings were highly intercorre-
lated  (.58 to .91) suggesting that customer satisfaction was likely a single
factor  (a  =  .80).  Because  analyses  involving each  of  these  questioas
showed essentially  the same  pattern of results as the  CSI, data  for  indi-
vidual items are not reported  here.

Peterson  and Wilson (1992) noted that  customer  satisfaction  is most
typically  measured  through  surveys,  and that  these  self-reports  usually
possess a negatively  skewed  distribution  (i.e., most customers are  satis-
fied)  with  the  modal  response  typically the  most positive  allowed.  The
implications of  this skewness are  that correlations between the CSI and
other variables are likely to be  attenuated,  and  statistical  tests of a non-
parametric  nature  may  be  more  appropriate  than  mean  comparisons


862

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

•  *»  *  *
r-  f-1  o
•^  n 
(N

o\  TT  <j-j 
O 

^
--t  ^  O

•» 

#

r-  (-J  ^1

» 

» 

•• 

* 

<f 
4
r^i  «3  CO  cj  CTi

4 

••

5

I

CC  Tf-  «3  O\  >O

.11
°2  °-

G  C

c  a-
.2 .5

P  9  t= -2  w  S
3  S  S .e  -a  g

0


ANN MARIE RYAN ET AL.

a-  ^H  o  VI  c-1

U-l

Tf-
r-

(N

Tf

«—'

1—1

i -H

^ _/

*

•

•

•

S

to  o

. —.  1 —.

1

oo

Tf

2

u
u
E

o
t
s
u
C

§
1=

§2

k-

u

n
u
l
o
V

t
i
f
o
r
P

<
k
r
a

M

^  -c  &>  -5
ou
u

Q.
'o  «
>..  S

^^ 

#j

•S
=
._
C
r-

i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P

i
i
d
e
r
C

CQ

r
t
n
o
C

!
o
s
r
e
P


864 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

(Peterson  & Wilson,  1992).  Only  the  mean  CSI  for  each  branch  was
available in organizational records; thus, we were unable to consider the
skew effects  in our  analysis.  Further, we could not examine  agreement
of customers at a branch level because of this data  limitation.

Turnover. Percentage turnover by branch for  1992 and 1993 was used.
Guzzo (1988) noted that withdrawal from work is often viewed as a par-
tial productivity measure.  Given that this organization did not  consider
turnover  an  indicator  of  performance,  we  treat  turnover  as  a  distinct
outcome measure.  Organizational records did not distinguish voluntary
from  involuntary turnover, so the measure used here included  both.

Results

Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for and intereorrelations among
the  criteria.  The  pattern  of  correlations  across  the  2-year  period  was
highly similar.  Turnover was positively  related  to  several  indicators of
loss; customer  satisfaction  was negatively related  to many  effectiveness
and  loss indicators.  Branch  size was correlated  with most  of  the  other
measures; thus, all regression analyses reported  control for branch size.
Partialling branch  size out of  the  correlations  reported  in Table 2 indi-
cated  that the relations of  profit  and volume to the other  indicators be-
come near zero, but had less of an effect  on the intereorrelations of the
other  criteria.

Changes between  1992 and  1993 on the customer  satisfaction,  turn-
over, and performance measures were assessed by two-tailed t tests. Cus-
tomer  satisfaction  was  significantly  more  positive  in  1993  (j) <  .001),
while turnover rates were unchanged.  Changes in the performance  indi-
cators occurred for  all indicators except  for the level of personnel  in re-
lation to authorization  (t(130)  =  -1.8, ns); in all cases but one, changes
reflected  an  improvement  in performance  in  1993.  Controllable  oper-
ating costs increased  (i.e., less positive), which would be expected  given
the increases in volume.

For  the  changes between  1992 and  1993, attitude  data,  t tests  indi-
cated  significantly  more, positive  attitudes  were  expressed  in the  areas
of Supervision, Job/Company Satisfaction, Teamwork, Quality,  External
Customer  Focus  and  Training,  and  on  the  one  item  General  Satisfac-
tion  index  (p  <  .001 on  all).  The  relation  of  attitudes  to  productivity
was examined  through partial rs, with the effects  of branch size  consid-
ered  (see Table 3).  Job/Company Satisfaction,  Teamwork,  and  Training
showed fairly consistent patterns of correlations with the  criteria.

Regression  analyses, with  branch  size  entered  on  the  first  step  and
all eight attitude factors entered on the second, were conducted for  both
1992 and  1993 outcome data.  Table 4 shows the variance attributable  to


a•o
o

o

&-
C
u
cr
_c

l
e
d

y
c
n

u
a*
.S
"u
•o

_0I

.2
g.

t
i
d

u

•§
t£
__
uc
c
o

e
l
b
a
l
l
o
r
t

o
U

1
1^a.

c
w

'o
•o

u.a
-s

u.O

3

u
s

153
s

e
r
a

t
i
f
o
r
P

r
e
v
o
c

c
.2

t
c
a

Vi

"5

u

O
V)

a

I

ANN  MARIE RYAN  ET AL.

865

S CO

—

q
V

^

II 

I  I  I  I

?j  —  W-^  m m f^  (M  o

^-•-i 

( 5 - H O -- 

O 

O 

O O'

S i D O—- 
\ 

• q - ' * f ^ 0O 

CO 

O 

.—  — Q 

Q — ' O "?

p pq  p p pp  p  p  p op  p p pp
' ' '  \ ' \ 

i

— o — o

o  o o  o — o

Hi

fM Vi  O

If
oo

T-.  O o o

o

o

o

It
so

It

Si

o

V.

CO

o

O

o o

o

o o

in  iN  CO
rs  -- o
1  I  1

i>  inO  cs
o
1  1
1

rs
1

1

o
1

<N  M  -H
1  1  1

\o  rs  oi
O  (N —

rs

O  Tt  (S
n 
ts  M

\O  —'

0
1

8
2

o

2
2

M ro  ts

»

tt
tt

tt

IN  O  ^
cs  c^  —

g-  S  5  S

en  [iJ  h"  O

.5 ^.2


866 

PERSONNEL  PSYCHOLOGY

TABLE4

Regression of Criteria on Attitudes,  with Branch Size Controlled

Criterion

R-square for size

Incremental  fi-square

1992

Customer  satisfaction
Tiirnover
Profit
Market  share
Volume
Qinlrollable  operating cost
Personnel  authorized
Probability  paymenl 85%
Credit  losses
Repossession
30 days  delinquency
60 days  delinquency

1993

Customer  satisfaction
Turnover
Profit
Volume
Market  share
Controllable  costs
Personnel  authorized
Probability  under 85%
Credit  losses
Repossession  ratio
30 days delinquency
60 days  delinquency

*p<.05;  **p<.oi;  ***p<.ooi

.18
.01
.64
.00
.77
.97
.05
.00
.16
.11
.17
.04

.20
.01

.m.42

.00
.98
.17
.01
.07
.11
.07
.03

.22***
.18**

m.12*

.02
.00
.02
.13*
.08
.04
.08
.14**

.12*
.20**
.01
.01
.07
.00
.04

mAV

.12*
.06
.07'

the  attitude  factors was significant  for several  performance  indicators
but  no consistent  pattern  existed  across the 2-year  period.  For both
years,  significant  relations between the attitude  factors  and customer
satisfaction, and the attitude factors and turnover were found.

The relations between attitudes and outcome measures were exam-
ined using structural  equation  modeling techniques.  Such techniques
using data over time, as was available here, can be informative  regard-
ing possible causal relations between variables, although they are by no
means conclusive evidence of causality.  Thus, we discuss analyses only
in terms of what is suggested about causal relations, noting that our study
does not provide determinants of causality. All of the analyses were con-
ducted using LISREL 8 (Joreskog & Sorbom, 1993). Four indicators of
fit were used to assess the models tested, including chi-square, root mean
square error of approximation (RMSEA; Browne & Cudeck, 1993), the
normcd fit index  (NFI; Bentler  & Bonett,  1980) and the comparative
fit index (CFI; Bentier, 1990).  A non-significant  chi-square indicates a
good fit between model and data; however, chi-square has been shown to
be affected  by sample size, thereby necessitating the inclusion of several


ANN MARIE RYAN ET AL. 

867

other indices of fit  (Bentler  & Bonett,  1980). A RMSEA of  .05 has been
suggested  as an indicator  of close  fit, while .08 suggests a reasonable  fit
of the model to the data  (Browne & Cudeck,  1993). NFI  and CFI values
greater  than  .90 also suggest  a reasonable  fit  (Bentler  & Bonett,  1980).
Note  that  in all  models  to  be presented, weights on  the  arrow lines  are
unstandardized, while off  the line weights are standardized with t values
in parentheses.  A  t of  1.96  is significant  at  .05 for  a two-tailed  test  and
1.64  for a one-tailed  test.  Further, LISREL  analyses controlling for  size
yielded essentially the same results as those  presented  here.

Rather  than examining  the  relations  between  all eight  attitude  fac-
tors and  the  10 performance  indicators,  CSI, and  turnover,  and  thereby
capitalizing on chance, we sought to develop a more parsimonious  mea-
sure  of  shared  attitudes.  Three  of  the  eight  attitude  factors were  used
to  represent  employee  satisfaction  attitudes  (hereafter  referred  to  as
Morale): Job/Company Satisfaction, Supervision, and Work Group/Tea-
mwork.  These factors were chosen because  an examination of  items in-
dicated  that  they were  all  clearly  satisfaction  items  and  were  all  areas
clearly influenced  at  the branch  level  (e.g., training programs might  be
influenced  to a greater  extent by corporate  headquarters  than behavior
of  one's  immediate  supervisor).  In  addition,  the  scales were  found  to
have significant  positive  correlations  to each other  in both the  scale de-
velopment  and current  studies.  In addition, in a second order  principal
components analysis of Time  1  data, all eight scales loaded on a general
factor, but these three scales had the highest loadings with the factor  ac-
counting  for  81% of  their  variance.  Based  on  the  item  content,  factor
intercorrelations,  and the second order  analysis, these three scales were
hypothesized to be related to a general factor we labeled Morale.  This is
consistent with Organ and Ryan's (1995) suggestion of a General  Morale
factor.

As recommended by Anderson and Gerbing (1988), we tested a mea-
surement  model  to  assess whether  these  three  factors  could  be  seen  as
representing Morale.  The measurement  model fit well (x^  =  9.39, df  -
5,p  =  .10; RMSEA  =  .08,90% confidence  interval  .00-.16; CFI  =  .99;
NFI  =  .99).  Attempts to create  measurement  models  including the  re-
maining five  attitude factors  led  to poor  fit,  as would be expected  given
the different  focus of the other  factors.

The  relation  between  Morale  and  customer  satisfaction  was exam-
ined.  Note  that  in  this  model  a single  observed  variable  was  available
for  customer  satisfaction.  As recommended  by Williams and  Podsakoff
(1989),  the  factor  loading was  set  at  the  square  root  of  the  reliability
(i.e.,  .80), while  the  random  measurement  error  was fixed  at  the  quan-
tity 1 minus the  reliability  multiplied  by the variance.  Figure  1 shows a
cross-lagged  model,  where  Morale  at  lime  1 is unrelated  to  customer


868

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

enI
I

il

>2  £
Efl  H

•,3  ™

I *
it
1 1

><
1 c
2-2

3 

^

i
t
a
VI


ANN  MARIE  RYAN ET AI..


870

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

.

n
o

i

u

5 

c
a.
E
oy
o

ri
u
B
H

1-

.
y
c
n
e
u
q
n

u
O

o

E

,0 

e

^.  -o

Hi 

5

ll
.B  ao  i
•a  5*
c  'S

cr  41

•«  .s

o


ANN  MARIE RYAN ET AL.

811

a

"3
o

33

I

,i


872 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

satisfaction  at Time  2 but  customer  satisfaction  at  Time  1 is related  to
Morale  at Time 2 (x^  =  31.43, df  =  14, p  =  .005; RMSEA  =  .10, 90%
confidence  interval  .05-.14; CFI  =  .98; NFl  =  .97).  This suggests  that
morale does not cause customer satisfaction,  but that customer  satisfac-
tion may cause morale.

A  non-lagged  model  of  the  Morale-customer  satisfaction  relation
was also tested, which had  similar fit statistics as the model presented  in
Figure 1. The non-lagged model also suggested the direction of causality
to be from  customer  satisfaction  to morale.  The  latent  variable  corre-
lations  between  Morale  and  customer  satisfaction  within  time  periods
were  .42 at Time  1 and .48 at Time 2.

The  relation between  Morale  and  turnover was examined.  The  re-
liability of  the  turnover  variable  was assumed  to  be  1.0,  as these  were
actual turnover rates.  Figure 2 shows a cross-lagged model (x^  = 44.09,
df  = 15, p  <.OO1; RMSEA  =  .12,90% contidence interval .08-.17; CFI
=  .96; NFI  =  .94), where Morale at Time  1 leads to turnover at Time 2
(a  t value  of  1.64  represents  significance  for  a one-tailed  test).  A  non-
lagged model was also examined  and indicated Morale lead to turnover
at  Time  2  (x^  =  41.07,  df  =  15, p  <.OO1;  RMSEA  =  .12, 90%  confi-
dence interval  =  .07-.16; CFI  =  .96, NFT =  .95). This finding  confirms
past  research  suggesting that  employee  attitudes  are  causally linked  to
turnover.  The latent variable correlations between Morale and  turnover
within time periods were  -.13  at Time  1 and -.21  at Time 2.

Cross-lagged latent variable analyses were conducted  to provide ev-
idence  for  the  direction  of  the  Morale-productivity  relation.  A  model
was tested for each of the 10 performance  indicators (e.g., profit,  market
share).  Only the model for the over 30-day delinquency variable showed
adequate fit and significant  relations between Time 1 and 2 (x^  = 31.89,
df  =  U,p= 
.004; RMSEA =  .10, 90% confidence  interval .05-.15; CFI
=  .97; NFI  =  .96). The model is presented in Figure 3. Note that a reli-
ability of  1.0 was assumed  for the delinquency variable.  The  significant
path from delinquency at Time 1 to Morale at Time 2 and  non-significant
path from  Morale  at Time 1 to delinquency at Time 2, together  suggest
that delinquency rates cause Morale. As only one of the 10 performance
indicators showed any relation to Morale, this finding may be  a capital-
ization on chance.

The  direction  of  the  relation  found  between  customer  satisfaction
and  Morale was unexpected.  However,  an effort  was made  to  explain
why this unexpected finding occurred.  Because it was found  that 30-day
delinquency  rates were  linked  to Morale, we  hypothesized  that  the  re-
lation between  delinquency  and  Morale  may be  mediated  by  customer
satisfaction.  In  other  words,  if  customers  can  not  pay  their  bills,  they


ANN MARIE RYAN ET AL. 

873

express low customer  satisfaction, which in turn causes a conflictual  re-
lation with organizational  representatives, who in turn are less  satisfied.
In general, the  negative  affect  of customers, caused by their  inability to
pay  their  bills,  leads  to  negative  affect  in the  organization  responsible
for  collecting the bad debt.  To test the hypothesis that the  delinquency-
Morale  relation  is mediated  by  customer  satisfaction,  several  models,
were examined with both Time  1 and Time 2 data.  The results of  mod-
els tested were nearly identical, providing cross-validation;  accordingly,
only Time  2 results  are  presented  here.  The  first  model tested was the
most  general  model; it linked  delinquency directly to both  Morale  and
customer  satisfaction.  The  model fit  the  data well  (x^  =  5.18, df  =  4,
p >.O5; RMSEA  =  .05,90% contidence  interval =  .00-.15; CFI  =  1.00,
NFI  =  .99).  However,  the  direct  path from  delinquency to Morale was
not significant  and was removed  for  the more restrictive model.  Figure
4 shows the  final  restricted  model which  fit  the  data  (x^  =  5.32,  df  =
5, p  >.O5; RMSEA  =  .02, 90% confidence  interval  =  .00-.08; CFI  =
1.00, NFI  =  .99) and did not result in a loss of lit as a result of the  move
from  the more  general  model  (x^  =  0.14, df  -  \,  p  >.O5).  In  addition
to the direct  effects  noted  in Figure 4, delinquency  had a significant  in-
direct  effect  (—.31) on Morale  through customer  satisfaction.  A  model
where delinquency mediated the customer satisfaction-Morale  relation
was also tested, as it is possible that dissatisfaction could cause customers
to withhold  payments. This model did not fit as well as the model where
customer  satisfaction  served  as a mediator  (x^  =  16.26, df  = 5, p <.O1;
RMSEA  =  .13, 90% confidence  interval  =  .06-.21;  CFI  =  .97, NFI  =
.96).

Discussion

This  study  found  (a)  some  relations  between  shared  attitudes  and
branch  performance  indicators,  (b)  relations between  shared  attitudes
and  customer  satisfaction,  (c)  relations  between  shared  attitudes  and
turnover,  (d)  little  to clearly  indicate  the  causal  nature  of  morale  pro-
ductivity relations,  (e) evidence  suggestive of customer  satisfaction  as a
cause of morale, and (f)  preliminary evidence regarding what may drive
this  unexpected  finding.  We discuss  the  implications  of  each  of  these
findings  in turn.

Specific  factors  were  found  to  relate  to  specific  performance  indi-
cators  across  the  2  years  of  data;  however,  attitudes  in  combination
did  not  relate  to  the  performance  measures.  The  factors  with  consis-
tent, significant  relations were 'leamwork. Training, and to some  extent,
Job/Company  Satisfaction.  Al  a branch  level  of  analysis,  it seems  nat-
ural to hypothesize  that  teamwork will affect  group-level  performance;


874 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

this is the  focus  of  much  current  research  (e.g.,  Guzzo  &  Shea,  1992;
Stevens  &  Campion,  1994 ).  Further,  training interventions  are  often
undertaken to enhance productivity (e.g., Campbell, 1988; Cascio, 1989;
Russell, Terborg, & Powers, 1985).  Thus, findings that  shared  attitudes
in  these  areas  relate  to  branch  performance  are  expected.  Relations
between Job/Company  Satisfaction  and  performance  support  Ostroff s
(1992) findings with secondary schools.  We cannot compare  our  results
to  individual-level  correlations,  but  would  concur  with  Ostroff  (1993)
that it could be argued that organization-level correlations for  attitudes-
productivity occur because there is an unmeasured effect  (i.e., the coop-
eration/collaboration  effect).  If this was the case, one might expect  re-
lations for our  Work Group/Teamwork  factor  with branch  performance
measures, which we did indeed find.  Research should be conducted  that
explicitedly  measures  the  proposed  mediator  of  the  attitude  organiza-
tional performance  relation,  (i.e., cooperative behaviors).

Customer  satisfaction  was related  to attitudes.  In addition, the rela-
tion between External  Customer  Focus, as evaluated by employees, and
Customer  Satisfaction, would  be predicted by the work of  Schneider  et
al. (1993) who found  that the service climate of the organization related
to the perceptions of  service quality held by customers.

Relations  between  shared  attitudes  and  turnover  were  also  found.
Job/Company  Satisfaction,  Stress, and Training were specific factors  re-
lated to turnover.  These results are consistent  and similar to findings  at
the individual level; Carsten and Spector (1987), in a meta-analysis, esti-
mated  a correlation between job satisfaction and turnover of  —.26.  The
structural equation analysis relating morale to turnover was also consis-
tent with past research, though in the current  study actual turnover was
used  rather  than  intention  to quit,  thereby  reducing  much  of  the  vari-
ability  in  the  dependent  measure.  Turnover  in  this case  also  included
both voluntary and involuntary turnover.  Thus, the rather  small magni-
tudes of  the  relations found  here  (—.14 and  —.22) between shared  atti-
tudes and  turnover  are  likely to be underestimates of  the true  relation-
ship with voluntary turnover at the organizational level.  Finally, HoUen-
beck  and  Williams  (1986)  showed  that  turnover  functionality  (whether
^ od  or poor employees leave) was unrelated  to employee attitudes.  In
the  current  study,  turnover  was  not  related  to  the  majority  of  branch
performance  indicators,  so it would  be difficult  to classify  the  turnover
functionality  at the branch level as good or  poor.

Our  attempts  to  determine  the  causal  direction  of  relations  led  to
some  inconclusive  findings.  First,  we  were  unable  to  provide  much
causal evidence  for  linking  morale  and  productivity.  The  increases  in
most  of  the  performance  indicators  over  time,  together  with  shrinking
variability  across  time  (see  Table 2)  suggests  a reason  for  this  finding.


ANN MARIE RYAN ETAL. 

875

This organization's performance,  along with the rest of the US economy,
improved  between  1992 and  1993 when  these  data  were  collected  and
this is reflected  in the changes in the performance  indicators.  For exam-
ple, third quarter  profits of $463 million were experienced  by the  parent
company  of  this organization  in  1993, compared  to  a third  quarter  loss
of $272 million in  1992;  1993 was seen as the beginning of  an  economic
upswing  (Facts  on  File,  1994).  This  ups-wing essentially  restricted  the
ranges of  most of  the  performance  indicators.  Although  mean  attitude
scores  increased  over  the  same  time  period,  the  variability  in  attitudes
remained  much more constant.  We can only speculate  on why  attitudes
were more positive in the second year; however, the data presented  here
do not suggest  that the organization's better economic performance  is a
cause of improved attitudes.  The increases in productivity and  attitudes
may both be  due  to  the  same  third  variables,  namely  interventions  un-
dertaken to improve  an organization  facing difficulties,  such as changes
in management,  reengjneering  of processes, and other  programs.

A second surprising finding was that customer satisfaction  appeared
to have a causal influence  on morale, which is the opposite of the direc-
tionality  assumed  in the  literature.  Tentative  as this finding  may be, we
would like to discuss several possible explanations for  it.

First,  the  emphasis  on customer  satisfaction  as an  indicator  of  suc-
cess within this organization  may have  led  attitudes to be influenced  by
it.  The  CSI  level was watched  carefully  by unit  managers  and  success
or  failure  in this area was likely to translate  info management  practices
that would affect  attitudes.  Second, service industry jobs, where  contact
with customers is greater than contact with peers or supervisors, may be
ones where  attitudes  are  influenced  by forces  external  to the  organiza-
tion.  As mentioned  earlier,  some  theorists feel  that  the  situation  is the
primary  determinant  of  employee  satisfaction.  Where  customers are  a
primary  part of the situation, it seems plausible that they will be a situa-
tional  influence  on  the attitudes of  a unit.  Further  research  that  exam-
ines attitude-customer  satisfaction  causal links might explore the extent
to which the type of service interaction influences the nature of relations
found.  For example, customers in this setting interacted with employees
by mail or phone rather than in person.  TTiird, Ihis particular setting may
be  somewhat  unusual  in  that  customer  satisfaction  might  be  inversely
related  to the  amount  of  contact  with  the organization.  Those  without
personal financial  problems and/or problems with the processing of their
payments are likely to have considerably less interaction with  organiza-
tional  representatives  than  those  with  such  problems.  As  one  helpful
reviewer  noted,  the popular  press on customer  satisfaction  suggests the
opposite—that  greater interaction will result  in greater  satisfaction.


876 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

We  found  that  payment  delinquency  rates were indirectly linked  to
morale  through  customer  satisfaction.  That  is, an  indicator  that  might
serve  as a  proxy for  local economic  conditions  appeared  to  affect  cus-
tomer  satisfaction,  which in turn  appeared  to affect  morale.  However,
only one of several indicators of loss {e.g., over 60-day delinquency, re-
possession ratio)  showed any relation to morale. The post hoc examina-
tion in the current study is likely flawed by the missing variable  problem
(James,  1980), in so much as missing variables  (e.g., the effects  of eco-
nomic conditions on both employee and customer attitudes) account  for
the  relationships  singled  out  in the  very simple  model  we  tested.  In  a
similar context, Sutton and Rafaeli  (1988) provide an excellent example
of  a moderator  variable  operating  at  the  unit  level, rather  than  the  in-
dividual level.  Moderators  of  organizational-level  relations need  to  be
examined  further.

An explicit statement of caution regarding generalizations from  this
research  is warranted.  Findings  at  the  unit  level  at  one  organization
should not be interpreted  at the individual level, nor should  recommen-
dations be made about individual-level applications based on these  find-
ings.  For  example,  one  cannot  conclude  that  a  satisfied  customer  will
lead  to  a  happy  employee.  Customer  satisfaction  data  at  the  individ-
ual  level  (i.e.,  linked  to  specific  employees)  is very  difficult  to  collect.
Perhaps  such  data  would  support  the  popular  wisdom  currently  being
preached  (i.e., employee  attitudes cause customer  satisfaction)  (Tbmp-
kins, 1992; Weaver, 1994), but we do not feel there is enough support for
that inference  at this time.

Even  at  the  individual level, though,  a finding  of  reversed  causality
may  not  be  entirely  unexpected.  Relations  between  attitudes  and  ef-
fectiveness  might  occur  more  readily  in a  service  than  production  en-
vironment.  Services differ  from  manufacturing  environments in that in
the  service industry  the  point  of  sale is less standardized,  an  intangible
output  is produced,  quality  is evaluated  from  an  external  perspective,
the  customer  is involved  in the  production of  the  service,  there  is a si-
multaneous  production  and  consumption  of  the  output,  and  service  is
labor  intensive  (Bowen, Siehl, & Schneider,  1989; Schneider  & Bowen,
1992).  All these factors  might enhance the likelihood that employee  af-
fect would have greater influence on or be influenced  to a greater  extent
by the  environment.

Common  models  of  customer  satisfaction  examine  the  difference
between customer  expectations  and product  or  service  performance  as
the determinant  of  satisfaction  (e.g., Boiton & Drew, 1991; Churchill &
Suprenant,  1982; Parasuraman, Geisha, & Berry, 1985,1994; see Cronin
&  Taylor,  1994  and  Teas,  1994 for  dissenting views).  An  examination
of  how attitudes of employees affect  or are  affected  by these would  aid


ANN MARIE RYAN ETAL. 

877

our  understanding of  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  employee
attitudes and customer satisfaction  at the  individual level.

There  are  several  limitations to the  research  presented  that  should
be noted.  First, the data were all from one organization, which likely re-
stricted variance on many of  the  measures examined.  Second,  some of
those branches that closed during the course of the study may have been
among the  poorest  performers.  Third,  given the  large  number  of  rela-
tionships  examined,  results  should  be  interpreted  with  a  consideration
of  Type  I error  rates.  Fourth,  although  branch  size was controlled  for
in ail the  analyses, its effects  on both  attitudes  and  productivity  should
be  considered  in  any discussion  of  the  relation  between  the  two.  The
differences  between  branches  in size  are  likely  related  to other  differ-
ences not assessed  here.  Although each branch here, regardless of size,
was considered by the organization as an equivalent  unit, studies Unking
attitudes and organizational  performance  should consider how variabil-
ity in size  affects  what  entity can be considered  an appropriate  level of
analysis (i.e., a workgroup in a very large unit might be equivalent  to an
entire small unit in structure, task, etc.).

Conclusion

An examination of Table 4 might lead one to conclude that with such
small  effect  sizes,  pursuing  a  link  between  attitudes  and  productivity
in a given organization  is not worth  continued  examination.  However,
organizations  of  the  size  of  the  parent  company  here  would  view  such
effects  as quite large.  For example, (if causality could be  demonstrated)
the  ability  to  increase  market  share  or  reduce  credit  losses  by just  a
few percentage  points translates  into  a substantial  sum of  money.  For
example,  the  top  25% of  the  branches  for  most  of  the  attitude  factors
had  4% less  turnover  than  the  bottom  25%.  For  some  factors,  market
share  differences  of  15% were  observed  between  the  top  and  bottom
quartiles  in  terms  of  attitudes.  Further,  human  resource  researchers
may  use  such  bottom-line  data  to justify  expenditures  on  such  efforts
as attitude surveys and  interventions.

The theoretical underpinning for this study were not strong. The lit-
erature  suggests that there are "effects" on performance  at the group or
unit level that are influenced  by employee  attitudes.  Such effects  might
be  unit norms,  organizational  citizenship  behaviors  on the  part  of  unit
members,  and  perhaps  the  level of  contextual  [performance  evidenced.
Further  theoretical development  is needed  to understand why attitudes
relate to organizational  effectiveness  at the unit level prior  to acting on
findings of relations.


878 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Our understanding of how attitudes influence  and are influenced  by
important organizational outcomes is limited.  Research efforts,  directed
at  analysis  levels  other  than  the  individual,  are  sorely  needed.  Many
organizations  possess  archival  attitude  and  performance  data,  but  re-
searchers may be  reluctant  to pursue  endeavors in this area  because of
the many factors that make such data messy (e.g., a continually changing
organizational environment, a host of  unmeasured  and potentially rele-
vant  third  variables, lack of control  over what  data  is collected).  How-
ever, unless human resource  researchers  make  efforts  to  link  interven-
tions  to  the  data  and  outcomes  organizations  rely  upon,  our  ability  to
establish our value in a time of shrinking resources will be  lessened.

REFERENCES

Anderson  JC, Gerbing  DW. (t988).  Structural  equation  modeling  in  practice:  A  review

and  recommended  two-slep approach. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 411-423.

Ashworth  SD.  Higgs  C,  Schneider  B,  Shepherd  W, Girr  LS. {t995,  May).  The  linkage
between customer satisfaction and employee-based measures of a company's strategic
business intent.  Paper presented  at the "Einth Annual  Conference  of the Society  for
Industrial  and  OrganizatiomU  Psychology, Inc., Orlando.

Benller  PM. (1990).  Comparative  fu  indexes in structural  models. Psychological Bulletin,

107, 238-246.

Bentler  PM, Bonett  DG.  (1980).  Significance  tests and  goodness-of-fu  in  the  analysis of

covariance structures.  Psychological Bulletin, 88, 588-606.

Berry  LL,  Parasuraman  A,  Geisha  ZA.  (1994).  Improving  service  quality  in  America:

Lessons learned. Academy  of Management  Executive, 8, 32-44.

BoltonRN,Drew  JH. (1991).  A longitudinal  analysis of the  impactof  service changes on

customer  attitudes. Journal of Marketing, 56,  1-9.

Bowen  DE,  Siehi  C,  Schneider  B. (1989).  A  framework  for  analyzing  customer  service

orientations  in manufacturing.  Academy  of Management  Ret'iew,  14,1S-9S.

Browne  MW, Cudeck  R.  (1993).  Alternative  ways  of a.ssessing  model  fit.  In  Bollen  KA,
Long  JS (Eds.),  Testing structural expiation  models  (pp.  136-162).  Newbury  Park,
CA: Sage  Publications.

Bryk AS, Raudenbush  SW. (1992). Hierarchical linear models: Applications  and data anal-

ysis methods.  Newbury  Park:  Sage Publications.

Campbell  JP.  (1988).  Training  design  for  performance  improvement.  In  Campbell  JP,

Oimpbell  RJ  {^d^^.). Productivity in organizations.  San Francisco:  .lossey-Bass.

Campbell JP, Otmpbell  RJ. (1988).  What  industrial-organizational  psychology  has to say
about  productivity.  In  Campbell JP, Campbell  RJ  (Eds.), Productivity in organiza-
tions (pp.  82-94).  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.

Carsten JM, Spector PE. (1987). tjnemploymentjobsatisfaction,  and employee  turnover:
A  meta-analytic  test  of  the  Muchinsky  model.  Joumai  of Applied  Psychology, 72,
374-381.

Cascio WF. (1989).  Using utility analysis to assess training outcomes.  In Goldstein  I (Ed.),

Training and de\>elopment in work organizations.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.

Churchill GAJr,Surprenant  C. (1982). Aninvestigationinto the determinants of customer

satisfaction.  Journal of Marketing Research, 19, 491-504.


ANN MARIE RYAN ET AL. 

879

CroninJJ,"EiylorSA.(1994).  SERVPERFversusSERVOUAL:  Reconciling  performance-
based and perceptions-minus-expectations  measurement of service quality.  Journal
of Marketing, 58,  125-131.

Dansereau  F, Alutto JA, Yammarino FJ. (1984).  Theory testing in organizational behavior:

The varient approach.  Englewood  Cliffs, NJ; Prentice Hall.

Desatnick RL, Detzel  DH. {1993). Managing to keep the customer.  San Frandsco, Jossey-

Bass.

Facts on File  (1994). Facts on file yearbook  1993:  The indaced record of world events.  New

York:  Author.

George  JM.  (1990).  Personality,  affect,  and  behavior  in  groups.  Journal of Applied  Psy-

chology. 75, 107-116.

George JM, James LR. (1993). Personality, affect,  and behavior in groups revisited:  Com-
ment  on aggregation,  levels of  analysis, and a  recent  application  of within and be-
tween analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology,  18, 798-804.

Gutek  BA, Winter  SJ.  (1992).  Consistency  of job  satisfaction  across  situations:  Fact  or

framing  artifact?  Journal of Vocational Behavior,  41, 61-78.

Guzzo  RA  (1988).  Productivity  research:  Reviewing  psychological  and  economic  per-
spectives.  !n  Campbell  JP, Campbell  RJ  (Eds.), Productivity in organizations  (pp.
63-81).  San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.

Guzzo  RA,  Shea  GP  (1992).  Group  performance  and  intergroup  relations  in  organiza-
tions.  In  Dunnette  MD, Hough  LM  (Eds.), Handbook  of industrial and organiza-
tional psychology, (Vol. 3, 2mi ed.)  (pp. 269-313).  Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psy-
chologists  Press.

Hollenbeck  JR, Williams  CR.  (1986).  Tbrnover  functionality  versus  turnover  frequency:
A note on work attitudes  and organizational  effectiveness.  Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 71,  606-6n.

Iaffaidano  Ml,  Muchinsky  PM.  (1985).  Job  satisfaction  and job  performance:  A  meta-

analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 97,  251-273.

Isen  AM,  Baron  RA.  (1991).  Positive  affect  as  a  factor  in organizational  behavior.  Re-

search in Organizational Behavior,  13,  1-53.

Jackson  SR.  (1992).  'Kam  composition  in organizational  settings:  Issues  in managing  a
diverse workforce.  In  Worchel  S, Wood  W, Simpson J  (Eds.), Group process  and
productivity  (pp.  138-173).  Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Jackson  SE,  May  KE,  Whitney  K.  (1995).  Understanding  the  dynamics  of  diversity  of
diversity in decision-making teams.  In Guzzo RA, Salas E (Eds.), Team effectiveness
and  decision making  in organizations,  (pp. 204-261).  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
James LR. (1980).  The unmeasured variables problem in path analysis. Journal of Applied

Psychology,  65, 

il5^2l.

James  LR.  (1982).  Aggregation  bias  in  estimates  of  perceptual  agreement.  Journal  of

Applied Psychology.  67, 219-229.

James  LR,  Demaree  RG, Wolf  G. (1984).  Estimating within-group  interrater  reliabiliqr

with and without  response bias. Journal of Applied Psychology,  69, 85-98.

James LR, Demaree  RG, Wolf G. (1993).  r^g-.  An assessment of within-group  interrater

agreement.  Journal of Applied Psychology,  78, 306-310.

James  LR,  Joyce  WF,  Stocum  IW.  (1988).  Comment:  Organizations  do  not  cognize.

Academy  of Management  Review, 13, 129-132.

Johnson  JW  (1995, May).  Linking management  practices  and service  orientation  to cus-
tomer satisfaction.  Poster presented  at the Tfenth Annual Conference  of the  Socie^
for  Industrial and Organizational  Psychology, Inc., Orlando.

Johnson  R,  Slade A. (1992).  Validation of pulse  items/scales: Bribing  of survey core  team.

Unpublished  technical  report.  Dearborn,  MI: Ford Motor  Company.


880 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Joreskog  KG, Sorbom  D. (1993).  LISREL  8: Structural equation modeling  with the  SIM-

PUS  command  language. Chicago, IL: Scientific  Software  International, Inc.

Judge  TA, Hulin  CL.  (1993).  Job  satisfaction  as  a  reflection  of  disposition:  A  multiple
source causal analysis.  Organizational Behavior and Human  Decision Processes,  56
388-421.

Klein KJ, Dansereau  F, Hall RJ. (1994). Levels issues in theory development, data collec-

tion, and analysis. Academy  of Management Reww,  19, 195-229.

Kozlowski SWJ, Hattrup K. (1992).  A disagreement  about within-group agreement:  Dis-
entangling issues of consistency versus consensus. Joumai  of Applied Psychology 77
161-167.

Lundby  KM, Dobbins  GH, Kidder  PJ.  (1995, May).  Climate for  service and  productivity
in high and  low volume jobs:  Further evidence for  a redefinition of service.  Poster
presented  at the Ttnth Annual  Conference  of the  Society for  Industrial and  Orga-
nizational  Psychology, Inc., Orlando.

Organ DW, Ryan K. (1995). A meta-analytic review of attitudinal and dispositional predic-
tors of organizational citizenship behavior.  PERSONNELPSYCHOLOGY, 45, 775-802.
Ostroff  C. (1992). The  relationship between satisfaction,  attitudes, and performance:  An

organizational-level analysis. Joumai  of Applied Psychology,  77, 963-974.

Ostroff  C. (1993).  Comparing correlations based on individual-level and aggregated  data.

Joumai  of Applied Psychology,  78, 569-582.

Paradise-Tornow  CA. (1991),  Management  effectiveness,  service  quality,  and  organiza-

tional  performance  in banks. Human  Resource Planning, 14, 129-140.

Parasuraman A, Geisha VA, Berry  LL. (1985). A conceptual model of service quality and

its implications for future  research. Joumai  of Marketing, 49, 41-50.

Parasuraman  A,  Geisha  VA, Berry  LL. (1994).  Reassessment  of expectations  as a  com-
parison  standard  in  measuring  service  quality:  Implications  for  further  research.
Joumai  of Marketing, 58, 111-124.

Peterson  RA,  Wilson  WR.  (1992).  Measuring  customer  satisfaction:  Fact  and  artifact.

Joumai  of the Academy  of Marketing Science, 20, 61-71.

Petty  MM,  McGee  GW, Cavender  JW. (1984).  A  meta-analysis  of  the  relationships  be-
tween individual job satisfaction  and individual performance. Academy  of Manage-
ment Review, 9, 712-721.

Pritchard  RD. (1992).  Organizational  productivity.  In Dunnette MD, Hough  LM (Eds.),
Handbook  of industrial  and  organizational psychology (Vol  3., pp.  443-472)  Palo
Alto, California:  Consulting Psychologists Press.

Russell JS,lerborgJR, Powers ML. (1985). Organizational performance and organization-

al-levei training and  support,  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 5fi, 849-863.

Scandura TA, Williams L. (1995, May). Multiple levels in organizational research: Analysis
options and interpretation issues.  Panel Discussion presented  at Ttnth Annual  Con-
ference  of the Society for  Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Inc., Orlando.
Schmit MJ, Allsdieid  SP (1995).  Employee  attitudes  and  customer satisfaction:  Making

theoretical and empirical  connections,  PERSONNELPSYCHOLOCfY, 48, 521-536.

Schneider B. (1987). The people make  the place,  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, VO,  437-453.
Schneider  B. (1991).  Service quality and profits:  Can you have your cake and eat it, too?

Human  Resource Planning, 14, 151-157.

Schneider  B, Bowen  DE.  (1993).  The  service  organization:  Human  resources  manage-

ment is crucial.  Organizational Dynamics, 21, 39-52.

Schneider  B,  Chung  B, Yusko  KP  (1993).  Service  climate  for  service  quality.  Current

Directions in Psychological Science, 2, 197-200.

Schneider  B, Goldstein  HW, Smith  DB. (1995).  The ASA framework:  An  update, PER-

SONNEL PSYCHOLOGY.-/A', 

lAl-lli.


ANN MARIE RYAN ET AL. 

881

Schneider  B, Wheeler JK, Cox JF  (1992).  A passion for service:  Using content  analysis to

explicate service climate  themes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 705-716.

Stevens  MJ,  Campioti  MA.  (1994).  The  knowledge,  skill,  and  ability  requirements  for
teiimwork:  Implications for  human resource  management.  Journal of  Management,
20. 503-530.

Siitton  RI,  Rafaeli  A.  (t988).  Untangling  the  relationship  between  displayed  emotions
and  organizational sales: The case of convenience stores. Academy  of  Management
Journal, 31, 461-487.

TtasRK.  (1994),  Expectations as a aimparaon standard  in measuring service quality:  An

a.ssessment  of a reassessment.  Journal of Marketing, 58,  132-139.

Tompkins  NC.  (1992).  Employee  satisfaction  leads  to  customer  service.  HR  Magazine,

93-95.

Tornow  WW, Wiley  JW  (1991).  Service  quality  and  management  practices:  A  look  at
employee  altitudes, customer  satisfaction,  and  bottom-line consequences.  Human
Resource Planning, 14. 105-116.

Watson  D,  Slack  AK.  (1993).  Genera!  factors  of  affective  temperament  and  their  rela-
tion  to job  satisfaction  over  time.  Organizational Behavior  and  Human  Decision
Processes,  54.  181-202.

Weaver  JJ.  (1994).  Want  customer satisfaction?  Satisfy  your  employees  first.  HRMaga-

zine,  109-110.

Wiley  JW.  (1991).  Customer  satisfaction  and  employee  opinions:  A  supportive  work

environment  and its financial  cost. Human  Resource Planning, 14. 117-128.

Wiley JW. (1994, April). Employee and customer satisfaction linkages: From research results
to action plans.  Paper presented  at the Ninth Annual  Omference  of  the  Society  for
Industrail  and  Organizational  Psychology, Inc., Nashville.

Williams LJ.PodsakoffPM.  (1989).  Longitudinal field methods for studying reciprocal re-
lationships  in organizational  behavior  research:  'Ibward  improved  causal  analysis.
Research in Organizational Behavior,  11, 247-292.

APPENDIX

Sample  Survey Items^

Supervision-My supervisor  treats everyone  fairly.
Job/company satisfaction-l  look forward  to coming to work.
leamwork-My work group lives up lo the Company's Mission, Values,

and  Guiding Principles.

Quality Emphasis-1 have been  involved  in continuous  improvement

efforts.

External  Customer  Focus-I  understand  the  requirements of my
external  customers (people  outside the Company who use my
products or services).

Workload  and Stress-I  do not feel  excessive work-related  stress.
Empowerment-I  can make improvements at work without checking first

with my supervisor.

Training and  Development-I  have received  the training I need to do a


882 

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

quality job.
"-Response  scale 1-5, strongly agree tostrongly disagree


