娀 Academy of Management Journal
2005, Vol. 48, No. 6, 1033–1049.

BEING GOOD OR BEING KNOWN:

AN EMPIRICAL EXAMINATION OF THE DIMENSIONS,

ANTECEDENTS, AND CONSEQUENCES OF ORGANIZATIONAL

REPUTATION

VIOLINA P. RINDOVA
IAN O. WILLIAMSON

ANTOANETA P. PETKOVA

University of Maryland

JOY MARIE SEVER
Harris Interactive

We examined the extent to which organizations’ reputations encompass different
types of stakeholders’ perceptions, which may have differential effects on economic
outcomes. Specifically, we propose that reputation consists of two dimensions: (1)
stakeholders’ perceptions of an organization as able to produce quality goods and
(2) organizations’ prominence in the minds of stakeholders. We empirically exam-
ined the distinct antecedents and consequences of these two dimensions of repu-
tation in the context of U.S. business schools. Results suggest that prominence,
which derives from the choices of influential third parties vis-a` -vis an organization,
contributes significantly to the price premium associated with having a favorable
reputation.

The concept of reputation, defined as stake-
holders’ perceptions about an organization’s abil-
ity to create value relative to competitors, has
received considerable attention from organiza-
tional scholars (Deephouse, 2000; Elsbach &
Kramer, 1996; Fombrun & Shanley, 1990; Fom-
brun, 1996; Hall, 1992, 1993; Martins, 1998).
Reputation is viewed as a valuable intangible
asset that provides a firm with sustainable com-
petitive advantages (Barney, 1991; Hall, 1992)
because it
influences stakeholders’ economic
choices vis-a`-vis the organization (Benjamin &
Podolny, 1999; Dollinger, Golden, & Saxton,
1997; Deephouse, 2000) and contributes to differ-
ences in organizational performance. Indeed, nu-
merous studies have documented a positive rela-
tionship between a firm’s reputation and its
financial performance (Fombrun & Shanley,
1990; Podolny, 1993; Roberts & Dowling, 2002).

We would like to thank Associate Editor Marshall
Schminke and three anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful comments. This paper has also benefited from the
comments of Dax Basdeo, Daniel Cable, Anil Gupta,
Sophia Marinova, Luis Martins, Tim Pollock, Ken Smith,
Cynthia Stevens, Marvin Washington, and the partici-
pants in the Guest Speaker Series at the R. H. Smith
School of Business. Special thanks to Oliver Friedman
for help with the empirical analysis.

Whereas this research has demonstrated unam-
biguously that a favorable organizational reputa-
tion is associated with economic benefits, it of-
fers a less clear picture of what
reputation
actually is and how it is formed. A review of
extant research on organizational reputation in
management, economics, sociology, and market-
ing reveals that two schools of thought inform the
construct’s definition. Scholars studying reputa-
tion from an economics perspective tend to de-
fine it as the observers’ expectations or estima-
tions of a particular attribute of an organization
(Milgrom & Roberts, 1986; Weigelt & Camerer,
1988), especially the organization’s ability to pro-
duce quality products (Milgrom & Roberts, 1986;
Shapiro, 1983). According to this perspective,
reputation forms on the basis of past actions,
through which firms signal to stakeholders their
“true” attributes (Clark & Montgomery, 1998;
Weigelt & Camerer, 1988).

A different perspective is presented by scholars
who draw on institutional theory to understand
reputation (Rao, 1994). These scholars tend to char-
acterize it as a global impression, which represents
how a collective—a stakeholder group or multiple
stakeholder groups—perceive a firm (Fombrun,
1996; Hall, 1992; Rao, 1994). According to this
perspective, reputation forms as a result of infor-
mation exchanges and social influence among var-

1033


1034

Academy of Management Journal

December

ious actors interacting in an organizational field
(Rao, 1994; Rindova & Fombrun, 1999).1

The different ways in which scholars working
from economics or institutional perspectives view
reputation suggest that research on this topic can be
advanced by greater integration of the conceptual-
ization of the construct. In this article, we integrate
these two perspectives by proposing that they rep-
resent two distinct dimensions of reputation. The
economics perspective addresses how stakeholders
evaluate a particular organizational attribute; there-
fore, it emphasizes the perceived quality dimension
of organizational reputation. In contrast, the insti-
tutional perspective is concerned with the collec-
tive awareness and recognition that an organization
has accumulated in its organizational field; there-
fore, it emphasizes the prominence dimension of
organizational reputation. Conceptualizing organi-
zational reputation as consisting of two interrelated
but distinct dimensions advances reputation re-
search by providing greater conceptual clarity
about what reputation is, how it is built, and how it
influences organizational economic outcomes.

Drawing on work conducted from both the eco-
nomics and institutional perspectives, we develop
and test a model of the antecedents and conse-
quences of these two dimensions of organizational
reputation. We propose that perceived quality is
influenced by the signals that organizations send
when they make strategic choices about the re-
sources deployed in producing products and ser-
vices. Conversely, prominence is influenced by the
choices that influential third parties, such as insti-
tutional
intermediaries and high-status actors,
make vis-a`-vis organizations (Deephouse, 2000;
Pollock & Rindova, 2003; Rao, 1994; Stuart, 2000).
In addition, our study advances reputation re-
search by examining several alternative models
that specify different sets of relationships among
the antecedents and consequences of reputation.
The development and testing of such alternative
models is important because scholars have argued
that the creation of reputation is causally ambigu-
ous (Barney, 1991). By comparing the alternative
models to the hypothesized model, we provide
greater theoretical clarity about how reputation is
built.

We empirically investigated these relationships
in the context of U.S. business schools with full-

1 Organizational field is defined as a set of actors that,
in the aggregate, constitute a recognized domain of or-
ganizational life, such as suppliers, consumers, regula-
tory agencies, and other organizations that produce sim-
ilar services or products (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983).

time MBA programs. We focused on the effect of
business schools’ reputations on corporate recruit-
ers, who seek to reduce uncertainty about the qual-
ity of business school graduates as potential em-
ployees. Because the quality of MBA graduates is
difficult to evaluate a priori, business schools’ rep-
utations are likely to strongly influence recruiters’
demand for MBA graduates. Therefore, the context
of our study is particularly appropriate for examin-
ing the dimensions, antecedents, and consequences
of reputation.

THEORY AND HYPOTHESES

Perspectives on Organizational Reputation

Organizational scholars studying reputation rec-
ognize that reputation is valuable because it re-
duces the uncertainty stakeholders face in evaluat-
ing firms as potential suppliers of needed products
and services (Benjamin & Podolny, 1999; Weigelt &
Camerer, 1988). Scholars working from different
theoretical perspectives, however, differ in their
explanations of how reputation reduces stake-
holder uncertainty. Those studying reputation from
an economics perspective view uncertainty as a
function of the information asymmetries between
competing firms and their stakeholders. Firms re-
duce information asymmetries, and thus market
uncertainty, when they make choices that reveal
their “true” attributes. Such choices serve as sig-
nals that enable buyers to assess relevant firm at-
tributes, such as whether a firm is a producer of
high- or low-quality goods (Fombrun & Shanley,
1990; Shapiro, 1983). Therefore, from an econom-
ics perspective, reputation reduces stakeholders’
concerns about the quality of firms’ products, thus,
inducing them to pay price premiums for firms’
products, which in turn positively influences or-
ganizations’ economic outcomes (Shapiro, 1982,
1983).

Scholars that embrace an institutional perspec-
tive on reputation maintain that the uncertainty
about the “true” attributes of firms is reduced
through the exchange of information among diverse
actors in an organizational field. In an organization-
al field, they argue, certain actors, such as institu-
tional intermediaries and high-status actors, have
superior ability to access or disseminate informa-
tion by virtue of their institutional roles or struc-
tural positions (Rao, 1998; Rao, Greve, & Davis,
2001). Stakeholders closely watch the choices of
such actors because of their perceived superiority
in evaluating firms (Rao, 1998; Stuart, 2000). As a
result, the actions of these actors introduce system-
atic disparities in the availability of information


2005

Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever

1035

about different organizations, thereby making some
more salient and central in the public mind (Rao et
al., 2001; Zuckerman, 1999). For example, Pollock
and Rindova (2003) showed that the volume of
media coverage a firm receives is positively related
to the performance of its initial public offering
(IPO). Similarly, Zuckerman (1999) showed that
whether or not a particular analyst covers a firm
affects how investors value it. Overall, the informa-
tion conveyed through the choices of influential
third parties vis-a`-vis organizations decouples the
reputation-building process from the strategic sig-
nals of competing firms (Rao, 1994) and makes
some firms more prominent in their organizational
fields (Rindova & Fombrun, 1999; Stuart, Hoang, &
Hybels, 1999). The institutional perspective, there-
fore, suggests that the extent to which an organiza-
tion is widely recognized among stakeholders in its
organizational field, and the extent to which it
stands out relative to competitors, may be an im-
portant dimension of organizational reputation.

These two perspectives on organizational repu-
tation have shaped the definitions of the construct
in the fields of management, economics, sociology,
and marketing. Reviewing over 60 studies using the
construct of organizational reputation in these
fields, we observed that scholars tend to define
reputation either as specific assessments of a rele-
vant attribute (e.g. ability to produce quality), as the
economics perspective suggests, or as collective
knowledge about and recognition of a firm, as the
institutional perspective suggests. Table 1 summa-
rizes the definitions of reputation across these stud-
ies, highlighting which perspective on reputation
they espouse in column 3.

Comparing the similarities and differences in the
definitions of reputation in extant research, we pro-
pose that organizational reputation can be concep-
tualized as comprising two dimensions: (1) a per-
ceived quality dimension, which captures the
degree to which stakeholders evaluate an organiza-
tion positively on a specific attribute, such as abil-
ity to produce quality products, and (2) a promi-
nence dimension, which captures the degree to
which an organization receives large-scale collec-
tive recognition in its organizational field.

These two dimensions of reputation are likely to
have different antecedents. Organizations’ strategic
choices regarding the resources used to produce
goods and services are likely to influence percep-
tions of quality because organizational strategic
choices convey information about organizations’
underlying capabilities to produce quality products
(Barney, 1991; Moran & Ghoshal, 1999). In contrast,
the choices of influential third parties—such as
institutional intermediaries and high-status actors,

whose attention to or affiliation with organizations
may be seen as a form of endorsement—are likely to
influence prominence (Pollock & Rindova, 2003;
Rao, 1998; Stuart, 2000). Figure 1 depicts the rela-
tionships between (1) the resource signals emitted
by an organization and its perceived quality and (2)
certifications from institutional intermediaries and
affiliation with high-status actors, and prominence.
The model further suggests that perceived quality
impacts prominence and that each dimension of
reputation directly influences an organization’s
economic payoffs.

Antecedents of Perceived Quality

To evaluate the quality they can expect from a
provider of goods, stakeholders rely on signals that
reveal the unobservable attributes that affect the
ability of a firm to produce quality products (Sha-
piro, 1982, 1983). Although economists stress that
“uncertainty about quality is a widespread and im-
portant feature of markets for most firms’ goods and
services” (Shapiro, 1982: 20), products and services
differ in the amount of uncertainty about quality
they present buyers with. The more difficult it is for
customers to assess product quality prior to pur-
chase, the more they are likely to rely on strategic
signals to form expectations about quality. In par-
ticular, customers are likely to rely on signals of
quality when the products they are purchasing can
only be evaluated with use and over time, or re-
quire high levels of specialized expertise to evalu-
ate. Examples of such products and services in-
clude new production technologies, custom-built
information systems, and legal or management con-
sulting. When customers find product quality dif-
ficult to evaluate prior to purchase, they may use
the quality of inputs and/or the quality of the pro-
ductive assets a firm uses to convert inputs into
outputs to form expectations about the quality of
the final product.

The inputs an organization uses in its production
process can signal quality because they affect the
quality of products (Barney, 1991; Moran &
Ghoshal, 1999). To provide stakeholders with reli-
able signals of quality, the strategic choices of firms
must be costly and unavailable to all competitors
(Ippolito, 1990). The acquisition and use of high-
quality inputs is costly and not common to all
competitors (Barney, 1986; Ippolito, 1990; Shapiro,
1983) and therefore can provide stakeholders with
signals that influence perceived quality. Intel In-
side and Nutrasweet are examples of input brands
used by PC and soft-drink manufacturers, respec-
tively, to signal the quality of their own products.
Drawing on this logic, we hypothesize:


1036

Academy of Management Journal

December

TABLE 1

Definitions of Reputation

Research Area

Definition of Reputation

Type of Perceptions Equated

with Construct

Examples of Studies

Management
Economics/game-theory

perspective

Institutional

perspective

Marketing perspective

Economics

An attribute or a set of attributes

Assessments of a relevant

ascribed to a firm, inferred
from the firm’s past actions

attribute(s)

An observer’s impression of an

Assessments of a relevant

actor’s disposition to behave in
a certain manner

attribute(s)

Public’s cumulative judgments of

Collective knowledge and

recognition

Collective knowledge and

recognition

Collective knowledge and

recognition

firms over time; a global
perception

Stakeholders’ knowledge and
emotional reactions—affect,
esteem—toward a firm

Level of awareness that a firm
has been able to develop for
itself and for its brands; fame

Consumers’ expectations and

beliefs about a firm’s products
quality

A rival’s perceptions about the
likelihood an incumbent will
behave in certain way

Weigelt & Camerer (1988)
Hayward & Boeker (1998)
Stuart (2000)
Clark & Montgomery (1998)

Fombrun & Shanley (1990)
Roberts & Dowling (2002)

Hall (1992)
Fombrun (1996)
Deephouse (2000)
Hall (1992)
Shamsie (2003)

Assessments of a relevant

attribute(s)

Shapiro (1982, 1983)
Allen (1984)

Assessments of a relevant

attribute(s)

Kreps & Wilson (1982)
Milgrom & Roberts (1982)

Sociology

A prevailing collective agreement

Collective knowledge and

about an actor’s attributes or
achievement based on what
the relevant public “knows”
about the actor

recognition

A characteristic or an attribute

Assessments of a relevant

Marketing

ascribed to an actor on the
basis of its past actions

Estimation of the consistency

over time of an attribute of an
entity

attribute(s)

Lang & Lang (1988)
Camic (1992)

Raub & Weesie (1990)
Kollock (1994)

Assessments of a relevant

Herbig & Milewicz (1995)

attribute(s)

Consumers’ impressions of a

Collective knowledge and

Goldberg & Hartwick (1990)

company that is producing and
selling a given product or
brand

recognition

Perceptions and beliefs about a

Assessments of a relevant

firm based on previous
interactions

attribute(s)

Campbell (1999)
Prabhu & Stewart (2001)

Public esteem or high regard

Collective knowledge and

Weiss, Anderson, & MacInnis

recognition

(1999)

Hypothesis 1. The higher the quality of the
inputs that an organization uses in its produc-
tion or service delivery processes, the higher its
perceived product quality.

The quality of the productive assets of a firm, and
especially the quality of its knowledge assets, can
also be used as a signal of quality. For example,
Rindova and Kotha (2001: 1269) reported that Ex-
cite attempted to signal the quality of its Web site
content by introducing “personality-driven re-
views” offered by a team of journalists who were
nationally renowned experts in their areas. Simi-

larly, Audretsch and Stephan (1996) suggested that
top-notch scientists in biotechnology firms signal
the quality of the firms’ research capability to stake-
holders. These arguments suggest that the quality
of the productive assets an organization uses will
influence the perceived quality dimension of its
reputation. Therefore, we hypothesize:

Hypothesis 2. The higher the quality of the
productive assets that an organization uses in
its production or service delivery processes, the
higher its perceived product quality.


2005

Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever

1037

Antecedents and Consequences of Organizational Reputation

FIGURE 1

Antecedents of Prominence

Whereas the resource choices of organizations
convey information that stakeholders can use to
make inferences about their abilities to produce
quality, the choices and opinions of third parties
vis-a`-vis these organizations may influence their
prominence. This is because under conditions of
uncertainty individuals look to the opinions and
choices of others to make up their own minds (Rao,
Davis, & Ward, 2000; Rao et al., 2001). As a result,
the formation of public opinion tends to follow a
“social influence” logic, leading some organiza-
tions to gain disproportionate amounts of public
attention and support on the basis of rather general
and nonspecific impressions and beliefs (Kuran &
Sunstein, 1999). Such organizations become prom-
inent within their organizational field and may be
preferred as suppliers of goods, even in the absence
of stakeholders’ specific judgments about their abil-
ity to produce quality goods.

Two types of actors—institutional intermediaries
and high-status actors (Kuran & Sunstein, 1999;
Rao et al., 2001)—are likely to have a particularly
strong influence on an organization’s prominence.
Institutional intermediaries are entities that spe-
cialize in disseminating information about organi-
zations or in evaluating their outputs (Fombrun,
1996; Rao, 1998). By virtue of their specialization
in collecting and disseminating information, insti-

tutional intermediaries are likely to be viewed as
having superior access to information and/or ex-
pertise in evaluating organizations (Rao, 1998).
Further, the information and evaluations provided
by institutional intermediaries about an organiza-
tion tend to be distributed more broadly than the
opinions of the average stakeholder. As a result,
they are likely to have a high degree of influence on
which organizations become prominent
in the
minds of stakeholders. Both general and expert in-
termediaries may influence prominence. General
intermediaries (e.g., the media) are those that pro-
vide general information on a broad set of issues,
while expert intermediaries (e.g., Moody’s Investor
Services debt ratings) are those providing technical
evaluations and certifications that often require
specialized expertise (Fombrun, 1996).

The media are a type of general intermediary
whose impact on stakeholders’ perceptions derives
primarily from their ability to focus public atten-
tion on the issues and entities that they select to
report on (Deephouse, 2000; Pollock & Rindova,
2003). In recent years media organizations have
also begun to offer stakeholders direct evaluations
of organizations in the form of various rankings and
ratings. For example, Fortune’s list “America’s
Most Admired Corporations” has become a widely
monitored measure of organizational reputation
(Roberts & Dowling, 2002). Media rankings have


1038

Academy of Management Journal

December

also become an important factor in determining the
reputations of business schools (Gioia & Corley,
2002; Martins, 1998). Although the media often
seek to position their rankings as evaluations of
quality, empirical tests of such rankings show that
they tend to be rather noisy and inconsistent indi-
cators of quality (Dichev, 1999). This finding is not
surprising given that ratings and rankings collapse
the diverse and complex information necessary to
evaluate organizational quality into a single num-
ber. However, it is precisely this synoptic nature of
rankings that may cause them to have a strong
impact on an organization’s prominence. By offer-
ing ready-made evaluations of organizations’ rela-
tive standings, media rankings reduce stakehold-
ers’ need to evaluate the attributes and quality of an
organization directly (Rindova & Fombrun, 1999).
As a result, stakeholders can use media rankings as
an overall indicator of whether an organization is
among the top in its industry. Therefore, we hy-
pothesize:

Hypothesis 3. The higher an organization’s po-
sition in media rankings, the greater its prom-
inence in the minds of stakeholders.

Expert intermediaries are also likely to impact
the prominence of organizations. Although some
expert intermediaries do offer direct evaluations of
product quality (e.g., Consumer Reports), many
more are likely to impact the prominence of organ-
izations by certifying their level of achievement
relative to explicit or implicit standards of excel-
lence in a given field. Since expert intermediaries
subject organizations to rigorous scrutiny using the
specialized knowledge that is necessary to evaluate
the more complex aspects of organizational opera-
tions and outputs, few organizations receive such
certifications from expert intermediaries, and those
that do tend to stand out among their industry
competitors. For example, the Baldrige award and
ISO 9000 status certify a level of quality achieve-
ment in business as determined by third-party pan-
els of experts. In the field of science, publications
in premier scholarly journals certify the degree to
which scientists produce knowledge that is novel,
objective, and cumulative and therefore, satisfies
the institutional norms associated with modern
science (Clemens, Powell, McIlwaine, & Oka-
moto, 1995; Merton, 1972). Because of the rigor-
ous scrutiny to which expert intermediaries sub-
ject
scientific research, very few scientists
receive such certification. Receiving certification
of achievement from expert intermediaries in-
creases the visibility of the few organizations that
meet
intermediaries,
causing stakeholders to view these organizations

the standards of expert

as being among the top in their industry. There-
fore, we hypothesize:

Hypothesis 4. The greater the extent to which
expert intermediaries provide an organization
with certifications of achievement, the greater
its prominence in the minds of stakeholders.

Affiliation with high-status actors may also in-
crease organizational prominence. Affiliation with
high-status actors increases prominence because
such affiliation enables stakeholders to assume that
the high-status actors, who are believed to be well
informed, have evaluated the organization posi-
tively (Stuart, 2000). High-status actors themselves
tend to garner a disproportionate amount of atten-
tion within their organizational fields (Rao et al.,
2000). As a result, affiliation with them may gener-
ate positive spillover effects (Stuart et al., 1999),
such as “basking in reflected glory,” which refers
to the transfer of a positive evaluation from one
social object to another (Cialdini, Borden, Thorne,
Walker, Freeman, & Sloan, 1976). Thus, ties to
high-status actors are likely to enhance the promi-
nence of an organization, leading us to hypothesize:

Hypothesis 5. The greater the extent of an or-
ganization’s affiliation with high-status actors,
the greater its prominence in the minds of
stakeholders.

The Relationship between Perceived Quality and
Prominence

In the preceding sections we have argued that
perceived quality and prominence are two distinct
dimensions of organizational reputation that also
have different antecedents. These two dimensions,
however, are likely to be related because they re-
flect a common stakeholder concern with identify-
ing providers of high-quality goods. The promi-
nence dimension of reputation reflects the degree
to which opinions about an organization’s ability to
produce quality and create value are disseminated
among its stakeholders. Opinions about an organi-
zation disseminate throughout its organizational
field not only through the actions and choices of
intermediaries, but also through the purchasing be-
haviors and opinion statements of various stake-
holders themselves (Nayyar, 1990; Rogerson, 1983).
As a result, organizations that customers perceive
as having high quality are likely to be mentioned or
patronized more frequently, leading more custom-
ers to choose them in the future. The aggregate of
these choices makes such organizations more
widely recognized within their organizational field
(Kuran & Sunstein, 1999). Therefore, customer per-


2005

Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever

1039

ceptions of quality can contribute to an increase in
an organization’s prominence, leading us to hy-
pothesize:

Hypothesis 6. The higher the perceived prod-
uct quality of an organization, the greater its
prominence in the minds of stakeholders.

Reputation and Price Premium

Because reputation reduces stakeholder uncer-
tainty about the value of future exchanges, favor-
able reputation can induce buyers to pay a price
premium (Rao & Monroe, 1996; Shapiro, 1983). As
we argued earlier, both prominence and perceived
quality reduce buyers’ uncertainty, but they do so
through different mechanisms. Perceived quality is
likely to have a positive effect on the prices that
customers are willing to pay because it increases
their confidence in the quality of an organization’s
goods. Higher prices serve as an assurance that a
producer organization has no incentives to increase
its profits by reducing investments that lead to
quality products (Shapiro, 1983). According to Sha-
piro, the price premium that producers with repu-
tations for quality can charge can be viewed “either
as a return on reputation or as an incentive pay-
ment to induce quality maintenance” (1983: 661).
Thus, on the basis of extant theory, we predict that
perceived quality is associated with higher price
premiums.

Hypothesis 7. The higher the perceived prod-
uct quality of an organization, the higher the
price premiums associated with its products.

Prominence reduces

stakeholder uncertainty
through “social proof” (Rao et al., 2000, 2001), be-
cause it reflects the collective recognition of an
organization in its organizational field. When mak-
ing economic choices, stakeholders are likely to
favor prominent organizations because prominence
reflects the “majority vote,” which can provide
some assurance to both buyers and others evaluat-
ing the buyers’ choices (Kuran & Sunstein, 1999;
Rindova & Fombrun, 1999). For example, buyers
may be willing to pay premium prices for the prod-
ucts of prominent organizations because acquiring
such products can enhance their image with their
own customers (Podolny, 1994). In addition, prom-
inence may lead to a higher price premium by
simply increasing the number of people bidding for
the goods an organization produces. Therefore, we
hypothesize:

Hypothesis 8. The greater the prominence of
an organization, the higher the price premiums
associated with its products.

METHODS

Sample and Data Collection

The sample used for this study included 107 U.S.
business schools rated by 1,600 corporate recruiters
who completed an online survey about business
school reputations administered by Harris Interac-
tive in 2000. The sample was generated from the
344 schools accredited as of March 2000 by the
International Association for Management Educa-
tion. Small schools (those with fewer than 50 full-
time MBA graduates in their class of 2000) were
eliminated because such organizations have been
shown to have goals and resource constraints that
differ from those of larger organizations (Aldrich,
2000). This criterion produced an initial sample of
188 schools that were asked to provide names and
contact information for corporate recruiters that
had recruited from them. Recruiters were contacted
by e-mail and regular mail and invited to partici-
pate in the online survey. On the survey recruiters
were asked to rate up to three MBA programs and to
select schools that they had either recruited from,
had some interaction with, or had some degree of
familiarity with. Of the recruiters who completed
the survey, more than 80 percent had hired stu-
dents from and/or had contacts with the schools
they rated in the previous two years, suggesting
there had been sufficient opportunity for them to
develop perceptions about these schools (Clark &
Montgomery, 1998). Although business schools
provided the contact information and/or contacted
the recruiters directly, they had no control over
which schools a recruiter nominated. The nomina-
tion procedure produced recruiter ratings for 107
business schools, which constituted the final sam-
ple for this study.

Dependent Variables

Measures of reputation. One shortcoming of ex-
tant reputation research is that organizational rep-
utation is seldom measured directly. It is common
for researchers to infer the unobservable effects of
reputation by examining direct relationships be-
tween observable organizational attributes or third-
party actions and organizational performance out-
comes (e.g., Rao, 1994; Shamsie, 2003; Stuart,
2000). In order to understand how reputation cre-
ates value, however, one needs to examine the spe-
cific effects of the different aspects of stakeholder
perceptions that make up reputation. In this study,
we overcame limitations of previous research by
developing direct measures of the two dimensions
of organizational reputation.


1040

Academy of Management Journal

December

Prominence. Prominence was measured by the
number of recruiters that nominated a given school.
Recall that recruiters were invited to select three
schools they would like to rate. We reasoned that
since corporate recruiters are bounded by both cog-
nitive and time constraints (Fiske & Taylor, 1991),
they were likely to choose to rate those schools that
were most prominent in their minds. Regardless of
the individual reasons that led each recruiter to
select a particular school, across the 1,600 recruit-
ers who completed the survey, this nomination
procedure captured the relative prominence of
business schools among corporate recruiters as a
stakeholder group. The prominence measure de-
rived through this nomination procedure is the
only measure of reputation that we are aware of
that captures the collective-level properties of rep-
utation (Rao, 1994) and allows for the distinction
between prominence and quality evaluations as
two distinct dimensions.

Perceived quality. Perceived quality was mea-
sured, on a scale of 1 to 10, as the average of
recruiters’ ratings of a school on 13 attributes re-
lated to student quality (see Appendix A for a list of
the attributes). The Cronbach’s alpha for the mea-
sure of perceived quality was .98. Because the unit
of analysis for this study was the organization, the
perceived quality score for each school was calcu-
lated as the average of the individual scores of all
recruiters who rated that
school. Ninety-two
schools were ranked by more than one recruiter.
Across the schools with multiple raters (two or
more), the mean interrater agreement (rwg) for the
13 attribute items was .95, suggesting a high level of
similarity in recruiters’ perceptions of each
school’s quality.

Price premium. Price premium was measured by
the mean starting base salary, not including bo-
nuses or other benefits, received by each school’s
MBA graduates in 2000, as reported in U.S. News &
World Report (2001).2 This is an objective measure
of recruiters’ economic choices vis-a`-vis different
schools. This measure was adjusted for cost-of-liv-
ing differences among geographic regions by mul-
tiplying each school’s mean starting base salary by
the U.S. Department of Commerce Census Bureau’s
(2000) cost-of-living index score for that school’s
geographic region.

2 Prior research has considered U.S. News & World
Report a reliable source of data about U.S. business
schools, since the Association to Advance Collegiate
Schools of Business (AACSB) approves the data the
periodical reports (Trieschmann, Dennis, Northcraft, &
Niemi, 2000).

Independent Variables

Quality of inputs. In the educational process of
an MBA program, incoming students constitute the
major resource input (D’Aveni, 1996). Schools’ ap-
plication of different admission criteria leads to
differences in the quality of inputs for their educa-
tional processes (D’Aveni, 1996). One of the main
admission criteria is applicants’ scores on stan-
dardized scholastic aptitude tests, such as the
GMAT. Therefore, we measured quality of inputs
as the average GMAT scores of students entering
MBA programs in 1998 and 1999, as reported in
U.S. News & World Report.

Quality of productive assets. The main produc-
tive asset employed in the educational process of a
business school is its faculty (Trieschmann, Den-
nis, Northcraft, & Niemi, 2000). Faculty embody the
knowledge that is transferred to students in the
educational process (Feldman, 1987). Therefore,
the more knowledgeable faculty are, the greater
their value as a productive asset. Job experience has
been identified as an important source of knowl-
edge acquisition and development of the embedded
relationships and routines that enable individuals
to better perform job tasks such as teaching (Qui-
nones, Ford, & Teachout, 1995; Tierney & Farmer,
2002). Thus, although faculty quality has many dif-
ferent facets, it is logical to expect that academic
experience will be positively related to the ability
of faculty to convey the knowledge they have ac-
quired to students. Based on this logic, we mea-
sured the quality of productive assets as the average
number of years of academic experience possessed
by a business school’s faculty. To compute this
measure for each school, we generated a data set of
over 9,000 full-time faculty employed in the 107
business schools in our sample. The average level
of academic experience for each school was calcu-
lated as the average number of years prior to 2000
that had elapsed since the members of the full-time
faculty employed by a business school had re-
ceived their Ph.D. degrees.

Media rankings. A business school’s rank in
BusinessWeek’s 1998 rankings was used to measure
media rankings. We used the BusinessWeek rank-
ing because it is the oldest and best-established
ranking of U.S. business schools and has been used
by multiple prior studies (D’Aveni, 1996; Elsbach &
Kramer, 1996; Martins, 1998; Segev, Raveh, & Far-
joun, 1999). In addition, the BusinessWeek rank-
ings were more appropriate for our study then
those published in other media sources, such as
the Financial Times or U.S. News & World Report,
because the latter include observable organization-
al attributes and economic outcomes (such as


2005

Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever

1041

starting salary).3 We used the 1998 BusinessWeek
rankings because this was the most recent Business
Week listing at the time the recruiters completed
the survey. For the ranked schools, we used their
actual position (e.g., first, second, third), and we
assigned a constant to the unranked schools.

Expert intermediary certifications. Publications
in premier scholarly journals certify that a faculty’s
research satisfies the institutional norms of modern
science (Clemens et al., 1995; Merton, 1972). We
measured faculty publications in premier journals
as the sum of the total number of publications of
the faculty of a business school over the five years
(1996 –2000) prior to the survey. We captured fac-
ulty publications in two forms: (1) research publi-
cations in premier research journals and (2) publi-
cations in well-established practitioner journals
(see Appendix B for a full list of journals). The list
used by Financial Times and agreed upon by
AACSB member schools was used in selecting rel-
evant journals.4 We calculated the number of fac-
ulty publications in research and practitioner jour-
nals for each school by adding all the publications
authored by the faculty members at a particular
school.

Affiliation with high-status actors. Faculties’
doctorates from prestigious universities provide
the business schools that employ them with an
indirect affiliation with these universities. Obtain-
ing a degree from a prestigious academic institution
enables faculty to accumulate scholastic, social,
and symbolic capital and to gain access to profes-
sional opportunities not available to others (Keith &
Babchuk, 1998; Long, Bowers, Barnett, & White,
1998). The symbolic capital associated with degree
prestige can also transfer to the business school
employing the degree holder (Zuckerman, 1988).
To compute this measure for each school, we used
the Gourman Report (Gourman, 1997) to assign a
Ph.D. degree-prestige score to each professor em-
ployed by a given school and then creating a school
score by averaging the individual faculty scores.
This procedure produced a single continuous score
ranging from 0 to 5 for each school. The Gourman
Report has been well established as a measure of

3 In 2000 BusinessWeek introduced as a component of
their rankings a measure of “intellectual capital” based
on faculty publications (BusinessWeek, 2000: 89). How-
ever, this component was not a part of the criteria during
the time of our study.

4 Feedback from colleagues with expertise in human
resources led to our adding Personnel Psychology to the
original list of journals developed by Financial Times
and removing Human Resource Management and the
International Journal of Human Resource Development.

the prestige of academic institutions in past re-
search (Cable & Murray, 1999; Williamson & Cable,
2003), and it is considered the only numerical rat-
ing of the prestige of virtually every university in
the United States.

ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

Analysis

To simultaneously test the proposed relation-
ships in our model, we used measured variable
path analysis in LISREL 8.53 (Jo¨reskog & So¨rbom,
2001), which allows researchers to simultaneously
examine a series of dependence relationships, such
as those hypothesized in our model, while also
analyzing multiple dependent variables (Shook,
Ketchen, Hult, & Kacmar, 2004). LISREL provides
both an overall assessment of the fit of a hypothe-
sized path model to data and tests of individual
hypotheses. This statistical technique also allowed
us to compare the fit of alternative models to that of
the hypothesized model.

The hypothesized model, which is depicted in
Figure 1, consisted of five exogenous variables and
three endogenous variables. Each variable was
modeled as a single indicator and assumed to con-
tain no measurement error with the exception of
the perceived quality variable, which was mea-
sured using a Likert-type survey instrument, thus
allowing for the calculation of a reliability coeffi-
cient. Following the procedures recommended by
James, Mulaik, and Brett (1982), we controlled for
measurement error in perceived quality by setting
the variable’s error term equal to its variance mul-
tiplied by one minus its Cronbach alpha score (.98)
and setting the variable’s lambda matrix value
equal to the square root of its Cronbach alpha score.
Prior research suggested that faculty degree pres-
tige, publications in premier journals, media rank-
ings, and GMAT scores were likely to be intercor-
related (D’Aveni, 1996; Trieschmann et al., 2000).
Thus, these exogenous variables were allowed to
covary in the estimation of the model.

Results

The means, standard deviations, and correlations
among all variables are presented in Table 2. We
computed these correlations via a fully saturated
LISREL model. We assessed overall fit of the model
to the data using chi-square and the goodness-of-fit,
normed fit, comparative fit, and incremental fit in-
dexes (the GFI, NFI, CFI, and IFI). The chi-square
statistic is well known to be oversensitive to sam-
ple size; it will be significant in large samples (sug-


1042

Academy of Management Journal

December

Correlations and Descriptive Statisticsa

TABLE 2

Variable

Mean

s.d.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1. Price premium
2. Perceived quality
3. Prominence
4. GMAT scores
5. Faculty experience
6. Media rankings
7. Publications in premier journals
8. Faculty degree prestige

61,449.29
7.70
21.35
614.76
16.34
49.02
62.81
4.34

15,827.66
1.13
24.97
46.16
2.35
20.29
62.50
0.29

.22*
.60*
.50*
⫺.17
⫺.38*
.39*
.49*

.32*
.33*
⫺.07
⫺.21*
.17
.31*

.70*
⫺.17
⫺.79*
.71*
.68*

.20*
⫺.67*
.71*
.73*

.04
⫺.03
⫺.04

⫺.76*
⫺.66*

.69*

a n ⫽ 107.
* p ⬍ .05

gesting inadequate model fit) even when the differ-
ences between observed and model-implied
covariances are slight (Kline, 1998). Researchers
recommend evaluating model fit by using a rule of
thumb whereby the model chi-square value di-
vided by degrees of freedom is lower than 3 (Kline,
1998). Fit indexes at or above .90 further indicate
acceptable fit
(Medsker, Williams, & Holahan,
1994). Our results with all these tests supported the
conclusion that the hypothesized model had ade-
quate fit to the data (␹2[14, n ⫽ 107] ⫽ 30.36, p ⬍
.05; ␹2/df ⫽ 2.17; GFI ⫽ .93, NFI ⫽ .95, CFI ⫽ .98,
IFI ⫽ .98).

Figure 2 contains the maximum-likelihood pa-
rameter estimates for the main predictors, signifi-
cance levels, and proportions of explained variance

(R2s) for the hypothesized model.5 First, we discuss
the results for the hypothesized predictors of busi-
ness schools’ reputations. In terms of the effects of
resource signals on perceived quality, supporting
Hypothesis 1, student GMAT scores were statisti-
cally significant, positive predictors of perceived
quality (␥ ⫽ .33). Hypothesis 2 predicts that the
average years of academic experience of a business
school’s faculty has a positive relationship with
perceived quality. However,
faculty experience
was not significantly related to perceived quality.

5 The R2s presented in the model are equivalent to one
minus the disturbance for each endogenous variable and
reflect
the proportion of explained variance (Kline,
1998).

Path Coefficients for the Hypothesized Model

FIGURE 2


2005

Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever

1043

In terms of the effects of institutional intermediar-
ies on prominence, supporting Hypothesis 3, media
rankings significantly predicted prominence (␥ ⫽
⫺.51). Because we used the actual ranks in our data
set (e.g., first, second, third), the negative coeffi-
cient should be interpreted to mean that business
schools that had higher ranks were more prominent
than business schools that had lower ranks. As
predicted by Hypothesis 4, faculty publications in
premier journals were significant, positive predic-
tors of prominence (␥ ⫽ .17). Finally, as predicted
by Hypothesis 5, faculty degree prestige was signif-
icantly, positively related to prominence (␥ ⫽ .18).
Next, we present the results for the hypothesized
effects of perceived quality on prominence and of
the two reputation dimensions on price premium.
The path from perceived quality to prominence
was positive and significant (␤ ⫽ .13), supporting
Hypothesis 6. Perceived quality was not signifi-
cantly related to price premium; thus, Hypothesis 7
was not supported. Last, as predicted by Hypothe-
sis 8, prominence had a significant, positive rela-
tionship with price premium (␤ ⫽ .59).

Given that the goal of our study was to examine
the system of relationships between the anteced-
ents, dimensions, and consequences of business
schools’ reputations, it is informative to examine
the total (direct plus indirect) effects of the hypoth-
esized predictors on perceived quality, promi-
nence, and price premium. Prominence had the
largest significant effect on price premium (.59).
Media rankings had the largest significant effect on
prominence (⫺.51), as well as a significant total
effect on price premium (⫺.30). Publications in
premier journals had a significant total effect on
prominence (.17), but no significant total effect on
price premium. Faculty degree prestige had a sta-
tistically significant
total effect on prominence
(.18) and a statistically significant total effect on
price premium (.11). Perceived quality did not have
a significant total effect on price premium, al-
though it did have a significant direct effect on
prominence. These findings suggest that in terms of
MBA salaries, business schools may benefit more
from overall stakeholder recognition than from re-
cruiters’ direct perceptions of student quality; one
should keep in mind, however, that perceived qual-
ity and recognition are positively related. Neither
of the resource signals we examined (GMAT or
faculty experience) had significant total effects on
price premium; however, GMAT scores had a sig-
nificant effect on perceived quality (.33), suggesting
that the quality of the students schools admit influ-
ences recruiters’ perceptions of quality.

Alternative Model Evaluation

Both Medsker and colleagues (1994) and Hayduk
(1987) recommended evaluating a hypothesized
model relative to plausible alternative models. In
the present study, four alternative models appeared
to present logical alternatives to the hypothesized
system of relationships. First, we predicted that
organizational resource signals would influence
perceived quality and that third-party certifications
and affiliation with high-status actors would influ-
ence prominence. However, it is conceivable that
organizational signals and third-party factors influ-
ence both perceived quality and prominence (Ben-
jamin & Podolny, 1999). We tested this alternative
model 1 by adding links from GMAT and faculty
experience to prominence and adding links from
media rankings, faculty publications, and faculty
degree prestige to perceived quality. Second, in the
hypothesized model, organizational and third-
party effects are predicted to influence price pre-
mium only indirectly, through their effects on the
two dimensions of reputation. However, reputation
may only partially mediate these relationships, in
that a firm’s resource signals and institutional fac-
tors may influence price premium directly. We
tested this alternative model 2 by adding direct
links from all five exogenous variables to price
premium.

Third, in the hypothesized model, we predict
that perceived quality influences prominence.
However, the sociological view of reputation sug-
gests that it is also possible that high-status actors
and institutional intermediaries set the tone of the
evaluations that other stakeholders make (Rindova
& Fombrun, 1999). Once these collective processes
are set in motion, more prominent organizations
may be perceived as having higher quality (Kuran &
Sunstein, 1999). We tested this alternative model 3
by reversing the link between perceived quality
and prominence so that prominence predicted per-
ceived quality.

Fourth, one can argue that access to high-quality
resources and influential third parties, such as the
media and the premier journals, is influenced by
the prestige of the university with which a business
school is affiliated (Keith & Babchuk, 1998). There-
fore, the prestige of a business school’s university
may affect both organizational and third-party
choices and indirectly influence the reputation and
price premiums
enjoys
(D’Aveni, 1996). To test this alternative model 4,
we added university prestige (as measured by the
university-level Gourman score) as a variable di-
rectly influencing business school MBA student
GMAT scores, faculty academic experience, media

the business

school


1044

Academy of Management Journal

December

rankings, publications in premier journals, and fac-
ulty degree prestige. All other aspects of the hy-
pothesized model remained unchanged.

We used the criteria suggested by James et al.
(1982) to compare alternative models 1 and 2 to the
hypothesized model because they are nested mod-
els. In this procedure, a significant reduction in
chi-square suggests an improvement in the fit to the
data. For alternative model 1, the decrease in chi-
square from the hypothesized model to alternative
model 1 was not significant (⌬␹2[5] ⫽ 10.91, p ⬎
.05). Thus, alternative model 1 is less parsimonious
because it adds more parameters to be estimated
and does not fit the data significantly better. Chi-
square difference tests contrasting the second alter-
native model and the hypothesized model also re-
vealed an insignificant decrease (⌬␹2[5] ⫽ 10.93,
p ⬎ .05), suggesting that the fit of alternative model
2 to the data was not better than the fit of the
hypothesized model.

Alternative models 3 and 4 were not nested in
our hypothesized model. Thus, following Kline’s
(1998) recommendations,
to determine whether
these alternative models fitted the data better than
the hypothesized model, we compared the Akaike
information criterion (AIC) scores of each alterna-
tive model to the AIC score of the hypothesized
model. Kline (1998) suggested that given two non-
nested models, the one with the lower AIC score
represents the better fit. The AIC scores for alterna-
tive models 3 and 4 (78.83 and 260.76, respec-
tively) were both higher than the AIC of the hypoth-
esized model (75.69). Thus, we concluded that the
hypothesized model was superior to the alternative
models we examined.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this article, we examine two questions that are
seldom addressed by reputation researchers but are
at the heart of the reputation construct: What fac-
tors shape stakeholder perceptions of organiza-
tions, and how do different aspects of stakeholder
perceptions influence the economic payoffs to or-
ganizations? We have addressed these questions by
proposing that organizational reputations consist of
two dimensions—perceived quality and promi-
nence—and by examining their distinct anteced-
ents and consequences.

Our study makes several important contributions
to reputation research. By positing that organiza-
tional reputation can be viewed as a two-dimen-
sional construct, we integrate previously disparate
branches of research rooted in the economics and
institutional perspectives and contribute to reputa-
tion research and management practice a model

that identifies the antecedents of these two distinct
dimensions. Our model also significantly advances
current understanding of the relationship between
organizational reputation and economic payoffs,
which has been the most central concern of repu-
tation research. Because past research has seldom
measured reputation itself, and has instead studied
the direct relationships between the observable
characteristics of firms and price premiums (e.g.,
Rao, 1994; Shamsie, 2003; Stuart, 2000), it cannot
reveal whether observable organizational and insti-
tutional factors affect price premium directly, or do
so through reputation, or both (e.g., Podolny & Stu-
art, 1995; Stuart, 2000). By measuring reputation
directly and by distinguishing between its two di-
mensions, in this study we were able to assess the
contributions
that each dimension—perceived
quality, and prominence—makes to the economic
payoffs an organization reaps. In the context of our
study, although perceived quality had no signifi-
cant relationship with price premium, prominence
had the largest total effect on price premium. These
results suggest that, viewed as an asset stock, the
extent to which an organization is widely recog-
nized in its organizational field strongly influences
the economic value of its reputation. Our results
also provide empirical support for the theoretical
argument that the prominence dimension of repu-
tation depends on support and endorsement by
influential third parties, such as institutional inter-
mediaries and high-status actors. We have ex-
tended previous research by showing the mecha-
nism through which the media shape the economic
outcomes of firms. More specifically, we found that
the media indirectly affect price premium by en-
hancing organizational prominence. In addition,
we expand current understanding of the role of
expert intermediaries in markets by showing that
certifications of a business school faculty’s aca-
demic merit, reflected in their publications in pre-
mier scholarly journals, have a significant effect on
a business school’s prominence. These findings
suggest that receiving recognition from experts in
an organizational field may be an important con-
tributor to organizational prominence. In addition,
our finding that the prestige of faculty’s academic
degrees had both a significant direct effect on
prominence and a significant total effect on price
premium suggests that hiring individuals with high
levels of symbolic capital, including but not lim-
ited to educational degree prestige, may enable an
organization to increase both its prominence and
economic payoffs.

In our study,

inputs (student
GMAT scores) predicted perceived quality, but the
quality of productive assets (faculty average aca-

the quality of


2005

Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever

1045

demic experience) did not do so. This difference in
effects may occur because different types of re-
sources may have different signaling value to cus-
tomers, with the quality of inputs having greater
signaling value because in the production process
inputs transfer their entire value to the final prod-
uct, while productive assets do not. The difference
may also be due to the fact that the quality of
productive assets, especially knowledge assets, is
complex and hard to observe, therefore reducing
their value as a signal that stakeholders can readily
use to form expectations about quality. Future re-
search should examine more specifically how the
attributes of organizational resources affect their
value as signals of quality.

Overall, our findings provide compelling evi-
dence that perceived quality and prominence are
predicted by different information signals. This ob-
servation suggests the need for future research to
examine in greater detail the cognitive processes
that underlie the two dimensions of organizational
reputation. It is conceivable that judgments of qual-
ity are based on specific, relatively detailed obser-
vations of signals about
firm attributes, while
prominence is based on general impressions about
an organization that develop largely through social
influence (Rao et al., 2000). Our results also pro-
vide evidence that positive evaluations of quality
increase prominence and, therefore, may serve as
inputs in the collective processes through which
prominence develops. Therefore, future research
should pursue a finer-grained examination of the
different processes of impression formation among
stakeholders and how they shape the two dimen-
sions of organizational reputation.

Several limitations of our study also provide ex-
cellent opportunities for future research. First, this
study focused on a single type of reputation: an
organization’s reputation with its customers. Since
organizations may have multiple reputations with
different stakeholder groups (Dollinger et al., 1997),
future research should examine how the two di-
mensions of reputation we propose affect the eco-
nomic payoffs associated with different types of
reputation, such as reputation with employees or
reputation with suppliers. Further, the question of
the extent to which an organization’s reputation
indeed varies along the two dimensions over stake-
holder groups is of significant theoretical and prac-
tical interest. It is possible that prominence is rel-
atively consistent across different stakeholder
groups, whereas perceived quality varies with the
varying performance expectations of different
stakeholders. Making progress in addressing this
question may help reputation research resolve one
of its long-standing debates about whether a firm

has one reputation or many (D’Aveni, 1996; Fom-
brun, 1996).

Second, future research should examine the ex-
tent to which the economic consequences of the
two dimensions depend on the institutional con-
text that surrounds an industry. The organizational
field of business schools, which provided the em-
pirical context for the test of our model, may have
particularly strong institutional forces, since pre-
mier scholarly journals are strongly institutional-
ized forms for certifying scholarly contribution
(Zuckerman, 1988) and media rankings of business
schools have a high degree of legitimacy with var-
ious stakeholders. In such a context, the effects of
prominence on economic payoffs may be stronger
than in contexts where institutional intermediaries
are less well established or credible. Further, it will
be important to examine the extent to which our
findings hold in other settings, where rankings are
common and pervasive, but product quality is not
so difficult for stakeholders to evaluate. In doing so,
researchers will be better able to understand the
extent to which certification by institutional inter-
mediaries and affiliations with high-status actors
substitute for direct evaluations of quality by en-
abling stakeholders to rely on ready-made interpre-
tations. Progress in that direction has significant
implications for understanding how firms should
invest in building their reputations and the extent
to which they benefit from investing in quality
versus investing in media hype and prestigious af-
filiations.

Third, our study focused on business schools
with full-time MBA programs with more than 50
students. The choice of this cut-off was based on
arguments in organizational research stating that
small and large organizations represent different
organizational forms that differ in the problems
they deal with and the resource constraints they
face (Aldrich, 2000). In markets with numerous
competitors, some small and midsize firms may
remain unnoticed by large groups of stakeholders
because their lack of prominence places them out-
side the “consideration set” (Nedungadi, 1990)
from which stakeholders ultimately chose to buy.
Thus, future research can extend this study by ex-
amining the extent to which our model applies to
small and midsize firms and how such firms can
actually bolster their reputations.

Finally, the uniqueness of our data set limits the
study’s ability to address how the relationships
among the antecedents, dimensions, and conse-
quences of reputation evolve over time. Since our
study was based on the first large-scale survey of
corporate recruiters with regard to their percep-
Journal,
tions of business schools (Wall Street


1046

Academy of Management Journal

December

2001), we could not examine how the reputations
of business schools with this group changed over
time. However, in future research scholars can en-
deavor to compare the impacts of organizational
and institutional factors on the sustainability of the
two dimensions of reputation and, in turn, the two
dimensions’ impacts on economic outcomes.

REFERENCES

Aldrich, H. 2000. Organizations evolving. London:

Sage.

Allen, F. 1984. Reputation and product quality. Rand

Journal of Economics, 15: 311–327.

Audretsch, D. B., & Stephan, P. E. 1996. Company-scien-
links: The case of biotechnology.

tist
American Economic Review, 86: 641– 652.

locational

Barney, J. B. 1986. Strategic factor markets: Expectations,
luck, and business strategy. Management Science,
32: 1231–1241.

Barney, J. B. 1991. Firm resources and sustained compet-
itive advantage. Journal of Management, 17: 99 –
120.

Benjamin, B. A., & Podolny, J. M. 1999. Status, quality,
and social order in the California wine industry.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44: 563–589.

BusinessWeek. 1998. The best B-schools. October 19:

86 –94.

BusinessWeek. 2000. The best B-schools. October 2: 75–

100.

Cable, D. M., & Murray, B. 1999. Universalism and the
norms of career mobility in science. Academy of
Management Journal, 42: 439 – 449.

Camic, C. 1992. Reputation and predecessor selection:
Parsons and the institutionalists. American Socio-
logical Review, 57: 421– 445.

Campbell, M. C. 1999. Perceptions of price unfairness:
Antecedents and consequences. Journal of Market-
ing Research, 36: 187–199.

Cialdini, R. B., Borden, R. J., Thorne, A., Walker, M. R.,
Freeman, S., & Sloan, L. R. 1976. Basking in reflected
glory: Three (football) field studies. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 34: 366 –375.

Clark, B. H., & Montgomery, D. B. 1998. Deterrence, rep-
utations, and competitive cognition. Management
Science, 44: 62– 82.

Clemens, E. S., Powell, W. W., McIlwaine, K., & Oka-
moto, D. 1995. Careers in print: Books, journals, and
scholarly reputations. American Journal of Sociol-
ogy, 101: 433– 494.

D’Aveni, R. 1996. A multiple-constituency, status-based
approach to interorganizational mobility of faculty
and input-output competition among top business
schools. Organization Science, 7: 166 –189.

DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. 1983. The iron cage
revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective
rationality in organizational fields. American Socio-
logical Review, 48, 147–160.

Deephouse, D. 2000. Media reputation as a strategic re-
source: An integration of mass communication and
resource-based theories. Journal of Management,
26: 1091–1112.

Dichev, I. D. 1999. How good are business school rank-

ings? Journal of Business, 72: 201–213.

Dollinger, M. J., Golden, P. A., & Saxton, T. 1997. The
effect of reputation on the decision to joint venture.
Strategic Management Journal, 18: 127–140.

Elsbach, K. D., & Kramer, R. M. 1996. Members’ re-
sponses to organizational identity threats: Encoun-
tering and countering the BusinessWeek rankings.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 41: 442– 476.

Feldman, K. A. 1987. Research productivity and schol-
arly accomplishment of college teachers as related to
their instructional effectiveness: A review and ex-
ploration. Research in Higher Education, 26: 227–
298.

Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. 1991. Social cognition. New

York: McGraw-Hill.

Fombrun, C. J. 1996. Reputation: Realizing value from
the corporate image. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.

Fombrun, C. J., & Shanley, M. 1990. What’s in a name?
Reputation building and corporate strategy. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 33: 233–258.

Gioia, D., & Corley, K. G. 2002. Being good versus looking
good: Business school rankings and the Circean
transformation from substance to image. Academy
of Management Learning and Education, 1: 107–
120.

Goldberg, M. E., & Hartwick, J. 1990. The effects of ad-
vertiser reputation and extremity of advertising
claim on advertising effectiveness. Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 17: 172–179.

Gourman, J. 1997. The Gourman Report: Graduate pro-

grams. New York: Princeton Review Publishing.

Hall, R. 1992. The strategic analysis of intangible re-
sources. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 153–
144.

Hall, R. 1993. A framework linking intangible resources
and capabilities to sustainable competitive advan-
tage. Strategic Management Journal, 14: 607– 618.
Hayduk, L. A. 1987. Structural equation modeling with
LISREL: Essentials and advances. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins.

Hayward, M. L. A., & Boeker, W. 1998. Power and con-
flicts of interests in professional firms: Evidence
from investment banking. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 43: 1–22.

Herbig, P., & Milewicz, J. 1995. The relationship of rep-


2005

Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever

1047

utation and credibility to brand success. Journal of
Consumer Marketing, 12(4): 5–10.

competitive advantage for diversified service firms.
Strategic Management Journal, 11: 513–519.

Ippolito, P. M. 1990. Bonding and nonbonding signals of

product quality. Journal of Business, 63: 41– 60.

James, L. R., Mulaik, S. A., & Brett, J. M. 1982. Causal
analysis: Assumptions, models, and data. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage.

Jo¨reskog, K. G., & So¨rbom, D. 2001. LISREL 8 user’s

reference guide. Chicago: Scientific Software.

Keith, B., & Babchuk, N. 1998. The quest for institutional
recognition: A longitudinal analysis of scholarly pro-
ductivity and academic prestige among sociology
departments. Social Forces, 76: 1495–1533.

Kline, P. B. 1998. Principles and practices of structural

equation modeling. New York: Guilford.

Kollock, P. 1994. The emergence of exchange structure:
An experimental study of uncertainty, commitment,
and trust. American Journal of Sociology, 100: 313–
345.

Kreps, D., & Wilson, R. 1982. Reputation and imperfect
information. Journal of Economic Theory, 27: 253–
279.

Kuran, T., & Sunstein, C. 1999. Availability cascades and
risk regulation. Stanford Law Review, 51: 683–768.
Lang, G. E., & Lang, K. 1988. Recognition and renown:
The survival of artistic reputation. American Jour-
nal of Sociology, 94: 79 –109.

Long, R. G., Bowers, W. P., Barnett, T., & White, M. C.
1998. Research productivity of graduates in manage-
ment: Effects of academic origin and academic affil-
iation. Academy of Management Journal, 41: 704 –
714.

Martins, L. 1998. The very visible hand of reputational
rankings in US business schools. Corporate Repu-
tation Review, 1: 293–298.

Medsker, G. J., Williams, L. J., & Holahan, P. J. 1994. A
review of current practices for evaluating causal
models in organizational behavior and human re-
source management research. Journal of Manage-
ment, 20: 439 – 464.

Merton, R. K. 1972. Insiders and outsiders: A chapter in
the sociology of knowledge. American Journal of
Sociology, 78: 9 – 47.

Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. 1982. Predation, reputation,
and entry deterrence. Journal of Economic Theory,
27: 280 –312.

Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. 1986. Price and advertising
signals of product quality. Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 94: 796 – 821.

Moran, P., & Ghoshal, S. 1999. Markets, firms, and the
process of economic development. Academy of
Management Review, 24: 390 – 412.

Nayyar, P. R. 1990. Information asymmetries: A source of

Nedungadi, P. 1990. Recall and consumer consideration
sets: Influencing choice without altering brand eval-
uations. Journal of Consumer Research, 17: 263–
276.

Podolny, J. M. 1993. A status-based model of market
competition. American Journal of Sociology, 98:
829 – 872.

Podolny, J. M. 1994. Market uncertainty and the social
character of economic exchange. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 39: 458 – 483.

Podolny, J. M., & Stuart, T. 1995. A role-based ecology of
technological change. American Journal of Sociol-
ogy, 100: 1224 –1260.

Pollock, T., & Rindova, V. 2003. Media legitimation ef-
fects in the market for initial public offerings. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 46: 631– 642.

Prabhu, J., & Stewart, D. W. 2001. Signaling strategies in
competitive interaction: Building reputations and
hiding the truth. Journal of Marketing Research,
38: 62–72.

Quinones, M. A, Ford, J. K, & Teachout, M. S. 1995. The
relationship between work experience and job per-
formance: A conceptual and meta-analytic review.
Personnel Psychology, 48: 887–910.

Rao, A. R., & Monroe, K. B. 1996. Causes and conse-
quences of price premiums. Journal of Business, 69:
511–535.

Rao, H. 1994. The social construction of reputation: Cer-
tification contests, legitimation, and the survival of
organizations in the American automobile industry:
1895–1912. Strategic Management Journal, 15: 29 –
44.

Rao, H. 1998. Caveat emptor: The construction of non-
profit consumer watchdog organizations. American
Journal of Sociology, 103: 912–961.

Rao, H., Davis, G. F., & Ward, A. 2000. Embeddedness,
social identity and mobility: Why firms leave the
NASDAQ and join the New York Stock Exchange.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 45: 268 –295.

Rao, H., Greve, H. & Davis, G. 2001. Fool’s gold: Social
proof in the initiation and abandonment of coverage
by Wall Street analysts. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 46: 502–526.

Raub, W., & Weesie, J. 1990. Reputation and efficiency in
social interactions: An example of network effects.
American Journal of Sociology, 96: 626 – 654.

Rindova, V. P., & Fombrun, C. J. 1999. Constructing com-
petitive advantage: The role of firm-constituent in-
teractions. Strategic Management Journal, 20: 691–
710.

Rindova, V. P., & Kotha, S. 2001. Continuous “mor-
phing”: Competing through dynamic capabilities,


1048

Academy of Management Journal

December

form, and function. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 44: 1263–1280.

Roberts, P. W., & Dowling, G. R. 2002. Corporate reputa-
tion and sustained superior financial performance.
Strategic Management Journal, 23: 1077–1093.

Rogerson, W. P. 1983. Reputation and product quality.

Bell Journal of Economics, 14: 508 –516.

Segev, E., Raveh, A., & Farjoun, M. 1999. Conceptual
maps of the leading MBA programs in the United
States: Core courses, concentration areas, and the
ranking of the school. Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 20: 549 –565.

Shamsie, J. 2003. The context of dominance: An indus-
try-driven framework for exploiting reputation.
Strategic Management Journal, 24: 199 –215.

Shapiro, C. 1982. Consumer information, product quality
and seller reputation. Bell Journal of Economics, 13:
20 –35.

Shapiro, C. 1983. Premiums for high quality products as
returns to reputations. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 98: 659 – 680.

Shook, C. L., Ketchen, D. J., Hult, G. T. M., & Kacmar,
K. M. 2004. An assessment of the use of structural
equation modeling in strategic management re-
search. Strategic Management Journal, 25: 397–
404.

Stuart, T. 2000. Interorganizational alliances and the per-
formance of firms: A study of growth and innovation
rates in a high-technology industry. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 21: 791– 811.

Stuart, T. E., Hoang, H., & Hybels, R. C. 1999. Interorgan-
izational endorsements and the performance of en-
trepreneurial ventures. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 44: 315–349.

Tierney, P., & Farmer, S. M. 2002. Creative self-efficacy:
Its potential antecedents and relationship to creative
performance. Academy of Management Journal,
45: 1137–1148.

Trieschmann, J. S., Dennis, A. R., Northcraft, G. B., Ni-
emi, A. W. 2000. Serving multiple constituencies in
business schools: M.B.A. program versus research
performance. Academy of Management Journal,
43: 1130 –1141.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2000. County and city data book:
2000 (a statistical abstract supplement) (13th ed.).
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.

U.S. News & World Report. 2001. America’s best grad-
uate schools. Washington, DC: U.S. News & World
Report.

Wall Street Journal. 2001. The top business schools.

April 30: R4 –R5.

Weigelt, K., & Camerer, C. 1988. Reputation and corpo-
rate strategy: A review of recent theory and applica-
tions. Strategic Management Journal, 9: 443– 454.
Weiss, A. M., Anderson, E., & MacInnis, D. J. 1999. Rep-

utation management as a motivation for sales struc-
ture decisions. Journal of Marketing, 63(4): 74 – 89.
Williamson, I. O., & Cable, D. M. 2003. Predicting early
career research productivity: The case of manage-
ment faculty. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
24: 25– 44.

Zuckerman, E. W. 1999. The categorical imperative: Se-
curities analysts and the illegitimacy discount.
American Journal of Sociology, 104: 1398 –1438.

Zuckerman, H. 1988. The sociology of science. In N. J.
Smelser (Ed.), Handbook of sociology: 511–574.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

APPENDIX A

Attributes Used in the Measure of Perceived Quality

Recruiters rated business schools on the following at-
tributes of their graduates on a scale ranging from 1,
“poor performance, does not meet your needs,” to 10,
“excellent performance, meets your needs very well.”

1. Communication and interpersonal skills
2. Original and visionary thinking
3. Leadership potential
4. Ability to work well within a team
5. Analytical and problem-solving skills
6. Strong international perspective
7. Strategic thinking
8. Ability to drive results
9. Specific functional expertise
10. Adaptability, including the ability to deal with

ambiguity

11. Fit with the corporate culture
12. Entrepreneurial skills
13. General management point of view

APPENDIX B

Journals Used in the Measure of

Faculty Publications, by Area

Accounting

Journal of Accounting and Economics
Journal of Accounting Research
Accounting Review

Economics

Econometrica
Journal of Political Economy
American Economic Review

Entrepreneurship

Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
Journal of Business Venturing
Journal of Small Business Management


Rindova, Williamson, Petkova, and Sever

1049

2005

Finance

Journal of Finance
Journal of Financial Economics
Review of Financial Studies

Management

Academy of Management Journal
Academy of Management Review
Administrative Science Quarterly
Management Science
Strategic Management Journal

Organizational Behavior and Human Resources

Journal of Applied Psychology
Organizational Behavior

and Human Decision

Processes

Personnel Psychology

International Business

Journal of International Business Studies
Management International Review

Marketing

Journal of Consumer Research
Journal of Marketing
Journal of Marketing Research

Operations and Information Systems

Information Systems Research
Journal of Operations Management
MIS Quarterly
Operations Research

Insurance and Real Estate

Journal of Risk and Insurance
Real Estate Economics

Practice

Academy of Management Executive
California Management Review
Harvard Business Review
Long Range Planning
Sloan Management Review

Violina P. Rindova (vrindova@rhsmith.umd.edu) is an
associate professor in strategy at the R. H. Smith School
of Business at the University of Maryland, College Park.
She received her Ph.D. in management from the Leonard
N. Stern School of Business at New York University. Her
current research focuses on the social construction of
markets and the sociocognitive dynamics of the creation
of intangible assets, competitive advantage, and value.

Ian O. Williamson (iwilliam@rhsmith.umd.edu) (Ph.D.,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill) is an assistant
professor of management at the Robert H. Smith School
of Business, University of Maryland, College Park. His
research primarly focuses on understanding how sociol-
ogy, information technology, and marketing theories can
be used to complement traditional human resource man-
agement perspectives on the recruitment and selection of
human resources. He is also a past president of the Man-
agement Faculty of Color Association (MFCA).

Antoaneta P. Petkova (apetkova@rhsmith.umd.edu) is a
doctoral candidate in the Management and Organization
Department at the Robert H. Smith School of Business,
University of Maryland, College Park. Her research fo-
cuses on the role of intangible assets and processes
through which they can be accumulated by firms.

Joy Marie Sever (jsever@harrisinteractive.com) is a se-
nior vice president at Harris Interactive and founder of
the company’s Reputation Practice. She received her
Ph.D. in social psychology from the University of To-
ronto. She is responsible for designing and managing
customized corporate reputation programs using the
Reputation Quotient SM assessment (which she code-
signed with Charles Fombrun, executive director of the
Reputation Institute.


