 
 
New Product Quality and Product Development Teams
Author(s): Rajesh Sethi
Source: Journal of Marketing, Vol. 64, No. 2 (Apr., 2000), pp. 1-14
Published by: American Marketing Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3203439
Accessed: 02-08-2017 21:41 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Journal of Marketing

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Rajesh Sethi

 New Product Quality and Product

 Development Teams

 New product quality has been found to have a major influence on the market success and profitability of a new
 product. Firms are increasingly using cross-functional teams for product development in hopes of improving prod-
 uct quality, yet researchers know little about how such teams affect quality. The author proposes and tests a series
 of hypotheses regarding how new product quality is affected by team characteristics (functional diversity and infor-
 mation integration) and contextual influences (time pressure, product innovativeness from the firm's perspective,
 customers' influence on the product development process, and quality orientation in the firm). The findings reveal
 that quality is positively related to information integration in the team, customers' influence on the product devel-
 opment process, and quality orientation in the firm. New product quality is negatively influenced by the innovative-
 ness of the new product from the firm's perspective. However, information integration mitigates the negative effect
 of innovativeness on quality. Quality orientation weakens the relationship between information integration and qual-
 ity. Time pressure and functional diversity do not have any effect on product quality.

 n important determinant of a new product's market
 success and profitability is its quality, that is, the
 superiority of the product in dimensions such as
 appearance, performance, workmanship, and life/durability
 (Aaker and Jacobson 1994; Buzzell and Gale 1987; Clark
 and Fujimoto 1991; Garvin 1988; Jacobson and Aaker 1987;
 Phillips, Chang, and Buzzell 1983). The crucial role of prod-
 uct quality in influencing a firm's competitiveness in the
 marketplace has come to be widely recognized in the United
 States in the last two decades, particularly after better-qual-
 ity Japanese products started capturing a major share of the
 market in one industry after another (Bounds et al. 1994;
 Clark and Fujimoto 1991; Garvin 1988). In hopes of
 enhancing the quality of their products, several U.S. firms
 have started embracing total quality management principles,
 which are believed to have helped Japanese companies
 improve quality (Bounds et al. 1994; Clark and Fujimoto
 1991).

 A key message of the total quality approach is that an ef-
 fective way of enhancing new product quality is to use
 cross-functional product development teams (Garvin 1988;
 Hackman and Wageman 1995). Consequently, an increasing
 number of firms are entrusting the product development task
 to teams composed of individuals from a variety of func-
 tional areas, such as marketing, research and development
 (R&D), manufacturing, and purchasing. Although the
 virtues of cross-functional product development teams have
 been widely extolled, few would argue that the mere forma-
 tion of such teams is sufficient to enhance new product qual-
 ity meaningfully (Bounds et al. 1994; Wheelwright and
 Clark 1992). However, despite the critical role of quality in
 influencing the success of a new product and the growing

 Rajesh Sethi is Assistant Professor of Marketing, School of Business,
 Clarkson University. The author thanks Larry Compeau, Anju Sethi,
 Steven Silverman, and the two anonymous JM reviewers for their insight-
 ful and helpful comments.

 popularity of cross-functional product development teams,
 there has been little research on how these teams affect new
 product quality (Menon, Jaworski, and Kohli 1997).

 Although much has been written about quality in the last
 two decades, most of it is either descriptive or prescriptive
 in nature and relies heavily on anecdotes rather than on ap-
 propriate research designs (Hackman and Wageman 1995).
 There exists some recent firm-level research on the determi-
 nants of product quality (Clark and Fujimoto 1991; Menon,
 Jaworski, and Kohli 1997; Morgan and Piercy 1998; Song,
 Souder, and Dyer 1997). However, these studies have main-
 ly concentrated on the effects of macro- or firm-level vari-
 ables (such as structural and cultural factors) rather than on
 the influence of micro- or team-level factors on new product
 quality. Also, firm-level research has usually focused on ag-
 gregate outcomes (e.g., the quality of a firm's products in
 general) instead of on how the quality of a new product is
 affected by the team. The knowledge generated by these
 firm-level studies, though certainly useful, may not be ef-
 fective in explaining variations in team-level outcomes.

 Similarly, there exists some research on product devel-
 opment teams, and it has provided valuable insights on the
 effects of teams on outcomes such as market performance of
 the new product, cycle time, and efficiency in developing in-
 novations (Ancona and Caldwell 1992; Barczak and Wile-
 mon 1992; Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995; Thamhain 1990).
 However, such insights may not directly apply to how teams
 influence a different outcome, such as new product quality.
 As is discussed subsequently, team-related factors that help
 one type of product outcome may not necessarily facilitate
 other outcomes and may even harm them. Therefore, this
 study explores how various aspects of cross-functional
 teams enhance or diminish new product quality.

 Literature in the areas of quality management, group

 psychology, and innovation can help in the development of
 a framework for studying the effect of cross-functional
 teams on new product quality. On the basis of this literature,
 it can be suggested that the emergence of a quality outcome

 Journal of Marketing
 Vol. 64 (April 2000), 1-14

 New Product Quality / 1

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 can be affected by two sets of factors-the characteristics of
 the team and contextual influences on the team. According-
 ly, I consider variables related to these two sets of factors.
 Regarding team characteristics, I focus on a critical team
 process (integration of information of various functional ar-
 eas) and on the "physical" composition of the team (func-
 tional diversity). Regarding contextual influences on the
 team, I study the effects of time pressure, the innovativeness
 of the product, customers' influence on the product devel-
 opment process, and quality orientation in the firm.

 Studying the extent to which these team-related fac-

 tors affect new product quality makes several contribu-
 tions to both marketing practice and theory. From a prac-
 tical standpoint, I focus on understanding factors that
 affect an important underlying explanation for new prod-
 uct success and profitability (i.e., new product quality).
 Even though this study is somewhat exploratory in nature,
 because I consider variables that can be influenced by
 managers, the findings of the study should provide useful
 recommendations for enhancing new product quality and,
 in turn, improving success and profitability. There are rea-
 sons to expect that some of these variables, which man-
 agers usually consider while forming product develop-
 ment teams, may have adverse effects on quality.
 Therefore, it is particularly useful to see if popular team-
 formation heuristics enhance or undermine new product
 quality.

 In terms of theory, an important contribution of this
 study is its extension of the existing research on quality,
 which so far has focused primarily on organizational-level
 antecedents, to the team level. Unlike the existing firm-lev-
 el research on quality that basically draws on concepts from
 sociology or organization theory, a team-level study must
 rely more on group research. Here, I develop such a team-
 level framework. Relatedly, another major contribution of
 this study is its examination of how some apparently con-
 flicting demands that are placed on product development
 teams affect a critical outcome such as new product quali-
 ty. For example, in search of innovative outcomes, product
 development teams might venture into new areas that are
 unrelated to their existing operations, which may lead to
 compromises in the quality of the new product. By focus-
 ing on the effects of such seemingly conflicting demands,
 this study helps clarify possible trade-offs associated with
 various expectations that managers have about the new
 product.

 New Product Quality

 Quality has been defined as perceived superiority or excel-
 lence in a product as compared with competing alternatives
 from the perspective of the marketplace (Garvin 1988; Zei-
 thaml 1988). However, because this a general definition, it
 is important to understand along what specific dimensions
 the superiority of a product should be evaluated. Garvin
 (1988) and Juran and Gryna (1989) have suggested several
 dimensions of product quality. Four of these dimensions can
 be useful in developing a definition of product quality that
 is applicable to both durable and nondurable consumer
 products. These dimensions are aesthetics, performance,

 2 I Journal of Marketing, April 2000

 life, and workmanship.l Aesthetics is the extent to which the
 new product is attractive in appearance. Performance refers
 to how well the product performs its intended function. Life
 is the duration for which the product remains usable before
 it needs to be disposed of. Finally, workmanship refers to
 how well manufactured the product appears to be. In addi-
 tion, there is a need to consider one more dimension of qual-
 ity-that is, safety-which is often overlooked in discus-
 sions on quality. An unsafe product cannot be considered a
 quality product. As such, I define new product quality as the
 extent to which a new product is superior to competing
 products in aesthetics, performance, life, workmanship, and
 safety.

 Theory and Hypotheses

 Because of the nature of the problem being examined in this
 study, the conceptual base for the hypotheses is drawn from
 three streams of literature: quality management, group psy-
 chology, and innovation. This literature suggests that the
 emergence of a quality outcome can be affected by two sets
 of factors-the characteristics of the team and contextual
 influences on the team (See Figure 1).

 Team Characteristics and New Product Quality
 The two important team characteristics I consider are (1)
 team process and (2) physical composition. Regarding the
 former, I focus on integration of information across func-
 tional areas. Information integration refers to the degree to
 which members of the team share, pay attention to, and
 challenge one another's information and perspectives to
 generate new insights about the product. This conceptual-
 ization of information integration in a team can be viewed as
 a special case of the general concept of integration, which
 essentially captures joint working (i.e., interaction and col-
 laboration) between functional areas at the firm level (Grif-
 fin and Hauser 1996; Gupta, Raj, and Wilemon 1986; Kahn
 1996; Ruekert and Walker 1987). I focus on information
 integration in particular because the specific processes that
 are considered conducive to the emergence of high quality
 are more akin to information integration than mere joint
 working between functional areas (Clark and Fujimoto
 1991; Garvin 1988; Hauser and Clausing 1988).

 Regarding physical composition, the variable I focus on
 is functional diversity within the team. In the quality litera-
 ture, for the emergence of a superior or high-quality out-
 come, it is considered crucial to involve several functional
 areas, which can bring diverse input to the decision-making
 process (Bounds et al. 1994; Clark and Fujimoto 1991;
 Garvin 1988).

 Effect of information integration. Because members in a
 team with high information integration share information
 more effectively, carefully attend to one another's perspec-

 IThe actual dimension suggested by Garvin (1988) is confor-
 mance, which refers to whether the product meets specifications
 during its manufacturing. However, conformance can be evaluated
 mainly on the production line. From the standpoint of perceived
 quality, it is more appropriate to replace conformance with per-
 ceived workmanship.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Team-Level Factors Affecting New Product Quality

 FIGURE 1

 Contextual Influences

 Customers'
 influence

 Quality

 orientation

 Product

 innovativeness+

 Time pressure

 Team Factors -- T- I + , +

 Information Product Quality

 integration +

 Functional
 diversity

 tives, and freely question and challenge these perspectives
 and their underlying assumptions, they are more likely to
 achieve a common understanding among themselves and
 consistency across various decisions made by the team. De-
 veloping a common understanding about the product and
 achieving consistency among decisions made throughout
 the product development process are considered critical for
 the development of a quality product (Clark and Fujimoto
 1991; Garvin 1988; Menon, Jaworski, and Kohli 1997). Be-
 cause individuals from various functional areas often have
 different ideas about the product (Dougherty 1992; Garvin
 1988), without effective information integration, these indi-
 viduals generally pull the project in different directions and
 thereby adversely affect the quality of the new product.

 Relatedly, effective information integration is expected

 to help in bringing functional knowledge and expertise
 together while important project-related decisions are being
 made. When diverse knowledge is brought together, it can
 help the team discover superior ways to satisfy customer
 needs; for example, R&D can get design ideas from market-
 ing for enhancing product performance and from manufac-
 turing for making the product more reliable (Clark and Fuji-
 moto 1991; Menon, Jaworski, and Kohli 1997). Better satis-
 faction of customer needs related to aesthetics, performance,
 life, workmanship, and safety is the essence of high quality.
 More important, a good-quality product synergistically
 builds on a firm's accumulated experience with the existing
 product technology and manufacturing process (Clark and

 Fujimoto 1991). It generally takes a great deal of time and
 resources to stabilize a product design and achieve a balance
 between the product technology and the manufacturing
 process. Such a balance helps reduce variation in produc-
 tion. If the new product causes a major disturbance in the
 existing balance, it can have an adverse effect on the quali-
 ty of the product, at least until the balance is restored (Clark
 and Fujimoto 1991). To be able to maintain this balance and
 synergistically build on the firm's existing technology and
 processes, individuals in the team must effectively integrate
 the information and perspectives of various functional areas.
 Therefore,

 HI: The level of information integration in a cross-functional

 product development team is positively related to new
 product quality.

 Effect of functional diversity. Cross-functional diversity
 refers to the number of functional areas represented on the
 team whose members are fully involved in the project. As
 the number of functional areas represented on the team
 increases, it is expected to ensure the availability of crucial
 functional input during the process of making important
 product-related decisions. Availability of various functional
 input helps in creating consistency among various decisions,
 generating ideas for satisfying customer needs in a superior
 manner, and building synergistically on the firm's existing
 technology and manufacturing process, which in turn facili-
 tates the development of a high-quality product. Beyond a

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 New Product Quality / 3


 certain point, however, a diversity of ideas and perspectives
 can create problems such as increased decision complexity
 and confusion. To handle such problems, it is not uncom-
 mon to find teams resorting to simplifying heuristics, ignor-
 ing several alternatives, or avoiding in-depth processing of
 alternatives (Keller and Staelin 1987; Weick 1995). Inade-
 quate information processing during new product develop-
 ment can have an adverse effect on the quality of the new
 product (Clark and Fujimoto 1991; Hauser and Clausing
 1988; Imai 1986).

 In summary, as functional diversity increases from a low
 to a moderate level, the quality of the new product is expected
 to increase. However, as functional diversity goes beyond the
 moderate level, the quality is likely to decline. Therefore,

 H2: New product quality will be highest when functional di-

 versity in a cross-functional team is moderate.

 Contextual Influences and New Product Quality
 Although the team characteristics discussed previously may
 be able to influence new product quality positively, by them-
 selves they may not be sufficient to maximize the benefits of
 teams. The ability of a team to produce a high-quality out-
 come can be helped or harmed by contextual influences on
 the team (Bounds et al. 1994). Therefore, in addition to
 focusing on the effect of these team factors, it is necessary
 to understand how various contextual influences affect new
 product quality. The four contextual influences I consider in
 this study are (1) time pressure, (2) product innovativeness
 from the perspective of the firm, (3) customers' influence,
 and (4) quality orientation in the firm.

 Effect of time pressure. A minimum level of time pres-
 sure is considered useful in spurring individuals to strive for
 a superior outcome (Karau and Kelly 1992). Beyond a cer-
 tain point, however, individuals are less likely to search for
 additional information and are expected to do restricted pro-
 cessing of available information, because time pressure cre-
 ates a need for cognitive closure (Karau and Kelly 1992).
 Therefore, high time pressure can make it difficult for team
 members to develop a common understanding about the
 product and build synergistically on the firm's existing
 technology and manufacturing processes. In addition, be-
 cause of time pressure, team members may be forced to con-
 sider a narrow range of decision alternatives and may not be
 able to think deeply about the various ways to build superi-
 ority into the product (Karau and Kelly 1992). As such, the
 team's ability to develop a quality product may be adverse-
 ly affected by high time pressure.

 The previous discussion suggests a nonlinear relation-

 ship between time pressure and product quality. However,
 interviews at the outset of this study indicated that new
 product development teams with low levels of time pressure
 are rare (senior managers increasingly demand shorter cycle
 times). Therefore, it is expected that time pressure will be
 beyond the range of positive effects such that,

 outcome. This negative effect of innovativeness can be
 explained from both an operational point of view and an
 organizational learning perspective. First, operationally, a
 very innovative product can require major changes in the
 existing technology and manufacturing process and thereby
 disturb the balance among the product, technology, and
 manufacturing systems (Clark and Fujimoto 1991). As
 noted previously, such a balance helps the firm improve
 quality by bringing the variation in production under con-
 trol. Because team members who work on a novel product
 are likely to be overwhelmed with a large diversity of unfa-
 miliar issues, they may not have the necessary frame of
 mind and the time to work in a focused manner on the
 process of continuous improvement and to attain a fine bal-
 ance between the new technology and the manufacturing
 process (Imai 1986). Consequently, high product innova-
 tiveness can lead to a higher variation in production or lower
 product quality.

 Second, the negative relationship between innovative-

 ness and product quality can also exist because different
 types of learning competencies are needed for the develop-
 ment of a very innovative product compared with a high-
 quality product. For example, highly innovative products
 require higher-order, or generative, learning (Argyris and
 Schon 1978; Slater and Narver 1995), also referred to as
 exploration (Kyriakopoulos and Moorman 1998; March
 1991). The higher-order learning takes place when individ-
 uals or firms question the basic assumptions or frameworks
 within which they have been operating and acquire a differ-
 ent way of looking at the world. This type of learning is
 more akin to reorientation in the deep structure or durable
 underlying order in beliefs, thoughts, and processes (Ger-
 sick 1991). In contrast, incremental efforts that are involved
 in continuous improvement of the quality of existing prod-
 ucts and processes are consistent with lower-order or adap-
 tive learning (Slater and Narver 1995), also referred to as
 exploitation of old certainties (Kyriakopoulos and Moorman
 1998; March 1991). Lower-order learning occurs when indi-
 viduals or firms operate within a set of recognized and
 unrecognized constraints and incrementally learn to
 improve their performance according to changing circum-
 stances (Argyris and Schon 1978; Slater and Narver 1995)
 without making any changes in the deep structure (Gersick
 1991).

 Not only do these two types of learning require different
 frames of mind, but there is also generally a great deal of in-
 ertia that hinders individuals or firms from moving from one
 state to another (Argyris and Schon 1978; Gersick 1991).
 Therefore, it is difficult for individuals who are more fo-
 cused on the generative learning mode to carry out (or
 quickly switch to) adaptive learning simultaneously, and
 vice versa. In other words, individuals who are driven to de-
 velop highly innovative products might not be able to stick
 to the regimen required for incremental or continuous im-
 provements in quality. Therefore,

 H3: Beyond a moderate level, time pressure has a negative ef-

 fect on new product quality.

 H4: The innovativeness of a new product is negatively related

 to product quality.

 Effect of product innovativeness. If a new product is

 Effect of customers' influence on the product develop-

 novel for a firm, it can hinder the emergence of a quality

 ment process. As used in this study, customers' influence

 4 1 Journal of Marketing, April 2000

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 refers to the extent to which input from customers is used for
 making important decisions during the initial stages of prod-
 uct development, during which the foundation for product
 quality is usually laid. For the development of a superior
 product, it is important to expose members of the product
 development team to customer needs and the consumption
 context (Bounds et al. 1994; Clark and Fujimoto 1991;
 Hauser and Clausing 1988). Moreover, it is useful to seek
 customer feedback about the team's ideas and plans (e.g.,
 the product concept). This feedback serves as a reality check
 and ensures that the superiority the team has incorporated
 into the product is considered meaningful by customers.

 However, certain experts doubt whether information

 from customers can be of much help, because customers can
 define their requirements mainly in terms of existing prod-
 ucts and services that may be low in quality (Deming 1993;
 Hayes and Abernathy 1980). Accordingly, these experts
 believe that firms that rely heavily on what customers say
 they require may risk achieving quality standards far below
 what their engineers and managers are capable of attaining
 (Hackman and Wageman 1995). Certainly, such a situation
 can arise if firms passively accept and develop just what
 customers say they want in the new product. However, firms
 deal with customer involvement in the product development
 process in several different ways. For example, in some sit-
 uations, firms might proactively apply their own knowledge
 and expertise about the product and usage situation to help
 customers discover and articulate their requirements, partic-
 ularly when customers seem unable to identify meaningful
 requirements on their own. Sometimes firms ask their lead
 or expert customers to suggest modifications that can
 enhance the quality of the product (von Hipple 1988). The
 insights so obtained (or the new product concept and the
 design that emerge from these insights) are then evaluated
 for quality by a wide variety of customers. In other words,
 even if customers are unable to provide meaningful insights
 on their own, firms have several ways of obtaining useful
 input and feedback for improving new product quality. As
 such,

 H5: The extent of customers' influence on the product develop-
 ment process is positively related to new product quality.

 Effect of quality orientation. I define quality orientation
 as the extent to which a firm lays emphasis on quality, cre-
 ates a commitment to quality among its employees, and
 practices total quality management. A strong quality orien-
 tation in the firm should generally spur the members of a
 product development team to strive for higher quality out-
 comes (Bounds et al. 1994; Garvin 1988). Conversely, with-
 out a commitment to quality on the part of various func-
 tional areas in the firm, a team may not be able to develop a
 quality product. The resources and facilities of functional
 areas that lack a commitment to quality are also expected to
 be relatively low in quality. Because to a large extent teams
 are dependent on these functional resources and facilities to
 accomplish their tasks, a lack of quality culture among these
 functional areas may hinder teams' ability to translate their
 ideas for improving quality into high-quality products.

 Moreover, individuals in a firm with a strong quality ori-
 entation are likely to be more attuned to pursuing the path of

 continuous improvement to achieve higher quality (Bounds
 et al. 1994; Imai 1986). These individuals are expected to be
 particularly aware that a new product needs to be built on
 the firm's existing technology and manufacturing processes
 or else there may be high variation, and quality may turn out
 to be low. Thus, team members who operate in a highly
 quality-oriented firm are more likely to build synergistically
 on the firm's technology and manufacturing processes.
 Therefore,

 H6: The extent of quality orientation in a firm is positively re-
 lated to the quality of the new product developed by a team.

 Information Integration as a Moderator of the
 Relationship Between Contextual Influences and
 Quality

 As discussed previously, both product innovativeness
 from the firm's perspective and time pressure are expected
 to affect adversely the team's ability to build the new prod-
 uct synergistically on the firm's existing technology and
 manufacturing processes. Considering that firms are con-
 stantly advised to develop innovative products and teams
 are increasingly coming under pressure to shorten the prod-
 uct cycle time, product quality is expected to be compro-
 mised under such circumstances. Therefore, it is important
 to investigate what factors can minimize the adverse effect
 of product innovativeness and time pressure on quality. In
 this study, I examine one such factor: information integra-
 tion in the team.

 Moderating the effect of time pressure. As information

 integration in a team increases, its members are in a bet-
 ter position to reduce the adverse effect of high time pres-
 sure on quality. Because members of a high-information
 integration team communicate effectively, they can find
 time for essential activities, even under conditions of
 high time pressure, by setting task priorities, doing paral-
 lel work on different aspects of the project, and avoiding
 unnecessary backtracking of the development job be-
 tween functional areas because of the common under-
 standing they develop about the project (Clark and Fuji-
 moto 1991; Smith and Reinertsen 1991; Takeuchi and
 Nonaka 1986). The time thus saved by a team with high
 information integration can be used to study carefully the
 input of various functional areas, search for superior
 ways to satisfy customer needs, and keep variation in the
 production of the new product to a minimum. In contrast,
 teams with low information integration may not be able
 to work effectively in a parallel mode and avoid back-
 tracking of the development job. Therefore, teams with
 low information integration may not be able to reduce the
 negative effect of high time pressure on quality effective-
 ly. Therefore,

 H7: The negative effect of time pressure on new product qual-
 ity will be reduced as information integration in the team
 increases.

 Moderating the effect of product innovativeness. High
 information integration in a team is likely to reduce the
 adverse effect of product innovativeness on quality. A team
 in which members work in a highly integrated manner might

 New Product Quality / 5

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 be able to minimize the disturbance in the operational bal-
 ance among the product, technology, and manufacturing
 processes that an innovative new product creates (Clark and
 Fujimoto 1991). Members in such a team are likely to be in
 a better position to handle a large diversity of unfamiliar
 issues to which a highly innovative product can give rise.
 Thus, when dealing with the operational imbalance created
 by the innovative product, members in a team with high
 information integration may still be able to help control
 variation in production. In contrast, teams with low infor-
 mation integration may not be able to work effectively to
 minimize the disturbance between the technology and man-
 ufacturing processes that an innovative new product causes.
 Therefore, teams with low information integration may find
 it difficult to reduce the negative effect of high innovative-
 ness on quality effectively.

 As discussed previously, from a learning perspective,

 two different types of competencies are needed for the
 development of a very innovative versus a high-quality
 product, and it is difficult for firms to develop simultane-
 ously high levels of both types of competencies. Although a
 team with high information integration may be able to over-
 come the operational imbalance created by an innovative
 product, if the firm's basic competence lies in developing
 innovative new products rather than in continuously
 improving quality, even an integrated team may not be able
 to compensate for the firm's lack of competence in produc-
 ing quality products. Yet considering that integrated teams
 can effectively take care of the operational imbalance, infor-
 mation integration may, to some extent, offset the negative
 effect of innovativeness on quality.

 H8: The negative effect of product innovativeness on product
 quality will be reduced as information integration in the
 team increases.

 Contextual Influences as Moderators of the Infor-
 mation Integration-Quality Relationship

 facilities that a firm with high-quality orientation generally
 has. In contrast, the benefit of increase in firmwide quality
 may not be as effectively availed of by a team with low in-
 formation integration, because its members may not have
 such a clear, common understanding among themselves
 about developing a quality product. Thus,

 H9: The positive effect of information integration on new

 product quality will be enhanced as quality orientation in
 the firm increases.

 Covariates. Two covariates are included in this study.

 First, interdepartmental connectedness in a firm (i.e., the
 extent of communication and contact across functional
 areas) has been considered a covariate because it can
 enhance the availability of diverse functional perspectives
 and facilitate responsiveness to customers and thereby posi-
 tively influence new product quality (Menon, Jaworski, and
 Kohli 1997). Second, the consumer durable goods industry
 in the United States was an early adopter of the total quality
 approach, as it was one of the first industries to be hit hard
 by competition from Japanese goods in the 1970s and
 1980s. Considering that this early adoption of the total qual-
 ity approach by the consumer durable goods industry com-
 pared with the consumer nondurable goods industry might
 have had a positive effect on the quality of durable goods,
 the type of industry is also a covariate of interest in this
 study.

 Methodology

 Data Collection

 The hypotheses were tested using data collected through a
 mail survey from key informants in cross-functional teams
 involved in recent major new product initiatives. To identify
 candidate projects and related key informants, a list of con-
 sumer product manufacturing firms that had introduced new
 products within two years preceding the start of this survey
 was created.

 Among popular managerial publications, integration of
 information across functional areas is considered important
 for the successful operation of a team. Given the importance
 managers place on information integration and its expected
 positive effect on new product quality, it is useful to exam-
 ine conditions that may elevate the information integra-
 tion-quality relationship. Here I consider one such factor:
 quality orientation.

 Moderating effect of quality orientation. Although a
 team with high information integration has the potential to
 develop a quality product, this potential can be better real-
 ized only if other individuals in the organization are driven
 to develop quality products and have resources and facilities
 suitable for producing quality outcomes (because teams are
 greatly dependent on the resources and facilities of many
 others in the organization). As quality orientation in a firm
 increases, teams with high information integration are ex-
 pected to produce a higher-quality product. A team with
 high information integration is likely to have a better and
 clearer understanding and plan for the development of a
 quality product and thus is in a better position to avail of
 other employees' commitment to quality and the superior

 Following similar key informant research (e.g., Cini,
 Moreland, and Levine 1993), the goal was to identify the
 person on each team who would be highly knowledgeable
 about team events and practices. In the present study, this
 person was the project manager who primarily manages or
 coordinates a cross-functional product development effort.
 Project managers can belong to various functional areas, but
 I decided to focus only on those projects that had project
 managers from the marketing area, because in consumer
 product companies (the focus of our study) many new prod-
 uct development projects are coordinated by marketing
 managers. Also, I discovered during the pretest that it was
 difficult to identify project managers from nonmarketing
 functional areas (e.g., because of the highly sensitive nature
 of R&D projects, many firms were reluctant to provide ac-
 cess to key contacts in that area).

 The short-listed firms were contacted by telephone to
 identify managers from the marketing area who had coordi-
 nated new product development projects. These individuals
 then were screened to confirm that they had recently man-
 aged new product development initiatives and that such ini-
 tiatives used a cross-functional team. Project managers who

 6 1 Journal of Marketing, April 2000

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Descriptive Statistics, Reliabilities, and Intercorrelations Among Refined Measures

 TABLE 1

 Measures Mean Deviation Alpha 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

 Standard Simple Correlations

 1. New product quality 5.80 .83 .78 1.00
 2. Information integration 5.15 1.21 .88 .31* 1.00
 3. Customers' influence 4.86 1.56 .91 .16 .14 1.00
 4. Time pressure 5.06 1.24 .77 -.05 -.05 .00 1.00
 5. Innovativeness 2.34 1.07 - -.25' -.11 .11 .05 1.00
 6. Quality orientation 5.45 1.31 .87 .42"** .15 .08 -.04 -.04 1.00
 7. Functional diversity 5.69 1.86 - .02 .02 .15 .06 .00 .05 1.00
 *Significant at p < .01.
 "Significant at p < .001.

 Measures

 met these criteria were asked to complete questionnaires
 that were mailed to them immediately after the screening.
 In completing the questionnaire, respondents were asked

 to focus on their most recently completed new product de-
 velopment project. I expected that project managers would
 have a better memory of projects in which they were most
 recently involved. Also, by asking them to focus on the most
 recent projects, I wanted to minimize the social desirability
 bias in the selection of projects; that is, many respondents
 might otherwise choose to focus on their more successful
 projects.2 Questionnaires were sent to 240 project managers.
 A reminder with another copy of the questionnaire was sent
 to managers who had not responded after three weeks. I re-
 ceived 141 usable responses, which yielded a 58.75% re-
 sponse rate. The industries represented in the sample con-
 sisted of appliances, lawn care equipment, office supplies,
 toys, processed food products, health and beauty aids, and
 household products. On an average these projects had been
 completed 7.8 months before data collection.

 Whenever possible, existing measures of the constructs
 were used. All measures were pretested on 30 managers who
 completed them for the cross-functional teams in which they
 had participated. On the basis of the pretest, measures were
 refined. All constructs were further tested with 7 managers
 of product development projects who completed the mea-
 sures for cross-functional product development teams in
 which they had participated and who also commented on
 their understanding of the items. Detailed interviews were
 held with these managers and, on the basis of their feedback,
 the questionnaire was further revised and administered to
 the full sample (for scales, see the Appendix).

 low item-to-total correlations (Churchill 1979). No scale
 item was deleted at this stage. Descriptive statistics and re-
 liability for each measure are included in Table 1. Ex-
 ploratory factor analysis indicates that all the major vari-
 ables in the study were unidimensional scales.

 After data collection, each measure was examined for

 To assess the degree of nonresponse bias, responses

 were divided into two categories-the responses received
 before reminders and those received after reminders. To ex-
 amine the possible difference between groups, t-tests were
 conducted with mean responses to each of the variables in-
 cluded in the model. These calculations were made under
 the assumption that those who responded late were similar
 to nonrespondents (Armstrong and Overton 1977). There
 were no significant differences between groups. Therefore,
 it was inferred that project managers who responded were
 not very different from those who did not respond.

 New product quality was measured as the extent to
 which a new product is perceived to be superior to other
 competing products in aesthetics, performance, life, work-
 manship, and safety. This measure is based on the work of
 Garvin (1988) and Juran and Gryna (1989). The quality
 scale is a new five-item, seven-point semantic differential
 scale that taps the previous dimensions of quality.

 The use of project managers as a source of data on new

 2There was a concern that even though project managers were
 asked to focus on their most recent projects, many of them might
 instead have chosen to report about their very successful projects.
 To address this concern, I examined the distribution of market per-
 formance of these projects (which was measured using a three-
 item, seven-point scale that asked project managers to rate the per-
 formance of the new product compared with their planned objec-
 tives in terms of sales, market share, and profitability). The distri-
 bution has a good deal of variability (standard deviation = 1.34,
 mean = 4.67 on a seven-point scale). Of all the projects that were
 launched, 23% performed below expectation (or were disappoint-
 ments), and 15% performed just at the firm's planned objectives
 for the new product. Thus, there is no concern that a majority of
 managers chose to report about their very successful projects.

 product quality gives rise to a possible concern that the
 judgment of the responding managers about new product
 quality may not reflect that of consumers. To examine the
 extent to which the ratings of product quality by the man-
 agers and customers agree with each other, additional data
 were obtained from consumers (see Andrews and Smith
 1996). Specifically, some of the respondents revealed the
 brand names of their products. From these, I focused on 23
 products that could be evaluated by customers for quality
 because they were commonly available products.

 For each of these 23 products, a product concept sheet

 was prepared that included a picture and a brief written de-
 scription of the product. After reading a product concept
 sheet, consumers responded to the quality of the product on
 the same scale used by managers. Consumer respondents
 were screened to ensure that only those who had used the
 product were asked to evaluate the product. A total of 316

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 New Product Quality /7


 responses was collected from 190 respondents. To deter-
 mine the extent to which consumers' assessments agreed
 with those of project managers, I examined the correlation
 between the average of consumers' ratings for a particular
 product and the corresponding manager's rating (n = 23).
 The correlation (r = .73, p < .01) suggests a high match be-
 tween the two groups and supports the use of managers' rat-
 ings of new product quality.

 Information integration was operationalized as the
 degree to which members of a cross-functional team
 share, pay attention to, and challenge one another's in-
 formation and perspectives to discover new ideas about
 the product. This measure is based on the conceptualiza-
 tion of integration suggested by Gupta, Raj, and Wilemon
 (1986) and the measure of market information use sug-
 gested by Deshpand6 and Zaltman (1982). The informa-
 tion integration scale is a four-item, seven-point Likert-
 type scale.

 Functional diversity was operationalized as the number

 of functional areas represented on the team whose mem-
 bers were fully involved in the project (rather than being
 ad hoc specialists or consultants who were engaged only
 for a limited time). The average number of functional ar-
 eas represented in the product development teams studied
 was six per team, which suggests that teams had consider-
 able diversity.

 Time pressure refers to the extent to which team mem-
 bers believed that they experienced shortage of time during
 the development of the product in question. A new three-
 item, seven-point Likert-type scale was developed to mea-
 sure time pressure.

 Product innovativeness was measured as how novel the

 product was for the firm. The product newness scale was a
 four-item scale derived from Booz, Allen & Hamilton's
 (1982) taxonomy of new products. A score of one on this
 scale means that innovativeness is low and the new prod-
 uct is an improvement or modification of an existing prod-
 uct of the firm, and a score of four indicates that innova-
 tiveness is high and the product is novel for the firm and
 the industry.

 Customers' influence on the development process was
 operationalized as the extent to which input and feedback
 from end customers was relied on in the development of
 the product concept and design. The reliance on customer
 input scale is a new three-item, seven-point Likert-type
 scale.

 Quality orientation was measured as the extent to which
 a firm emphasizes quality, creates a commitment to quality
 among its employees, and practices total quality manage-
 ment. The quality orientation scale is a new three-item, sev-
 en-point Likert-type scale.

 Covariates. The first covariate, interdepartmental con-
 nectedness, was operationalized as the extent of formal and
 informal communication and contact among employees
 across functional areas in a firm (Jaworski and Kohli 1993).
 The scale for this variable is a four-item, seven-point Likert-
 type scale (Jaworski and Kohli 1993). The second covariate,
 the type of industry, refers to whether the new product was
 a consumer durable or nondurable.

 Results

 Hypothesis Testing
 Hypotheses were tested using moderated regression analysis
 as suggested by Aiken and West (1991) and Jaccard, Wan,
 and Turrisi (1990). Significant interactions in the model
 were examined through the simple slope analysis, a tech-
 nique that overcomes the need to create subgroups from
 continuous independent variables (Aiken and West 1991).3
 An examination of correlations among independent vari-
 ables showed that correlations ranged from 0 to .15 (see
 Table 1). To minimize multicollinearity among interaction
 terms and their constituent terms in the regression model, all
 independent variables were mean centered (Aiken and West
 1991; Jaccard, Wan, and Turrisi 1990). To test for multi-
 collinearity, the eigenvalue spectrum multicollinearity diag-
 nostic (Myers 1986) was used. For this purpose, the condi-
 tion number, that is, the ratio between the highest and the
 lowest eigenvalues in the model, was calculated. In the
 model, this ratio was 12.4. As Myers (1986) suggests,
 researchers should be concerned about multicollinearity if
 the condition number is greater than 1000.

 As can be seen in Table 2, the terms in the model ac-

 counted for 35% of the variance in new product quality, and
 the F statistic was 7.46 (p < .001). The F-test for difference
 in R-squares between the models with interaction terms and
 without interaction terms (Jaccard, Wan, and Turrisi 1990) is
 significant (F = 5.38, p < .01), which suggests the existence
 of interaction effects. Results of the simple slope analysis
 appear in Table 3.

 Main Effects of Team and Contextual Influences
 on New Product Quality
 As was expected, information integration was positively
 related to new product quality (b = .15, t = 2.38, p < .01). H,
 is supported. To examine further if information integration
 influences some dimensions of quality more than others,
 these dimensions were correlated with information integra-
 tion. The analysis suggested that except for life (r = .14, p =
 .12), the other four dimensions (i.e., aesthetics, perfor-
 mance, safety, and workmanship) were significantly corre-
 lated with information integration (raesthetics-integration = .23,
 rperformance-integration = .33, rsafety-integration = .23, rworkman-
 ship-integration = .31, p < .01). Considering that the three
 important product development stages, namely, concept
 development, design, and manufacturing preparation, have
 some type of role in influencing at least a few of these four

 3The simple slope analysis technique involves rearranging a
 regression of the dependent variable at various levels of a modera-
 tor variable. For example, to examine the interaction Y = a +
 IindXind + modXmod + interXindXmod (ind = independent term,
 mod = moderator term, inter = interaction term), the equation is
 rearranged as Y = a + Xind(Pind + interXmod) + (PmodXmod). After
 substituting the values of relevant unstandardized regression coef-
 ficients from the full regression model, the equation is solved for
 Xind at different values of Xmod such as (x + Is), (x), (x - Is)
 (Aiken and West 1991; Jaccard, Wan, and Turrisi 1990). This
 yields a series of equations reflecting the effect of the independent
 variable under different levels of the moderator variable.

 8 / Journal of Marketing, April 2000

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 TABLE 2

 Unstandardized Regression Coefficients

 b Error b t

 Standard

 Main Effects on New Product Quality
 H1 Information integration .15 (.06) 2.38**
 H2 Functional diversity .02 (.15) .12
 Functional diversity (quadratic term) -.01 (.07) -.18
 H3 Time pressure -.01 (.07) -.09
 H4 Innovativeness from the firm's perspective -.48 (.26) -1.85"
 H5 Customers' influence .18 (.06) 2.89*
 H6 Quality orientation .25 (.07) 3.63***

 Interaction Effects
 Moderating Effects of Information Integration on the Effects of Time Pressure and Innovativeness
 H7 Information integration x time pressure .01 (.01) .76
 H8 Information integration x innovativeness .15 (.06) 2.70"**

 Moderating Effects of Quality Orientation on the Effect of Information Integration
 H9 Quality orientation x information integration -.04 (.02) -2.76**

 Covariates
 Interdepartmental connectedness .09 (.07) 1.29
 Industry 2.10 (.59) 3.51**

 R-square = .41
 Adjusted R-square = .35
 F = 7.46***

 *Significant at p < .05.
 "Significant at p < .01.
 "'Significant at p < .001.

 Results of Simple Slope Analysis for Significant Interactions

 TABLE 3

 Slope for Various Levels
 of the Moderator Variablea

 Interaction Low Moderate High

 Innovativeness x information integrationb -.66 -.48 -.30
 Information integration x quality orientationb .20 .15 .10
 aSlope of the equation capturing the relationship between independent and dependent variables for various levels of the moderator variable.
 bModerator variable.

 dimensions of quality, it seems that information integration
 is indeed critical almost throughout the product develop-
 ment process.

 The results did not support the nonlinear relationship be-
 tween functional diversity and quality proposed in H2. Co-
 efficients for both the linear term (3 = .02, t = .12, p = .46)
 and the quadratic term (3 = -.01, t = -. 18, p = .43) of func-
 tional diversity were not significant. Time pressure was pre-
 dicted to have a negative effect on quality, but contrary to
 expectations, time pressure was not related to quality (b =
 -.01, t = -.09, p = .47). H3 is not supported. However, inno-
 vativeness from the firm's perspective was negatively relat-
 ed to product quality as was suggested in H4 (b = -.48, t =
 -1.85, p < .05).

 Consistent with expectations, customers' influence on
 the product development process was positively related to

 new product quality (b = .18, t = 2.89, p < .01); thus H5 is
 supported. To explore further if customers' influence on new
 product quality differed during the idea/concept develop-
 ment stage and design stage, I combined the first two items
 of the scale that relate to idea generation and concept devel-
 opment/testing and left the third item about customers' in-
 fluence during the design stage as it was. I then correlated
 product quality with customers' influence during the
 idea/concept development stage and the design stage. Cus-
 tomers' influence during the idea/concept development
 stage seems to have a stronger relationship to product qual-
 ity (r = .18, p < .05) than does customers' influence during
 the product design stage (r = .08, p = .38).

 Furthermore, it was hypothesized that quality orienta-
 tion would have a positive effect on quality (H6). This pre-
 diction is also supported (b = .25, t = 3.63, p < .001).

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 New Product Quality / 9


 Interaction Between Team Factors and Contextual
 Influences

 It was predicted that information integration would mitigate
 the negative effect of time pressure on new product quality
 (H7). The interaction between time pressure and information
 integration was not significant (b = .01, t = .76, p = .23). H7
 is not supported.

 Similarly, according to H8, information integration was
 expected to reduce the negative effect of product innova-
 tiveness on quality. The interaction between product innov-
 ativeness and information integration was significant (b =
 .15, t = 2.70, p < .01). Simple slope analysis (Aiken and
 West 1991) suggests that as information integration increas-
 es from low to high, the slopes of equations capturing the
 negative effect of product innovativeness on quality pro-
 gressively decrease (Table 3). Therefore, Hs is supported.

 Quality orientation was expected to strengthen the ef-

 fect of information integration on new product quality (H9).
 The interaction between quality orientation and informa-
 tion integration was significant, but the sign of the coeffi-
 cient was negative (b = -.04, t = -2.76, p < .01). As is in-
 dicated by simple slope analysis, when quality orientation
 increases from low to high, the slopes of equations captur-
 ing the positive effect of information integration on quality
 become progressively less positive (Table 3). Hg is not sup-
 ported. This finding is treated in more detail in the discus-
 sion section.

 Covariates

 The covariate interdepartmental connectedness was found to
 have a weak positive effect on new product quality (b = .09,
 t = 1.29, p < .10). The dummy variable for durable products
 also had a significant effect on quality (b = 2.10, t = 3.5 1, p <
 .001), which confirms the contention that the early adoption
 of the total quality approach by the durable goods industry
 has a positive effect on the quality of new durable goods.

 durable and nondurable goods, teams are able to deal easily
 with time pressure through various well-known strategies,
 including supplier involvement and simultaneous product
 development with overlapping stages. Considering that
 products in the sample were from stable industries (and thus
 were not radical new products), it is possible that product
 development teams were able to overcome the adverse ef-
 fect of time pressure. Relatedly, it seems that because there
 was no negative main effect of time pressure on quality that
 could be mitigated, no moderating effect of information in-
 tegration on the time pressure-quality relationship could be
 detected. Further research should examine whether the neg-
 ative effect of time pressure on quality is more likely to be
 found in less stable industries (such as high-tech industries)
 and whether integration plays any role in mitigating the neg-
 ative effect of time pressure in such industries. It will also be
 interesting to examine whether different sources of time
 pressure have differential effects on quality. (For example,
 time pressure created by some arbitrary deadlines imposed
 on the project may have a different effect than time pressure
 experienced by a team when it is in a race to reach the mar-
 ket earlier than a competitor.)

 Second, an unexpected result in this study is the negative
 moderating effect of quality orientation on the relationship
 between information integration and new product quality. I
 hypothesized a positive moderating effect, expecting that
 quality orientation will help a team with high information in-
 tegration more than a team with low information integration.
 However, as the findings suggest, the reverse seems to be
 true. Possibly, because employees in firms with high-quality
 orientation are more committed to developing quality prod-
 ucts and the facilities of the firm are generally of better qual-
 ity, even a low information integration team is able to devel-
 op a high-quality product in such an environment.
 Conversely, considering that high information integration by
 itself is quite effective in enabling the team to build the new
 product synergistically and find new ways to enhance supe-
 riority, high firmwide quality orientation in such a situation
 may not lead to any substantial increase in new product qual-
 ity. In other words, in a firm with high-quality orientation,
 the relationship between information integration and new
 product quality may not be as strong, or information integra-
 tion plays a less significant role in influencing new product
 quality.4 More research is needed to understand fully the
 process through which quality orientation in the firm affects
 the ability of teams to influence new product quality.

 Conclusions and Discussion

 This research examines how certain team characteristics and
 contextual influences affect new product quality. The results
 show that quality is positively influenced by information
 integration in the team, customers' influence on the product
 development process, and quality orientation in the firm.
 However, product innovativeness has a negative effect on
 quality. Functional diversity and time pressure have no
 effect on new product quality. The relationship between
 information integration and new product quality is weak-
 ened by quality orientation in the firm. Information integra-
 tion mitigates the negative effect of product innovativeness
 on quality.

 Some hypotheses were not confirmed. First, there was
 no effect of time pressure on quality. The absence of the
 main effect of time pressure seems to confirm the belief by
 certain experts in the product development area that teams
 have the ability to perform well even under conditions of
 limited time (Smith and Reinertsen 1991; Takeuchi and
 Nonaka 1986). Possibly, as Eisenhardt and Tabrizi (1995)
 suggest, because the steps required for cycle time reduction
 are quite predictable in stable industries, such as consumer

 10 / Journal of Marketing, April 2000

 Finally, no relationship was found between functional
 diversity and new product quality. However, at the same
 time, information integration among members from differ-
 ent functional areas has a strong effect on quality. One in-
 terpretation of these findings could be that merely having a
 functionally diverse team is not sufficient for the emergence

 4Alternatively, it can be suggested that in firms with strong qual-
 ity orientation, the extent of information exchange or integration
 between functional areas at the firm level is expected to be high as
 a matter of course. Thus, individuals in high-information integra-
 tion teams in such firms are likely to be faced with extremely large
 amounts of information that can create information overload. This
 overload can lead to inefficient decision making and harm the qual-
 ity of the new product.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 of quality. Instead, product quality seems to depend on how
 effectively members from different functional areas inte-
 grate information and perspectives. Alternatively, perhaps
 no effect of functional diversity on quality was found be-
 cause there seems to be a critical threshold beyond which in-
 creased functional diversity does not contribute to quality,
 and with the average number of functional areas at six, the
 teams in the sample may have been beyond this threshold.
 Further research may be able to identify teams with a wider
 range of functional diversity to understand how this variable
 affects quality.

 Limitations of the Study
 There are three primary limitations to this study. First, the
 dependent and several independent measures in the study
 are perceptual in nature, which could have led to common
 method bias. It is encouraging, however, to note a high
 degree of agreement between the project managers' ratings
 of quality and an outside assessment of quality by con-
 sumers. This suggests that common method bias should not
 be a serious cause for concern. Future studies, however,
 might consider more objective quality ratings of new prod-
 ucts from an independent source, such as Consumer
 Reports. Because such quality ratings are not available for
 all new products, researchers might want first to select prod-
 ucts for which quality ratings have already been published
 and then work backward to find the project teams that devel-
 oped these products.

 Second, this study deals with relatively stable and ma-
 ture consumer products for which the product development
 process is fairly predictable and consists of well-understood
 steps. Such products require a deliberate development
 process that emphasizes extensive planning. Conversely, for
 products in an uncertain industry, experiential tactics in-
 volving frequent iterations of design are more appropriate
 (Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995). For these reasons, the find-
 ings of this research may not be generalizable to firms that
 operate in more uncertain environments.

 Third, it is possible that projects that are coordinated by
 marketing managers (as was the case with projects in this
 study) rather than by managers from R&D or manufacturing
 may involve less technical complexity and relatively less col-
 laboration among technical areas such as R&D and manufac-
 turing. Therefore, some caution must be exercised in applying
 the findings of this study to technically complex projects that
 involve intense collaboration among technical areas.

 Managerial Implications
 Although this study is exploratory in nature, it still provides
 some guidelines to managers for improving product quality.
 For example, the findings alert managers to the trade-off
 between product innovativeness and quality. As was noted
 previously, the problem can arise because of the operational
 imbalance between the technology and manufacturing
 processes created by a novel product or because of differ-
 ences in competencies required for developing a highly
 novel product compared with a high-quality product.
 Although the results indicate that the problem of operational
 imbalance can be offset, to some extent, by the use of teams
 with high information integration, as noted previously, it

 would generally be difficult for firms to have both types of
 competencies or pursue high innovativeness and quality
 simultaneously. One possible solution is to create a separate
 division for working on innovative new products and let the
 existing divisions focus more on quality improvements.

 Considering the potential conflict between focusing on
 continuous improvement in quality and seeking novel prod-
 ucts, it is crucial to understand which is more important for
 organizational performance. The first important factor that
 needs to be taken into account in this regard is the strategic
 posture of the firm. For example, whereas prospector firms
 might focus more appropriately on developing more innov-
 ative products, defender firms may be better off putting
 more emphasis on quality improvements. However, if a
 prospector firm starts focusing too much on continuous im-
 provement in quality, though it might be able to strengthen
 competencies that promote efficient continuous improve-
 ment, it can end up neglecting and weakening competencies
 that generate innovative products (see Kyriakopoulos and
 Moorman 1998; March 1991). Thus, a prospector firm that
 places excessive emphasis on quality improvement runs the
 risk of being left behind in the long run by competitors that
 continue to emphasize innovation.

 The second factor that can influence whether to empha-
 size innovativeness or quality is the life cycle stage of the
 product category. If the new product is in the initial stages
 of its life cycle, focusing more on innovative outcomes
 might be important, but as the product category starts to ma-
 ture, it may be more appropriate to emphasize quality im-
 provement. Finally, the technical sophistication of the prod-
 uct category can also affect whether to focus on
 innovativeness or quality. In high-tech areas, in which tech-
 nology is rapidly evolving, firms might want to focus more
 on innovativeness rather than overemphasize continuous
 improvement in quality.

 Furthermore, although it has been suggested that seek-
 ing information from customers can only be of limited use
 because customers can define their requirements mainly in
 terms of existing products and services that may be low in
 quality (Deming 1993; Hayes and Abernathy 1980), this re-
 search suggests that teams that seek more input from cus-
 tomers during the initial phases of the product development
 process end up developing better-quality products. Results
 indicate that customer input during the idea/concept devel-
 opment stage is more effective in enhancing quality than in
 a subsequent stage, such as product design. Considering the
 evidence from previous research that many product devel-
 opment teams tend to cut short the process of obtaining in-
 formation from customers-particularly during the initial
 stages of product development (Cooper 1993)-it is impor-
 tant to impress on teams that they need to stay in touch with
 customers during new product development.

 Finally, although the drive toward shorter cycle time in
 the business world is believed to have negative conse-
 quences for new products (Crawford 1992), the results sug-
 gest otherwise. It appears that product development teams
 have the ability to handle time pressure effectively, at least
 in industries with a stable environment in which the product
 development process is quite predictable (as was the case
 with this sample).

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 New Product Quality / 11


 B. Information Integrationb
 a. Members freely shared their information and perspectives

 Implications for Theory and Research
 This study extends research on new product quality, which
 has so far mainly focused on organizational antecedents and
 broad aggregate outcomes (e.g., the quality of a firm's new
 products in general), to the team-level determinants of new
 product quality. It has also examined two apparent trade-offs
 involved in new product development, namely, the trade-
 offs between quality and innovativeness and between qual-
 ity and time pressure. In the new product development area,
 research has usually been done under the belief that it is pos-
 sible to achieve high quality, high innovativeness, and
 shorter cycle time simultaneously (some exceptions are
 studies by Crawford [1992] and Griffin [1997]). More
 research is needed on such trade-offs. Particularly, it will be
 interesting to explore how certain team, senior management,
 or firm factors can help resolve these trade-offs. For exam-
 ple, as this research has suggested, information integration
 in the team can somewhat mitigate the adverse effect of
 innovativeness on quality.

 Similarly, researchers rarely have questioned the popular
 notion that autonomous cross-functional teams are always
 good for product development and have assumed that there
 are no downsides or costs of the use of cross-functional
 teams for a firm as well as for individuals who are involved
 in these teams (an exception is a study by Olson, Walker, and
 Ruekert [1995]). For example, firms need to create special
 evaluation, monitoring, and reward systems for such teams.
 Functional chiefs can feel threatened by the loss of power
 and control over such autonomous projects. Similarly, team
 members can be separated from their functional areas for a
 long time and may face adjustment problems when they try
 to rejoin their respective areas after the completion of pro-
 jects. Therefore, more research is needed on how firms can
 improve new product outcomes such as quality and still min-
 imize the costs associated with autonomous teams. For ex-
 ample, as the results of this study suggest, in a firm with
 high-quality orientation, information integration plays a less
 significant role in influencing quality.

 Furthermore, whereas this study covers the entire prod-
 uct development process, it would be informative to exam-
 ine the effects of different aspects of cross-functional teams
 at various stages of the new product development process.
 For example, a certain type of team composition may be
 more effective at some product development stages than at
 others. If a team has more representatives from marketing
 and design than manufacturing, it might be more effective in
 building superiority into the product at the concept develop-
 ment and design stages than during manufacturing prepara-
 tion. However, to make such stagewise analysis more mean-
 ingful, researchers may have to find a way of measuring
 superiority or quality built into the product at different
 stages of the product development process (e.g., concept
 quality, design quality, manufacturing quality).

 Finally, although I have relied on the organizational
 learning literature to examine the trade-off between quality
 and innovativeness, the effect of factors related to organiza-
 tional knowledge on new product quality can be studied in
 further research. For example, a team's absorptive capacity
 (Cohen and Levinthal 1991), which refers to its ability to

 recognize and assimilate external knowledge, can affect
 whether the team will be able to recognize customer needs
 and identify the appropriate technology for satisfying these
 needs effectively. Similarly, the richness and accessibility of
 organizational memory (Moorman and Miner 1997; Walsh
 and Ungston 1991) can also influence the degree to which a
 team can synergistically build the new product on the firm's
 existing store of expertise.

 APPENDIX
 Measures

 A. Qualitya

 Unattractive 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Attractive
 Works poorly 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Works well
 Has short life 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Has long life

 Unsafe 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Safe
 Badly 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Well

 manufactured manufactured

 with one another.

 b. When making important project-related decisions, mem-
 bers paid great attention to the information and perspec-
 tives of members from other departments.

 c. Members freely challenged the assumptions underlying

 one another's ideas and perspectives.

 d. Exposure to the information and perspectives of other
 departments helped members think of new ideas about
 the product.

 C. Customers' Influencec
 Extent to which input and feedback from end users was
 relied on in the following stages of product development:
 a. Development of product idea/concept."
 b. Evaluation/Screening of product idea/concept.*
 c. Development of design."

 D. Time Pressureb
 a. On this project, team members often wished they had

 more time to complete their work.

 b. On this project, team members had plenty of time to think

 carefully about project-related details.*

 c. On this project, team members believed they were under

 a lot of time pressure.

 E. Innovativeness from the Perspective of the Firmd
 a. An improvement/modification in one of the firm's existing

 products.

 b. A new product added to one of the existing product lines.
 c. A new product that is a new line for the firm, but similar

 products are offered by other companies.

 d. A totally new product, and no similar products are offered

 by other companies.

 F. Quality Orientation in the Firmb
 a. This organization places a great deal of emphasis on

 b. Employees in this firm are highly committed to produce

 product quality.

 quality products.

 c. The organization practices total quality management.
 *Reverse coded.
 al = not at all, 7 = a great deal.
 bl = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree.
 cl = a great extent, 7 = not at all.
 dSelect one.

 12 / Journal of Marketing, April 2000

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 REFERENCES
 Aaker, David A. and Robert Jacobson (1994), "The Financial

 Information Content of Perceived Quality," Journal of Market-
 ing Research, 31 (May), 191-201.

 Aiken, Leona S. and Stephen G. West (1991), Multiple Regression:
 Testing and Interpreting Interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
 Publications.

 - and John Hauser (1996), "Integration of R&D and Mar-

 keting: A Review and Analysis of the Literature," Journal of
 Product Innovation Management, 13 (May), 191-215.

 Gupta, Ashok K., S. P. Raj, and David Wilemon (1986), "A Model
 for Studying R&D-Marketing Interface in the Product Devel-
 opment Process," Journal of Marketing, 50 (April), 7-17.

 Ancona, Deborah G. and David F. Caldwell (1992), "Demography
 and Design: Predictors of New Product Team Performance,"
 Organization Science, 3 (May/June), 321-41.

 Hackman, Richard J. and Ruth Wageman (1995), "Total Quality
 Management: Empirical, Conceptual, and Practical Issues,"
 Administrative Science Quarterly, 40 (June), 309-42.

 Andrews, Jonlee and Daniel C. Smith (1996), "In Search of Mar-
 keting Imagination: Factors Affecting the Creativity of Market-
 ing Programs for Mature Products," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 33 (May), 174-87.

 Argyris, Chris and Donald A. Schon (1978), Organizational

 Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective. Reading, MA:
 Addison-Wesley.

 Armstrong, J. Scott and Terry S. Overton (1977), "Estimating Non-

 response Bias in Mail Surveys," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 14 (August), 396-402.

 Barczak, Gloria and David Wilemon (1992), "Successful New

 Product Team Leaders," Industrial Marketing Management, 21
 (February), 61-68.

 Booz, Allen & Hamilton (1982), Management of New Products.

 Chicago: Booz, Allen & Hamilton.

 Bounds, Greg, Lyle Yorks, Mek Adams, and Gipsie Ranney (1994),

 Beyond Total Quality Management. New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Buzzell, Robert D. and Bradley T. Gale (1987), PIMS Principle.

 New York: The Free Press.

 Hauser, John R. and Don Clausing (1988), "The House of Quality,"

 Harvard Business Review, 66 (May/June), 309-19.

 Hayes, Robert H. and William J. Abernathy (1980), "Managing
 Our Way to Economic Decline," Harvard Business Review, 58
 (July/August), 67-77.

 Imai, Masaaki (1986), Kaizen: The Key to Japan's Competitive

 Success. New York: Random House.

 Jaccard, James, Choi K. Wan, and Robert Turrisi (1990), "The

 Detection and Interpretation of Interaction Effects Between
 Continuous Variables in Multiple Regression," Multivariate
 Behavioral Research, 25 (October), 467-78.

 Jacobson, Robert and David A. Aaker (1987), "The Strategic Role

 of Product Quality," Journal of Marketing, 51 (October),
 31-44.

 Jaworski, Bernard J. and Ajay K. Kohli (1993), "Market Orienta-
 tion: Antecedents and Consequences," Journal of Marketing,
 57 (July), 53-70.

 Juran, Joseph M. and Frank M. Gryna (1989), Quality Planning
 and Analysis from Product Development Through Use. New
 York: McGraw-Hill.

 Churchill, Gilbert A., Jr. (1979), "A Paradigm for Developing Bet-
 ter Measures of Marketing Constructs," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 16 (February), 64-73.

 Cini, Marie A., Richard L. Moreland, John M. Levine (1993),

 "Group Staffing Levels and Response to Prospective and New
 Group Members," Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
 ogy, 65 (October), 723-34.

 Clark, Kim B. and Takahiro Fujimoto (1991), Product Develop-

 ment Performance. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

 Cohen, Wesley M. and David A. Levinthal (1991), "Absorptive
 Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation,"
 Administrative Science Quarterly, 35 (September), 128-52.

 Cooper, Robert G. (1993), Winning at New Products. New York:

 Addison-Wesley.

 Crawford, C. Merle (1992), "The Hidden Costs of Accelerated

 Product Development," Journal of Product Innovation Man-
 agement, 9 (September), 188-99.

 Deming, W. Edwards (1993), The New Economics for Industry,
 Government, Education. Cambridge, MA: MIT Center for
 Advanced Engineering Study.

 Deshpand6, Rohit and Gerald Zaltman (1982), "Factors Affecting
 the Use of Market Information: A Path Analysis," Journal of
 Marketing Research, 21 (February), 14-31.

 Dougherty, Deborah (1992), "Interpretive Barriers to Successful
 Product Innovation in Large Organizations," Organization Sci-
 ence, 3 (May), 179-202.

 Eisenhardt, Kathleen M. and Behnam N. Tabrizi (1995), "Acceler-
 ating Adaptive Processes: Product Innovation in the Global
 Industry," Administrative Science Quarterly, 40 (March),
 84-110.

 Garvin, David A. (1988), Managing Quality. New York: The Free

 Press.

 Gersick, Connie G. (1991), "Revolutionary Change Theories: A
 Multilevel Exploration of the Punctuated Equilibrium Para-
 digm," Academy of Management Review, 16 (January), 10-36.
 Griffin, Abbie (1997), "The Effect of Project and Process Charac-
 teristics on Product Development Cycle Time," Journal of Mar-
 keting Research, 34 (February), 24-35.

 Kahn, Kenneth (1996), "Interdepartmental Integration: A Defini-
 tion with Implications for Product Development Performance,"
 Journal of Product Innovation Management, 13 (March),
 137-51.

 Karau, Steven J. and Janice R. Kelly (1992), "The Effects of Time
 Pressure and Time Abundance on Group Performance Quality
 and Interaction Process," Journal of Experimental Social Psy-
 chology, 28 (6), 542-71.

 Keller, Kevin Lane and Richard Staelin (1987), "Effects of Quality

 and Quantity of Information on Decision Effectiveness," Jour-
 nal of Consumer Research, 14 (September), 200-13.

 Kyriakopoulos, Kyriakos and Christine Moorman (1998),

 "Exploitative vs. Exploratory Market Learning and New Prod-
 uct Outcomes," in AMA Educators' Proceedings: Enhancing
 Knowledge Development in Marketing, Ronald C. Goodstein
 and Scott B. MacKenzie, eds. Chicago: American Marketing
 Association, 28-33.

 March, James J. (1991), "Exploration and Exploitation in Organi-
 zational Learning," Organization Science, 2 (February), 71-87.
 Menon, Ajay, Bernard J. Jaworski, and Ajay K. Kohli (1997), "Prod-
 uct Quality: Impact of Interdepartmental Interactions," Journal
 of the Academy of Marketing Science, 25 (Summer), 187-200.

 Moorman, Christine and Anne S. Miner (1997), "The Impact of
 Organizational Memory on New Product Development and
 New Product Performance and Creativity," Journal of Market-
 ing Research, 34 (February), 91-106.

 Morgan, Neil A. and Nigel F. Piercy (1998), "Interactions Between
 Marketing and Quality at the SBU Level: Influences and Out-
 comes," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 26
 (Summer), 190-208.

 Myers, Raymond H. (1986), Classical and Modern Regression

 with Applications. Boston: Duxbury Press.

 Olson, Eric M., Orville C. Walker Jr., and Robert W. Ruekert

 (1995), "Organizing for Effective New Product Development:
 The Moderating Role of Product Innovativeness," Journal of
 Marketing, 59 (January), 48-62.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 New Product Quality / 13


 Phillips, Lynn W., Dae R. Chang, and Robert D. Buzzell (1983),
 "Product Quality, Cost Position, and Business Performance: A
 Test of Some Key Hypotheses," Journal of Marketing, 47
 (Spring), 26-42.

 Ruekert, Robert W. and Orville C. Walker Jr. (1987), "Marketing's
 Interaction with Other Functional Units: A Conceptual Frame-
 work and Empirical Evidence," Journal of Marketing, 51 (Jan-
 uary), 1-19.

 Slater, Stanley F. and John C. Narver (1995), "Market Orientation
 and Learning Organization," Journal of Marketing, 59 (July),
 63-74.

 Takeuchi, Hirotaka and Ikujiro Nonaka (1986), "The New New
 Product Development Game," Harvard Business Review, 64
 (January/February), 137-46.

 Thamhain, Hans J. (1990), "Managing Technologically Innovative
 Team Efforts Toward New Product Success," Journal of Prod-
 uct Innovation Management, 7 (March), 5-18.

 von Hipple, Eric (1988), The Sources of Innovation. New York:

 Oxford University Press.

 Walsh, James P. and Gerardo R. Ungston (1991), "Organizational
 Memory," Academy of Management Review, 16 (January),
 57-91.

 Smith, Preston G. and Donald G. Reinertsen (1991), Developing

 Weick, Karl E. (1995), Sensemaking in Organizations. Thousand

 Products in Half the Time. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.

 Song, Michael X., William E. Souder, and Barbara Dyer (1997),
 "A Causal Model of the Impact of Skills, Synergy, and Design
 Sensitivity on New Product Performance," Journal of Product
 Innovation Management, 14 (March), 88-101.

 Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

 Wheelwright, Steven C. and Kim B. Clark (1992), Revolutionizing

 Product Development. New York: The Free Press.

 Zeithaml, Valarie A. (1988), "Consumer Perceptions of Price,
 Quality, and Value: A Means-End Model and Synthesis of Evi-
 dence," Journal of Marketing, 52 (July), 2-22.

 Wx:' ,:

 PT:i :~: :li

 a::

 P? i.:ii1:'ii$:-:~i.~- ii:i::~::: :

 W.' w:wi

 For a: FRE.E:.Catialog.& Personalized ce:Cali
 Business Lists:.
 Over 11 Million Businesses
 Select by Type of Business, Employee Size & Sales
 Volume for any ZIP Code, County, City or State.

 Consumer Lists:
 Over 200 Million Consumers
 Select by Age, Income, Household Value & More.

 (800) 336-8349

 (800) 661-5478

 or Fax Us at: (402)331 -0991

 Business Credit Reports

 only 5.,00 each!

 www. in foUS A. coi

 infoUSA-A Public Company, Nasdaq: IUSA
 5711 S. 86th Circle * Omaha, NE 68127

 Al so Available,

 Monthly Updates!

 E-Mail: lists@infoUSA.com

 Media Code: 01-JMK

 14 / Journal of Marketing, April 2000

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:41:24 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

