INFORMATION TO USERS

This  manuscript  has  been  reproduced  from  the  microfilm  master.  UMI  films 
the  text  directly from the  original  or copy submitted.  Thus,  some  thesis  and 
dissertation copies are in typewriter face, while others may be from any type of 
computer printer.

The  quality  of  this  reproduction  is  dependent  upon  the  quality  of  the 
copy submitted.  Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations 
and  photographs,  print  bleedthrough,  substandard  margins,  and  improper 
alignment can adversely affect reproduction.

In the  unlikely event that the author did  not send  UMI  a  complete  manuscript 
and  there  are  missing  pages,  these  will  be  noted.  Also,  if  unauthorized 
copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

Oversize  materials 
(e.g.,  maps,  drawings,  charts)  are  reproduced  by 
sectioning the original,  beginning at the upper left-hand comer and  continuing 
from left to right in equal sections with small overlaps.

included 

Photographs 
in  the  original  manuscript  have  been  reproduced 
xerographically 
Higher  quality  6”  x  9”  black  and  white 
photographic prints are available for any photographs or illustrations appearing 
in this copy for an additional charge.  Contact UMI directly to order.

in  this  copy. 

ProQuest Information and Learning 

300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor,  Ml  48106-1346 USA 

800-521-0600

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


RELATIONSHIP OF ORGANIZATIONAL CITIZENSHIP BEHAVIORS AND 

CUSTOMER ORIENTATION TO SERVICE QUALITY AND 

CUSTOMER SATISFACTION

A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED ON THE SIXTH DAY OF JUNE 2001 

TO THE PROGRAM IN BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 

IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 

OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL 

OF TULANE UNIVERSITY 

FOR THE DEGREE 

OF

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

BY

CESAR J. SEPULVEDA-MARTINEZ

APPROVED:  tyfobLU  

/
MARY A. KONOVSKY, PhD.
CHAIRPERSON

MICHAEL J. BURKE, PhD.

ARTHUR  P. BRIEF, PhD.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


UMI  N um ber: 3 0 2 6 1 3 6

Copyright 2001  by 

Sepulveda-Martinez,  Cesar Javier

All rights reserved.

___ 

®UMI

UMI  Microform 3026136 

Copyright 2002  by Bell & Howell  Information  and  Learning Company. 

All rights  reserved. This microform edition  is protected against 

unauthorized  copying under Title  17,  United States Code.

Bell  &  Howell  Information and  Learning Company 

300  North Zeeb  Road 

P.O. Box 1346 

Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


© Copyright by Cesar J. Sepulveda, 2001 

All Rights Reserved

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


RELATIONSHIP OF ORGANIZATIONAL CITIZENSHIP BEHAVIORS AND 

CUSTOMER ORIENTATION TO SERVICE QUALITY AND 

CUSTOMER SATISFACTION

AN ABSTRACT 

SUBMITTED ON THE SIXTH DAY OF JUNE 2001 

TO THE PROGRAM IN BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 

IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 

OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL 

OF TULANE UNIVERSITY

FOR THE DEGREE 

OF

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

BY

CESAR J. SEPULVEDA-MARTINEZ

APPROVED: 

/ /,/. /),

MARY A. KONOVSKY, PI

CHAIRPERSON

MICHAEL J. BURKE, PhD.

ARTHUR  P. BRIEF, PhD.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Abstract

Organizational Citizenship Behavior (OCB) is performance that supports the 

social and psychological environment in which job-specific tasks function (Organ,  1997). 

Researchers have mainly examined the variables that predict an employee’s OCB (e.g., 

Organ and Konovsky,  1989). However, the OCB literature points out that OCBs also may 

have important consequences for an organization (e.g., Organ,  1988). Moreover, OCBs 

mainly have been investigated at the individual level of analysis; that is, studies have 

viewed OCBs as individually exhibited behaviors. Yet, OCBs may also be displayed at 

the group level (e.g., George,  1990). OCB at the group level is defined as helping 

behaviors shared by members of a group that help create or support the environment 

where core activities take place. The purpose of this dissertation is to examine 

hypothesized relationships between OCB at the group level and two important 

organizational outcomes: service quality and customer satisfaction. Additionally, it was 

hypothesized that a marketing variable, Customer Orientation Behavior (COB), leads 

organizations and service employees to create value for their customers (Narver and 

Slater,  1990) and at the group level, to have a positive relationship with service quality 

and customer satisfaction.  This study also included tests of additive and multiplicative 

effects of OCB and COB in the prediction of customer service evaluations. Results show 

that at the group level OCBs may lead to better perceptions of service quality however, 

OCB relationships with customer satisfaction results were generally not significant. Tests 

of additive and multiplicative effects of OCB and COB in the prediction of customer

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without perm ission.


service evaluations were not supported. Finally, a post-hoc analysis shows a probable 

nonlinear relationship between the variables under study.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am and always will be grateful to my Lord and savior Jesus Christ, whose love 

and relationship brought me the stability, patience, and wisdom to continue and finish 

this project.

A special thanks goes to my wife Sylvia, whose love, support, and patience helped 

me pass through this process in an enjoyable way. We also have raised four wonderful 

children -- Miguel, Ana Sofia, Karla Eugenia, and Stephanie — whose love through these 

years have also helped me. I am proud of all of them. I also thank God for my parents 

Hector and Elma and my brother Hector and sister Elma.

I also want to thank Pastor Jonas Robertson his wife Ruth and members and 

friends of the Church of Abundant Life whose love in Jesus helped me and my family 

grow in Jesus and receive many blessings.

I also express my appreciation to the members of my dissertation committee,

Mary Konovsky, Mike Burke, and Art Brief. They provided suggestions, comments, and 

valuable guidance in the completion of this dissertation.

Finally, I want also to thank all people that in one way or another helped me and 

shared with me moments of sadness and moments of joy during the process of my 

doctoral program. God bless all of you.

“My times are in thy hand.” Psalms 31:15

“What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.” Psalms 56:3

ii

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter I: Introduction....................................................................................................  

Organizational Citizenship Behaviors...............................................................  

Organizational Citizenship Behaviors in the Aggregate.................................  

1

7

9

The Service Context and Customer Service Indicators...................................   15

OCB-Service Quality/Customer Satisfaction Relationship............................  20

Customer Orientation..........................................................................................  23

Summary..............................................................................................................  34

Chapter II: Method...........................................................................................................  38

Data Site, Participants, and Data Collections Procedures...............................   38

Sample Size..........................................................................................................  39

M easures..............................................................................................................  40

Scoring Procedures and Assessment of Interrater Agreement.......................   44

Data Analysis......................................................................................................   46

Chapter III: Results..........................................................................................................  48

Sample Characteristics.......................................................................................   48

Scale Development..............................................................................................  50

Test of Hypotheses..............................................................................................  55

Post-Hoc Analysis...............................................................................................  57

Summary..............................................................................................................  59

iii

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Chapter IV: Discussion....................................................................................................   60

Study Findings.....................................................................................................   60

Follow up Analysis..............................................................................................  69

Limitations of the Study, Future Research Directions, and

Practical Implications...........................................................................................  73

Tables.................................................................................................................................   77

Figures................................................................................................................................  88

Appendices.........................................................................................................................  95

References..........................................................................................................................  102

iv

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


LIST OF TABLES

Table  1:  Conceptual Differences between Quality and Satisfaction.......................  78

Table 2:  Factor Loadings (rotated solution) for OCB (5-factor).............................   79

Table 3:  Factor Loadings (rotated solution) for OCB................................................  80

Table 4:  Factor Loadings for Customer Oriented Behaviors (COB) (1  factor) 

  81

Table 5:  Factor Loadings for Service Quality (1  factor)...........................................   82

Table 6:  Factor Loadings for Customer Satisfaction (1  factor)................................  83

Table 7: 

rwg,  Adm, and Admd for Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction 

  84

Table 8:  Means,  Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Intercorrelations for

Study Variables...............................................................................................  85

Table 9:  Regression Results for Hypothesis 3 ...........................................................   86

Table  10:  Regression Results for Hypothesis 4 ..........................................................  87

v

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


LIST OF FIGURES

Figure  1:  Theoretical Framework.................................................................................   89

Figure 2:  Results of the Proposed Theoretical Framework........................................  90

Figure 3:  Local Lineal Regression Curve for the OCB/SQ Relationship.................  91

Figure 4:  Local Lineal Regression Curve for the OCB/CS Relationship.................  92

Figure 5:  Local Lineal Regression Curve for the COB/SQ Relationship.................  93

Figure 6:  Local Lineal Regression Curve.for the COB/CS Relationship.................  94

vi

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendix A: Consent Form for Branch Managers.......................................................  96

A.ppendix B: Branch Manager Questionnaire...............................................................   97

Appendix C: Customer Questionnaire...........................................................................   100

vii

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1

CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION

A middle age man wanted to fulfill a dream of buying a new German imported 

car. Buying this car meant spending considerable money, thus he decided to take his time 

and obtain as much information as possible in order to make a good decision. As the 

customer gathered information, he visited a specific car dealership several times. During 

these visits, the customer had the opportunity to observe not only different helping and 

cooperating behaviors (Organizational Citizenship Behaviors, OCB) among the 

dealership’s service employees but also service behaviors oriented toward him. These 

behaviors helped the customer feel satisfied with the service received at the car 

dealership. The customer also noticed that it did not matter with whom the service 

employees interacted or had a service encounter; the helping behaviors among the 

employees, as well as the customer oriented behaviors, were displayed by the service 

employees as a group. In other words, the car dealership unit acted as a whole to provide 

good service. For instance, some of the helping behaviors the customer observed among 

the service employees were as follows: (a) Employees assisted other salespeople’s 

customers. For example, because the salesperson who originally helped this customer was 

not always available, the customer had a service encounter with other service employees 

who willingly helped him despite the fact that they knew that if the sale were made, the 

credit would go to the salesperson directly responsible for the customer; (b) Service 

people offered after-hours assistance. For example, on some of his visits, the customer

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


arrived at the car dealership after the official closing hours, but he always received help 

from a service employee who was there doing paper work; (c) The customer noticed that 

service employees were supportive of each other and raised issues among themselves 

about specific car characteristics that helped close the sale; and (d) The customer also 

observed that the more experienced salespeople helped new salespeople by giving them 

advice about the service encounters and car features, for example.

Similarly, during his visits to the car dealership, the buyer observed Customer 

Oriented Behaviors (COB) displayed by the service employees. For example, salespeople 

were always courteous in the service encounters. Additionally, service employees showed 

competence in answering all questions the customer raised about the product and the 

service the car dealership provided. Finally, after the purchase was made, the customer 

continued receiving phone calls from the salespeople at the car dealership inquiring about 

the car’s performance. In summary, helping behaviors among employees combined with 

customer oriented behaviors helped the customer to perceive good service quality and to 

be satisfied with the service he received.

In the above story, service employees in the car dealership performed activities 

that may or may not be directly related to their main job activities. However, this 

contextual performance or helping and cooperating behaviors may support the 

environment in which the core activities take place (Borman & Motowidlo,  1993; Organ,

1997). Examples of this contextual performance include checking with other employees 

before taking actions and calling the main office and asking about color availability. Also, 

more experienced service employees helped train new salespeople, advising them how to

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


deal with a customer for example. Finally, the salespeople showed helping behavior 

among themselves by assisting each other in closing a sale. These types of helping 

behaviors and efforts to cooperate help this organization achieve its goals and also result 

in happy customers. Additionally, the service employees who work for this car dealership 

displayed customer oriented behaviors. These behaviors created value to the customer by 

meeting his needs and expectations (Narver & Slater,  1990; Schneider, White, & Paul,

1998). In the case of the car dealership receiving post-sale phone calls from the 

salespeople is an example of customer oriented behavior.

One research trend centers on behaviors displayed by employees who aid in 

creating a climate or environment where the core activities of the job take place (i.e., 

helping behaviors). Another research trend is on behaviors that service employees display 

that generate value to customers (i.e., Customer Oriented Behaviors).

Helping behaviors have been discussed in the literature as being important 

contributors to organizational effectiveness (e.g., Organ,  1988; Podsakoff, Aheame, & 

MacKenzie,  1997). Among the research that discuss these kinds of activities are 

organizational citizenship behavior (OCB); (e.g., Bateman & Organ,  1983; Organ,  1988; 

Organ & Konovsky,  1989; Organ,  1997), prosocial organizational behavior (POB); (Brief 

& Motowidlo,  1986), organizational spontaneity (George & Brief,  1992), in-role and 

extra-role behaviors (e.g., Wemer,  1994), and contextual performance (Borman & 

Motowidlo,  1993; Motowidlo & Van Scotter,  1994; Van Scotter & Motowidlo,  1996).

Each of these constructs is defined somewhat differently. Two of these constructs, 

POB (Brief & Motowidlo,  1986) and organizational spontaneity (George & Brief,  1992)

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


have strong limitations. For instance, POB is a construct that includes almost any kind of 

behavior; thus, developing a focused research agenda is difficult. Also, POB research has 

not specifically addressed the dimensionality of the construct (Van Dyne, Cummings, & 

Parks,  1995), and POB scales have been derived from the OCB scales (e.g., George, 

1991). Finally, no further research exists on organizational spontaneity; therefore we do 

not know the empirical relationships between this construct and other variables. Thus, in 

this dissertation, I investigate the OCB construct. The OCB literature provides the central 

constructs to be studied in service settings (i.e., bank branches). Also, the contextual 

performance literature is important because it provides characteristics and modifications 

included in OCB constructs (Organ,  1997).

To date, OCB research has two important features. First, most OCB studies have 

examined contributions at the individual level of behavior (Organ,  1997). Second, most 

OCB research has focused on investigating the antecedents that predict these behaviors 

(see Organ & Ryan,  1995 for a review o f the literature describing OCB antecedents). 

OCB, however, has been discussed in the literature as being an important contributor to 

organizational effectiveness (e.g., Organ,  1988; Podsakoff et al.,  1997). Unfortunately, 

until now, asserting that OCB is an important predictor of organizational effectiveness is 

more a theoretical statement than an empirically addressed issue. In relation to OCB 

consequences, Borman and Motowidlo (1993), for example, argue that the relationship 

between OCB and effectiveness is based more on logic than on empirical support. In the 

field of applied psychology, performance as OCB is viewed as behavior, and 

effectiveness is viewed as the outcome o f that behavior (Campbell,  1990). But, the 

outcome or effectiveness of OCB has rarely been examined in the literature.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


5

Additionally, most OCB/contextual performance research has been done at the 

individual level of analysis (see George,  1991; Konovsky & Pugh,  1994; Mackenzie, 

Podsakoff, & Fetter, 1991,  1993; Morrison,  1994; Motowidlo & Van Scotter,  1994; 

McNeely & Meglino,  1994; Podsakoff, Mackenzie, Moorman, & Fetter,  1990; Puffer, 

1987; & Werner,  1994, for a review of the literature). Most studies have viewed OCB as 

individually displayed behaviors. Yet, OCBs may also be displayed at the group level 

(George,  1990). Thus, this study treats OCB as an independent variable at the group level 

of analysis.

Moreover, up to now, research investigating OCB consequences at the group level 

of analysis has mainly focused on criterion variables such as quantity produced, product 

quality, and sales performance. For instance, one of the few studies relating OCB to 

effectiveness is Podsakoff et al. (1997). Their research used work crews as the unit of 

analysis. Podsakoff et al. found that two OCB variables, helping behavior and 

sportsmanship, had a positive effect on performance quantity when measured as quantity 

of products manufactured. Podsakoff et al.  (1997) also found that the work crews’ helping 

behavior had a significant effect on performance quality when measured as products 

rejected by the quality control department or the customer.

Podsakoff and MacKenzie (1997) suggest research is needed to study the impact 

of OCBs on other criteria variables o f organizational effectiveness besides quantity 

produced. In a service context, two customer service indicators that suggest 

organizational effectiveness are service quality and customer satisfaction. Therefore, one 

purpose of this study is to examine possible relationships between group level OCBs and 

service quality and customer satisfaction.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


6

Podsakoff and MacKenzie (1997) also suggest that research should include other 

forms of helping behaviors and that this research should examine the relationship of these 

other helping behaviors with performance. For example, Podsakoff and MacKenzie 

(1997) consider helping behaviors towards customers (i.e., customer oriented behaviors, 

COB) as one additional type of helping behavior. COBs are important to investigate 

because the marketing literature argues that customer orientation may assist in the 

achievement of organizational goals (e.g., Jaworski & Kohli,  1996; Kelley,  1992). 

However, there is a scarcity of empirical studies investigating the effects of COBs on 

customers’ evaluations, such as service quality and customer satisfaction, (Jaworski & 

Kohli,  1996; Podsakoff & MacKenzie,  1997). Thus, customer orientation, defined as 

value generation to customers (Narver & Slater,  1990), may have a positive relationship 

with customer service indicators such as service quality and customer satisfaction. Figure 

1  describes the proposed theoretical framework for this study.

Insert figure  1  about here

The findings of this study will add to the known benefits of OCB and COB and 

will enhance our understanding of organizational effectiveness. Organ (1997) noted that 

most OCB research has addressed discretionary behaviors at the individual level. Thus, 

this study will develop the group level of analysis (i.e., bank branches) and  contribute to 

our understanding of OCB at an aggregated level of analysis. Additionally, this study will 

help to fill the gap in understanding the effects of COBs on customers’ evaluations, 

including  such things as service quality and customer satisfaction (Jaworski & Kohli,

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


7

1996; Podsakoff & MacKenzie,  1997).  Likewise, this research will assist in 

understanding the OCB/COB relationship to service quality and customer satisfaction. 

Finally, this study will also enhance our understanding of issues spanning the 

organizational behavior and marketing literatures.

In the rest of this chapter, I define OCB and OCBs at the agreggate level. I also 

define service quality and customer satisfaction and present a rationale for a positive 

relationship between OCB and these customer evaluation measures. Additionally, I define 

and discuss COB as service behaviors and posit a rationale for COB- service quality and 

customer satisfaction relationships. Finally, I present a hypothesis describing the 

interaction of OCB and COB in the prediction of service quality and customer 

satisfaction.

Organizational Citizenship Behaviors

Organ (1988) described OCB as “individual behavior that is discretionary, not 

directly or explicitly recognized by the formal reward system, and that in the aggregate 

promotes the effective functioning of the organization” (p. 4). However, one of the 

critical debates in the OCB literature has involved the definition of OCB. In response to 

the theoretical and empirical criticisms of OCB regarding the extra-role nature and lack of 

formal rewards, Organ (1997) decided to modify the OCB working definition. For 

instance, one of the criticisms of the definition o f OCB comes from George and Brief 

(1992). Although citizenship behaviors had been classified only as extra-role, George and 

Brief (1992) posit that some of the OCB dimensions should be classified as in-role or

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


8

prescribed role behaviors. As an example, George and Brief argued that 

conscientiousness, one o f the OCB dimensions, focuses on “rule adherence and, thus, on 

prescribed role performance” (p. 312). Also, George and Brief (1992) argued that another 

of the OCB dimensions, civic virtue, which includes behaviors such as attending 

meetings and making suggestions for company improvement, should be part of the in-role 

performance that an employee displays. Morrison (1994) argued that defining OCB 

activities is a function of how employees define their job activities. Further, Morrison 

showed that in-role and extra-role behaviors are differently defined by employees. Thus, 

Morrison found that respondents identified 18 o f 20 OCB items as in-role. Additionally, 

based on different research (e.g., Podsakoff & MacKenzie,  1994; Wemer,  1994), Organ 

(1997) argued that OCB may also lead to monetary recompense similar to in-role 

performance.

In response to such concerns, Organ (1997) redefined OCB as “performance that 

supports the social and psychological environment in which task performance takes 

place” (p. 95). Organ argues that compared to task performance, OCB “is less likely to be 

considered an enforceable job requirement” (p. 91), and he adds OCB is “less likely than 

task performance to be regarded by the performer as leading confidently to systemic 

rewards” (p. 91). Thus, even though the traditional OCB dimensions had been defined 

exclusively as extra-role activities, the OCB redefinition leaves the possibility open for 

including behaviors that may be considered in-role for certain positions or for including 

behaviors that may be considered in-role for some employees but not for others. 

Motowidlo and Van Scotter (1994) agree and argue that “task performance is role 

prescribed, but contextual performance is more typically discretionary” (p.476). Also, this

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


9

new OCB definition is flexible with regard to whether OCB behaviors are associated with 

rewards. Organ (1997) noted that most OCB research has addressed helping behaviors at 

the individual level, but that we need to develop OCB research at the aggregated level of 

analysis. In the next section, I define OCBs in the aggregate.

Organizational Citizenship Behaviors in the Aggregate

Examining OCB at the individual level is important because these behaviors are 

displayed by individuals. However, helping behaviors in the form of OCBs and 

contextual performance may also occur at aggregated levels (e.g., George,  1990). For 

instance, Ostroff (1992) found a stronger relationship between employee satisfaction and 

organizational performance at an aggregated level than those normally observed at the 

individual level. Ostroff (1992) considers that performance measures at the individual 

level may not adequately capture interactions and dependencies in the work setting such 

as those found in service environments.

In this research OCB at the group level is defined as helping behaviors shared by 

members of a group that help create or support the environment where core activities of 

the position take place. Shared implies that members of the group have a common 

perspective of the behavior that may be related to their group membership (James, 

Demaree, & Wolf,  1984). A modified and adapted example given by George (1990) 

clarifies this definition. Assume four bank branches with five service employees. 

Employees of Branch 1  frequently display high levels of helping behaviors. For instance, 

employees commonly cooperate with each other, communicate with members of the 

group that will be affected by decisions, and make suggestions to improve the service 

they deliver to customers. Employees of Branch 2 do not display helping behaviors. For

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


10

instance, employees never help their teammates and always take long breaks. Members of 

Branch 3 display moderate levels o f helping behaviors. Members of Branch 4 vary in 

their helping behaviors; although some display high levels of helping behaviors, others 

display very low levels of helping behaviors. The members of branches  1, 2, and 3 

display shared or homogeneous helping behaviors. If helping behaviors in Branch 4 are 

averaged, the results may be similar as those at Branch 3. However, members of Branch 4 

do not display similar levels of helping behavior because their behavior is not 

homogeneous.

Arguing that group members display OCB denotes that service employees at a 

branch are similar in respect to OCBs, therefore means that the service employees can be 

considered as a whole (Klein, Dansereau, & Hall,  1994). Schneider’s (1987) ASA 

framework gives one theoretical justification for group level employee behaviors. The 

ASA framework posits that similar people will be attracted to, selected by, and retained in 

a work setting (Schneider,  1987). This process may result in similar group behaviors. 

Thus, group members may be expected to display similar levels of OCBs (George & 

Bettenhausen,  1990). Training programs and job requirements may also promote 

behavioral similarity among service employees within a branch. Schneider and Bowen 

(1992), for example, argue that training programs in the service area should include job- 

specific task proficiency, customer relationships, and cultural values and norms. Through 

these training programs, some behaviors of employees may be standardized. Thus, for the 

purpose of this study, I examined OCB at the group level. OCB dimensions include 

altruism, conscientiousness, sportsmanship, courtesy, and civic virtue. The next section 

defines these dimensions, and I present examples of their existence at the group level.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


11

OCB Dimensions

Bateman and Organ (1983) generated a list of employee behaviors to develop an 

OCB measure. These activities included making constructive statements in relation to the 

department, showing personal interest in the work of others, making proposals for 

improvements in the organization, and demonstrating behaviors such as punctuality and 

attendance above standard levels. Additionally, the list included behaviors that an 

employee may abstain from performing, such as complaining and starting arguments with 

other employees. Later, Smith, Organ, and Near (1983) developed a simplified list of 

items arrayed in two factors: altruism and conscientiousness. At the group level, altruism 

means members of the group display similar helping behaviors to one another. For 

instance, in a university department, professors volunteer to teach colleagues’  classes 

when their colleagues are absent because of illness. Conscientiousness is defined as 

behaviors that are well above the minimum standards asked by the organization and that 

are nor directed towards a specific person but toward the organization. Examples of 

conscientiousness at the group level occur, for example when all group members display 

high levels of attendance at work, strictly follow rules, or use work time wisely.

More recently, Organ (1988) suggested three dimensions of OCB in addition to 

altruism and conscientiousness. First, according to Organ (1988) sportsmanship, is the 

desire of the employee to accept or to tolerate less than desired circumstances in the job 

without complaining. In other words, sportsmanship refers to behaviors the employees 

avoid, for example “avoiding complaining about petty grievances, railing against real or 

imagined slights, and making federal cases out of small potatoes” (Organ, 1988, p.l 1). At 

the group level, group members of a service department will be willing to tolerate, for

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


12

example, the  problems related to a store’s remodeling activities without getting upset 

(Podsakoff, MacKenzie, & Hui,  1993). Civic virtue means that employees care about the 

company. Thus, civic virtue implies that employees will participate in the organization’s 

meetings and will present constructive suggestions in relation to improvements in their 

position. For example, salespeople in a unit will participate by providing suggestions 

during department meetings. Finally, courtesy consists of behaviors aimed at preventing 

work-related problems with others. Courtesy is the practice of checking with other 

employees before taking actions that may affect their work. For example when 

salespeople from a company unit verify that a product is in stock before accepting an 

order, they demonstrate group-level courtesy.

In sum, the five OCB dimensions previously defined by Organ may be displayed 

at the group level (i.e., displayed consistently by members of a unit or a branch). These 

dimensions of group level citizenship behaviors may enhance organizational outcomes 

(Organ,  1988). In the next section, I explore about this OCB-organizational effectiveness 

relationship and discuss the little research that has been done in this area.

OCB in the Aggregate and Organizational Effectiveness

The OCB definition provided above assumes that the purpose of these behaviors 

is to benefit the organization. Organ (1988) argues “our requirement of OCB is that it 

represent actions of individuals that in the aggregate improve the functioning of the 

organization” (p.8). However, only very limited previous research has studied the OCB- 

organizational effectiveness relationship at the group level.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


13

OCBs may enhance organizational effectiveness by lubricating the social and 

psychological climate where the activities of the employees take place by reducing 

friction and/or increasing effectiveness (Borman & Motowidlo,  1993; Organ,  1988). 

Podsakoff and MacKenzie (1997) argue for the different ways in which increasing 

effectiveness may happen. First, OCB may improve effectiveness by coworkers helping 

each other. For instance, helping behavior may improve effectiveness when inexperienced 

service employees become productive faster, learning from their more experienced 

co workers. Another way in which OCB may improve the efficiency of an organization is 

by integrating and coordinating activities within a unit or group and across work units.

For instance, group members of a sales unit should determine the availability of a product 

from the warehouse before accepting an order. This efficient pooling of resources may 

reduce the possibility of problems. Finally, OCB may enhance effectiveness by helping 

the organization adapt to the market changes. For instance, service employees in close 

contact with customers may provide valuable information about changes in customers’ 

behaviors and may provide recommendations about how to respond to those changes. A 

few empirical studies demonstrate that OCB may enhance organizational effectiveness.

In a sample of 18 work groups, Karambayya (1990) found that high performing 

work groups displayed more OCB than employees in low performing groups.

Performance ratings were obtained from 12 different organizations formed mainly of 

white collar and professional employees. This study characteristic leads to a limitation, 

however. Because the sample was taken from 12 different organizations, performance 

evaluations were not the same. Thus, we do not know if the measures used by all of the 

evaluators were equivalent.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


14

A series of more recent studies, Podsakoff et al., (1997) and Podsakoff and 

MacKenzie (1994), addressed the OCB-performance relationship. Podsakoff et al. (1997) 

found that two OCB variables, helping behavior and sportsmanship, had a positive effect 

on performance quantity measured as quantity of products manufactured. Podsakoff et al., 

(1997) also found that helping behavior had a significant effect on performance quality 

measured as products rejected by the quality control department or the customer. These 

variables explained about 26% of the variance in performance quantity, and close to  17% 

in performance quality. Podsakoff et al.’s (1997) research used 40 work crews as the 

sample, and measures of OCB were based on the work of Organ (1988) and the research 

of MacKenzie et al.  (1991).

In a sample o f 116 insurance agency units, Podsakoff and MacKenzie (1994) 

studied the effect of OCB on unit-level performance. The researchers found that OCBs 

explained approximately 17% of the variance. Unexpectedly, Podsakoff and MacKenzie 

(1994) found a negative relationship between helping behavior, viewed as a composite of 

altruism, courtesy, peacekeeping, and some aspects o f cheerleading, and unit level 

performance. In the third study, MacKenzie et al., (1996), as cited by Podsakoff and 

MacKenzie (1997), studied 306 pharmaceutical sales teams. The researchers found that 

helping behaviors and sportsmanship had a positive relationship with sales team 

effectiveness. These variables together explained approximately 15% of the variance.

These studies have focused mainly on criterion variables such as quantity 

produced, product quality, and sales performance. However, the benefits generated by 

OCB in the aggregate may influence other outcomes of organizations (Podsakoff &

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


15

MacKenzie,  1997). In other words, organizational effectiveness may have multiple 

criterion variables. One important criterion variable in service organizations is customer 

service. Two common ways to operationalize customer service indicators are service 

quality and customer satisfaction. To my knowledge, no study has addressed the OCB- 

service quality relationship, and only one study has examined the relationship of OCB- 

customer satisfaction in the aggregate. In a sample of 30 limited menu restaurants, Walz 

and Niehoff  (1996) found a positive relationship between aggregated helping behaviors 

and average overall customer satisfaction measures (.42; p < .001). However, civic virtue 

and sportsmanship were not significantly related to customer satisfaction. Unfortunately, 

Walz and Niehoff (1996) do not give a theoretical rationale for these fmdings. Also, some 

limitations of this study are related to the study’s methodology. OCB evaluations were 

not made by the direct employee’s supervisor but by general managers who managed 

multiple restaurants. Also, managers were asked to randomly select five employees from 

each store. There was however no actual documentation that this procedure occurred. In 

sum, Walz and Niehoff (1996) is an exploratory study with all the limitations this 

implies. This study will improve Walz and N iehoff s (1996) research in several ways. 

First, a bigger sample size is planned; second, this study is going to use two different 

customer service evaluations; and third, the theoretical rationale is presented to justified 

the expected relationships.  Because the current research includes customer service 

evaluations, the next section describes the service context and the constructs included.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


16

The Service Context and Customer Service Indicators

Service organization employees have face-to-face contact with customers (e.g., 

Zeithaml, Parasuraman, & Berry,  1985); thus, service employees’ work involves greater 

interpersonal interaction than manufacturing work (Schneider,  1990). The behaviors and 

attitudes of service people may affect customers’ perceptions of the service (Bowen & 

Schneider,  1985). As a consequence, service quality perceptions come from the delivery 

of the service and the interaction between the service employee and the customer at the 

time of the delivery (the service encounter). Also, the intangible nature o f service 

frequently demands a service employee’s quick response to customer needs, such as the 

employee is deciding the necessary actions to take. As Solomon, Surprenant, Czepiel, and 

Gutman (1985) write, “In pure service situations where no tangible object is 

exchanged...customer satisfaction and repeat patronage may be determined solely by the 

quality of the personal encounter” (p. 100).

As discussed above, providing a service differs from providing a good. Thus, the 

ways in which customers evaluate services will also differ from the ways customers 

evaluate products. Also, as it was asserted by Bowen and Schneider (1985), that the 

service performance of employees may affect customers’ perceptions of the service and, 

as a consequence, service quality is in the delivery or the interaction between the service 

employee and the customer at the time of the service delivery (the service encounter). As 

proposed at the beginning of this chapter, discretionary behaviors in the form of OCBs 

may influence customer service perceptions of service quality and customer satisfaction. 

In order to more specifically examine these possibilities, in the next section I discuss

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


17

aspects of customer service, and I focus on a description of the most widely used 

literature on service quality (Parasuraman, Zeithaml, & Berry,  1988) and customer 

satisfaction (Rust & Oliver,  1994).

Service Quality

Researchers have used different dimensions to assess customer service 

perceptions. For instance, Schneider and Bowen (1985) measured customer perceptions 

of service quality using five different dimensions: courtesy/competence, utility/ security, 

adequate staff, employee morale, and branch administration. The most common ways to 

operationalize customer service perceptions have been through service quality and 

customer satisfaction (Pugh,  1997).

Zeithaml, Parasuraman, and Berry (1990) define perceived service quality as the 

difference between customer expectations and customer perceptions. Five dimensions 

define customer perceptions of service quality. Contact employees may influence each of 

these dimensions (Zeithaml & Bitner,  1996).  The five dimensions are  1) Tangibles, or 

aspects of the physical facilities, equipment, and personnel from the organization, the 

appearance and dress of service employees; 2) Reliability, or the ability to perform the 

offered service dependably and accurately; 3) Responsiveness, or the service employees’ 

willingness to help customers and to provide timely service; 4) Assurance, or knowledge 

and courtesy of service employees and their ability to communicate trust and confidence; 

and 5) Empathy, or individualized attention the organization gives to its customers by 

paying attention, listening, and being flexible in filling customers’ needs. These 

dimensions of service quality clearly relate to the interaction between the service provider 

and the consumer (Bitner, Booms, & Tetreault 1990).

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


18

According to Mangold and Babakus (1991), technical quality and functional 

quality influence perceptions of service quality. The former implies what the company 

delivers, or in other words, the service core. The functional quality implies the manner in 

which the sendee is delivered. Because of the intangibility of services, evaluating the 

technical characteristics of service provision is often difficult for consumers. Therefore, 

consumer perception of service quality may be mainly based on the functional 

characteristics of services. In this way, the contact employee may not only perform the 

requirements asked in the job description (task performance), but may also display 

behaviors that support the environment where these activities take place and, thus, affect 

customer perception of the functional characteristics of services.

Researchers in the employee customer interaction literature have also found that 

service employees influence customer perception of service quality (e.g., Mangold & 

Babakus,  1991; Hartline & Ferrell,  1996). Empirical research in service quality and 

customer satisfaction shows the importance of the customer-service employee interaction 

in the evaluation of overall quality and satisfaction with services (Bitner et al.,  1990). 

These authors also add that the dimensions used to evaluate service quality as described 

by Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry (1985) “reveal that a majority of all items relate 

directly to the human interaction element of service delivery” (p. 72).

Customer Satisfaction

Rust and Oliver (1994) define customer satisfaction as “the consumer’s 

fulfillment response” (p.4). In other words, consumer satisfaction is the degree to which 

the product or service delivers a level of fulfillment to the consumer. In contrast to this,

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Rust and Oliver (1994) define service quality as a comparison to an ideal or excellence in 

the service encounter. Oliver (1993) posits that consumer satisfaction includes elements 

of judgment (e.g., cognition) and affect (e.g., emotion); whereas service quality is based 

only on elements of cognition. Oliver (1997) summarizes the conceptual differences 

between quality and satisfaction (see Table  1). For example, although service quality 

expectations are based on ideals or excellence, customer satisfaction expectations are 

based on predictions or needs.

Insert table  1  about here

Iacobucci, Grayson, and Ostrom (1994) suggest that service quality and customer 

satisfaction are complementary operationalizations of the total evaluation of customers. 

For instance, the focus of service quality is primarily long-term, but the focus of 

satisfaction is short-term (Oliver,  1997). Thus, both constructs are important for 

understanding customer reactions. My proposition is that organizational citizenship 

behaviors targeted to the organization and to specific individuals inside the organization 

may be positively related to customer attitudes of satisfaction and of perceptions of 

service quality.

I also study service quality and customer satisfaction at the group level. Service 

quality and customer satisfaction are measures of work effectiveness, and Organ noted 

that the ultimate effect of OCBs is the benefit of the organization. Thus, OCBs may be 

important primarily because they facilitate the achievement of organizational or group

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


20

goals. Therefore, one reason for investigating service quality and customer satisfaction at 

the group level is to demonstrate the effect of OCBs on group level effectiveness. The 

marketing literature also notes that customers interact with or have several service 

encounters with different employees of the same group. Consequently, service quality and 

customer satisfaction perceptions may come from the aggregated encounters the customer 

has had with service employees. Thus, this rationale provides an additional reason to 

examine service quality and customer satisfaction at the group level. The rationale for my 

hypotheses follows.

OCB-Service Quality/Customer Satisfaction Relationship

As mentioned previously, one of the main characteristics of service is its 

intangibility. Thus, evaluating a service may be compared to evaluating an experience 

(Pugh,  1997) because evaluation is more difficult when no hard evidence on which to 

base a judgment exists. I propose that one indicator on which customers depend to 

evaluate quality is organizational citizenship behavior. In other words, I want to know if 

OCBs from service employees translate into improved service perceptions and attitudes 

for customers.

As mentioned previously, the OCB domain includes five dimensions: altruism, 

courtesy, conscientiousness, sportsmanship, and civic virtues. This study examines these 

OCB dimensions at the group level. Through altruism and courtesy, service employees of 

a bank branch help each other accomplish their activities, help coworkers with specific 

problems (e.g., serving or handling a problematic customer), or serve customers of 

colleagues when an employee is sick. At the group level, an example of courtesy in the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


21

service industry may be the service employees who agree to notify their supervisors 

concerning the details of angry customers who wishes to talk with their supervisors. A 

final example given by Organ (1988) is the case of a service department that promptly 

and informally keeps in touch with production people when orders that need special 

dispositions are given by the service department.

Through conscientiousness, sportsmanship, and civic virtue, groups of service 

employees will perform activities such as coming in early and enforcing the delivery of an 

order before the scheduled time. This means that the organization will not have problems 

with a new customer because of lateness or as a consequence of unforeseen 

circumstances. In relation to sportsmanship in the service industry, a group o f employees 

does not complain about job conditions among themselves, but also avoids complaining 

to the customers. Thus, if service employees in a bank branch feel they have not been 

treated well or do not have adequate job conditions, they may complain to other group 

members or customers, thereby affecting the image or perception the customer has of the 

service and the organization (Schneider & Bowen,  1985). Finally, through civic virtue 

behaviors, groups of service employees may create and discuss constructive suggestions 

proposing how the branch can improve its service quality, resulting in the group or 

organization benefiting by giving better service. For example, Bowen and Schneider 

(1985) recommend that as a consequence of the direct contact with the customer, service 

employees can effectively participate in the design of new products and can provide 

organizations with important market information.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


22

Previous research (Parasuraman et al.,  1990; Berry, Zeithaml, & Parasuraman,

1990) found that cooperation among service employees (teamwork) is important for 

achieving service quality. For instance, in the example of the car dealership described at 

the beginning of this chapter, through the helping behavior of or cooperation among 

salespeople, the story ended with a happy customer. Also, Zeithaml and Bitner (1996) add 

“the nature of many service jobs suggests that customer satisfaction will be enhanced 

when employees work as teams” (p.321). Moreover, Berry and Parasuraman (1991) posit 

that “an interactive community of coworkers who help each other, commiserate, and 

achieve together is a powerful antidote to service burnout” (p.  162). Thus, discretionary 

behaviors, such as altruism and courtesy, among groups of service employees may be 

related to service quality and to customer satisfaction.

Therefore, because of the helping behavior among groups of service employees 

and because of the friendly atmosphere created by employees who are helpful or 

courteous to each other, fewer mistakes are likely to be made in the delivery of the 

service. For instance, as a consequence of work group helping behavior, service 

employees may communicate or perform the necessary activities so that customers who 

placed a special order will receive the requested service on time. Thus, the customer may 

perceive service quality and, thus, be satisfied with the service. In a bank branch, new 

tellers who are unsure of how to deal with a specific situation and who do not want to 

make a mistake may ask more experienced tellers how to handle the situation. Often, this 

scene happens in front of customers who observe the helping behaviors among 

employees.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


23

Additionally, I believe that through OCB, service employees can develop 

behaviors that enhance their organization’s service orientation. Borman and Motowidlo 

(1993) posit that “contextual activities...  support the organizational, social, and 

psychological environment in which the technical core must function” (p.73). The climate 

or environment resulting from these behaviors provides better service as perceived by 

customers. Researchers, for example, have found a relationship between employee 

attitudes and customer evaluations (Schneider & Bowen,  1985). As Schneider and Bowen 

(1993) put it, “[the] internal organizational climate visible to employees spills over on 

external customers, a consequence of the psychological and physical closeness that exists 

between employees and customers in service encounters” (p.39). In this case, however, 

the climate is not what management gives to its employees, but what the service 

employees as a group create or display inside the organization.

HI: There is a positive relationship between group level OCB (altruism, courtesy, 

conscientiousness, sportsmanship, and civic virtue) and customers’ perceived service 

quality and customer satisfaction at the group level of analysis.

I have argued above that group citizenship behaviors and  aggregated customer 

service indicators are positively related. These OCBs are displayed among service 

employees and not directly to customers; however, besides displaying helping behaviors 

towards coworkers and the organization, service employees may also display helping 

behaviors directly toward customers (Podsakoff & MacKenzie,  1997). These behaviors 

also may be related to customer service indicators. Hartline and Ferrell (1996) posit that 

“the responses of customer-contact employees heavily influence customers’ perceptions

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


24

of service quality and the service encounter”(p. 53). Thus, the helping behaviors by 

employees toward customers are included in the customer orientation construct. In the 

next section, the customer orientation construct is defined, and its relationship with 

service quality/customer satisfaction is discussed.

Customer Orientation

The marketing literature, posits that customer orientation is a significant predictor 

of organizational effectiveness (e.g., Kelley,  1992; Deshpande, Farley, & Webster,  1993; 

Jaworski & Kohli,  1996; and Han, Kim, & Srivastava,  1998).  Customer orientation refers 

to service behaviors that generate value to the customer (Narver & Slater,  1990). 

Employees may generate customer value by meeting the needs and expectations of the 

customer (Narver & Slater,  1990). For example, bank branch service employees who treat 

customers with respect are meeting customer expectations with a friendly attitude.

Schneider and colleagues (e.g., Schneider & Bowen,  1985) have investigated the 

climate for service construct, which refers to employee perceptions of  the organization’s 

service related characteristics in the form of routines, practices, and policies that support 

the ability of employees to provide good service. On the other hand, customer orientation- 

as-service-behaviors are the actual behaviors (i.e., actions) by members of a group that 

are displayed toward customers to foster good service. Schneider et al., (1998) assert that 

organizational service characteristics lead to service behaviors that may result in higher 

customer service evaluations. Borucki and Burke (in press) also differentiate service 

behaviors from organizational service characteristics. Borucki and Burke’s research 

suggests that service behaviors mediate the service climate effects on store financial

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


25

performance. Moreover, Siguaw, Brown, and Widing (1994) found that market 

orientation defined as organizational service characteristics affects service employees’ 

customer orientation. This study, therefore, examines customer orientation-as-service- 

behavior (COB) and its relationship with organizational performance. A few empirical 

studies focus on the effects of customer orientation on customers’ responses, such as 

service quality and customer satisfaction (Jaworski & Kohli,  1996; Podsakoff & 

MacKenzie,  1997). In the next section, I develop this construct and argue for a 

relationship between the two different constructs of customer evaluations included in this 

study.

Customer Orientation as Service Behaviors (COB)

As mentioned above, COB may be defined as behaviors displayed by service 

employees (group level) that generate value to customers (Narver & Slater,  1990; Saxe & 

Weitz,  1982). For example, customers expect to be treated with a certain courtesy. Also, 

customers expect service people to have a helpful attitude about the products or services 

they offer. For instance, members of a bank branch who treat customers with respect are 

meeting customer expectations of a friendly attitude. Also, a group of tellers at a bank 

branch who keep customers informed about changing regulations are meeting customers’ 

needs with a helpful attitude about informing customers how to follow the right 

procedures. Another example, given in the initial part, o f this chapter discussed 

salespeople in a car dealership who worked together creating customer value by keeping 

the customer informed about changes in car models. Another example is that of service 

employees in a car dealership who keep track of a car’s performance through calling

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


26

customers after an automobile purchase. Additionally, bank personnel may handle a 

special request or problem. Helping a customer by handling special service problems can 

inspire trust and confidence, thus positively influencing perceptions of service quality and 

customer satisfaction. One reason customer orientation is important is that aspects of 

customer service, such as service quality and customer satisfaction, may be influenced by 

the interpersonal interaction between customers and contact employees (Bitner, Booms,

& Mohr,  1994). In relation to service behavior, Bitner et al., (1994) found that many 

satisfactory customer encounters are the result of the service employee’s desire and 

disposition to adjust to the needs of customers. Finally, Schneider and Bowen (1992) also 

argue that in a service context most companies only concentrate on the technical job 

skills, for instance bank tellers learning how to operate a computer. However, companies 

also need to encourage employees to focus on the customer relationship aspects of the 

service interaction necessary to keep good relations between an organization and the 

customers (Hogan, Hogan, & Busch,  1984).

One important point regarding OCBs and COBs is that they can be differentiated. 

OCBs are mainly directed internally toward the employees or the organization while 

COBs are directed externally toward customers. Different antecedents can also determine 

OCBs and customer orientation. Motowidlo and Van Scotter (1994) found that 

personality factors are more highly related to helping behaviors than to job-specific task 

proficiency. Additionally, experience was found to be more highly correlated with the 

core activities of the position than with helping behaviors. Finally, organizational 

practices can determine COBs. For instance, with organizational policies, although there 

may not be any rule or procedure that a service employee must follow to help a coworker

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


27

in a specific situation, there may be specific procedures that service employees are 

required to follow to be customer oriented. Moreover, service employees receive training 

to deal with customers, but most employees do not receive training to perform OCBs. By 

means of employee training on customer orientation, behavioral service similarity among 

service employees within a branch can be promoted.

As mentioned earlier, this research studies COBs at the group level (i.e., bank 

branch). In other words, COBs are bank branch service personnel’s behaviors to create 

value for their customers. The ASA framework (Schneider,  1987) also provides a 

theoretical justification for the existence of group level COBs. As noted, the ASA 

framework posits that similar people will be attracted to, selected by, and retained in a 

work setting (Schneider,  1987). This process may result in similar group behaviors. 

Therefore, service employees in a service organization may display homogeneous levels 

of customer oriented behaviors. Thus, COBs will be also studied at the group level.

COB and Service Quality/Customer Satisfaction Relationship.

According to Podsakoff and MacKenzie (1997), evidence o f the effect of COBs 

“is only just beginning to accumulate” (p.  147). Until recently however, research has 

mainly focused on financial performance and not on customer service evaluation. For 

instance, Narver and Slater (1990) studied the relation between different financial 

measures of organizational effectiveness and customer orientation. Measures of customer 

orientation included achieving customer commitment, creating customer value, 

understanding customer needs, and providing after-sales service. Narver and Slater (1990) 

found positive relationships between customer orientation with return on assets (r = .30, p>

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


28

< .001), low cost-based competitive advantage (r = .27, g < .01), and differentiation-based 

competitive advantage (r = .44, g < .001) among 113 strategic business units in a forest 

products division of an organization. Kizilos (1995) studied the level at which customer- 

centered behavior mediated the effect of employee involvement on organizational 

effectiveness. Kizilos (1995) found that customer-centered behavior measured as 

anticipating and adapting to customer needs, exceeding customer expectations, and 

resolving customer problems related positively (r = .31, p < .05) to unit sales volume. 

Finally, Borucki and Burke (in press), found a positive relationship between sales 

personnel service performance and store financial performance (r = . 17, g < .05). Sales 

personnel service performance was measured with a 13-item scale that tapped aspects of 

helping behaviors toward customers and financial performance as operating profit/loss as 

a percentage of total sales.

Customers may perceive high service quality and satisfaction when interacting 

with a group of service employees who are highly customer oriented because the 

customer views these behaviors as beneficial, authentic, and real. As mentioned above, 

Bitner et al. (1994) found that satisfactory customer encounters are the result of the 

service employee’s desire to handle special requests or problems. Also, Price, Amould, 

and Tierney (1995) argue that an “authentic understanding [of the customer] 

involves... real giving on the part of the provider” (p.93). For example, a service 

employee who explains the care of a product or the most beneficial use of the product or 

service to a customer may help the customer to perform the service or to use the product 

in such a way that he/she will take full advantage of it. As a consequence, the customer

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


29

may perceive high service quality and respond with service satisfaction. Thus, I propose 

the following hypothesis:

H2: There is a positive relationship between COB and perceived service quality and 

customer satisfaction at the group level of analysis.

The Additive Relationship o f OCB and COB in Predicting Customer Evaluations

Hypotheses  1  and 2 argue for a positive relationship between OCBs among service 

employees and COBs, which are mainly displayed towards customers, and two customer 

service evaluations: service quality and customer satisfaction. However, OCB or COB 

alone may not result in the strongest perceptions of service quality or customer 

satisfaction. As noted above, previous research (e.g., Parasuraman et al.,  1990) argues 

that cooperation among service employees is important for achieving good service and 

that teamwork prevents service failures (Berry & Parasuraman,  1991). However, helpful 

behaviors among service employees alone may not result in the highest evaluations of 

customer service. George (1990), for example, asserts that prosocial behaviors may be 

focused mainly on group members; “hence, one might not expect such groups to be more 

helpful to customers, per se.” (p.l 14). Similarly, through customer oriented behaviors, the 

service employee may directly influence service evaluation measures. Bitner et al. (1994) 

found that many satisfactory customer encounters are the result of the service employee’s 

desire and disposition to adjust to the needs of customers. However, different researchers 

(e.g., Gronroos, 1990; Berry,  1995; Christopher, Payne, & Ballantyne,  1991) assert that 

the quality of relationships among employees within the organization may also influence 

the level or quality of relationship with customers. Thus, as mentioned above, OCB or

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


30

COB alone may not result in the strongest perceptions of service quality or customer 

satisfaction. Therefore, OCB and COB may additively explain variance in service quality 

and customer satisfaction beyond that explained by OCB or COB alone. Consequently, I 

present the following hypothesis.

H3:  OCB and COB will additively predict perceived service quality and customer 

satisfaction at the group level.

The Interaction o f OCB and COB in Predicting Customer Evaluations

Although hypothesis 3 posits that OCB and COB additively predict perceived service 

quality and customer satisfaction, a possibility exists that these variables also 

multiplicatively interact to predict the respective criteria. That is, the interaction of OCB 

and COB may explain variance in service quality and customer satisfaction beyond that 

explained by OCB or COB alone. An interaction occurs when the effect of one 

independent variable depends upon the level of another independent variable at which it 

is evaluated (Chambliss & Dunlap,  1994).  Similarly, Cohen and Cohen (1983) define 

interaction as “two variables, u and v, [which] are said to interact in their accounting for 

variance in Y when over and above any additive combination of their separate effects, 

they have a joint effect” (p. 302).

Groups of employees who display high OCB may facilitate the transfer of COB 

towards customers by creating an environment in which good service is promoted. There 

are several possible reasons why the display of OCBs by members of a group may 

enhance that group’s willingness to deliver good service. Below I demonstrate how each 

of the OCB dimension’s could enhance COBs.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


31

As stated above, altruism refers to group members displaying helping behaviors 

towards one another. One way that altruism may enhance COB in a group and foster good 

service is when group members help new group members with suggestions and share 

their positive and negative service encounters with customers. Members of a group may 

have different experiences dealing with customers. When experienced service employees 

share or spread these experiences, all members of a group may exhibit the best service 

behavior practices, which, in turn, can lead to better customer service evaluations 

(Podsakoff & MacKenzie,  1997). Schneider and Bowen (1995) assert that organizations 

require the coordination and interdependence of many service employees to provide good 

service. Members of a group who do not share their experiences or who avoid contact 

with one another can create an enmity environment (Berry,  1995). This environment can 

lead members of a group to work independently of one another instead of communicating 

with each other, and this way of working can lead to poor service. Finally, altruism may 

also enhance COB in a group if experienced group members take over a bad situation or 

problem when a new group member is dealing with a customer. New members of a group 

may not have enough experience dealing with “special” customers who always demand 

service employees’  full attention or who make special requests.  In groups that display 

high altruism, members with more experience may be willing to take over or help new 

service employees satisfy these customers, thereby, facilitating the transfer of COBs.

Conscientiousness refers to behaviors that are above the standards asked by the 

organization. A conscientious group may also facilitate the transfer of COBs by 

consistently making their best efforts to please customers. Berry (1995) describes a good 

example of a behavior that is above the required levels: “I ordered my lunch at the deli

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


32

counter, and found when it arrived that I could not carry my tray very well because I was 

holding my baby son. An employee who was apparently on her lunch break gave up her 

place in line right behind me to carry my tray to the table” (p.l). In this example, the 

group member clearly carried out her duties beyond the minimum levels, and by taking 

time from her lunch hour, she displayed a helpful attitude towards a customer. Group 

members who display behaviors that are above the standards asked by the organization 

may encourage other group members to display COBs. For instance, service employees 

who do not spend time on personal phone calls leave telephone lines available for post­

sale phone calls to find out about a product’s performance.

It is also possible that groups that display high civic virtue behaviors promote 

COBs. Civic virtue implies that group members will participate in the organizations’ 

meetings and are concerned about the life of the company (Organ,  1988). In the service 

industry, one of the main challenges is to control for diversity in the delivery of a service 

(Zemke & Schaaf,  1989). By sharing their best service strategies with other members the 

service organization, group members may not only reduce diversity in service delivery but 

also may have an impact on the customers’ image of the organization. Additionally, 

customers very easily get used to certain levels of service (Schneider & Bowen,  1995). As 

the organization keeps improving its service levels, customers will keep demanding and 

expecting an improved service. As a consequence, responsible and active presentation of 

constructive suggestions from group members may enhance service behaviors. As 

Zeithaml et al. (1990) posit, “teamwork is the heart of service-quality initiatives- 

employees need to work together to have service come together for customers” (p. 107).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Courtesy, a fourth dimension of OCBs, consists of behaviors aimed at preventing 

work-related problems with others (Organ,  1988). To deliver good service, groups of 

service employees may share responsibility and coordinate with each other who can lead 

to improved effectiveness and speed (Schneider & Bowen,  1995). Groups that display 

high courtesy behaviors may engage in the practice of checking with other group 

members before taking actions that may affect their ability to coordinate with other group 

members in the organization. A coordinated organization can help employees offer good 

service. For instance, sometimes members of a group need to handle a customers’ special 

request and must obtain information concerning the possibility of delivering a product in 

a specific period of time. By “touching base,” the group may avoid customers’ waiting for 

the product.

Finally, sportsmanship is the desire of the employee to accept or to tolerate less 

than desired circumstances of the job without complaining (Organ,  1988). Groups that 

exhibit high sportsmanship behaviors by not complaining about unimportant matters may 

help group members focus on displaying service behaviors (COBs) that may lead to 

satisfied customers. By not being distracted and by focusing on customers, group 

members’ exhibit helpful attitudes to a customer. Additionally, not complaining about 

unimportant matters may help to avoid low morale and a pessimistic environment that 

may interfere with behaviors that should center on the customer. Pessimistic environment 

where members of the groups are constantly complaining even about unimportant matters 

can diminish both the service employees’ willingness to give customer their full attention 

and the ability for the employee to have a friendly attitude.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


34

On the other hand, when OCB is low, customers, independently of the level of 

COBs, are likely to perceive low service quality and customer satisfaction. Groups with 

low OCB may work competitively rather than cooperatively, independently as opposed to 

interdependently (Berry,  1995). Therefore, under conditions of low OCB, service 

behaviors directed toward customers will not be effective in enhancing customer service 

evaluations. Groups with a low OCB will not engage in the helping behaviors that 

facilitate the coordination of COBs. For instance, group members may keep to themselves 

the best service behavior practices instead of sharing and spreading their experiences. 

Also, as stated before, members of a group who do not share their experiences may create 

a hostile environment (Berry,  1995). This environment can lead members of a group to 

work competitively instead of courteously, and this way of working can lead to 

perceptions of poor service quality and to low customer satisfaction.

Therefore, the relationship between COBs and customer service evaluations may 

be stronger in groups that display high OCBs than in groups that display low OCBs. In 

sum, I argue that group helping behaviors facilitate group COBs toward customers. As 

such, I hypothesized that OCBs would moderate the relationship between COBs and 

perceptions of service quality and customer satisfaction.

Based on this discussion, the following hypothesis is presented.

H4: The multiplicative interaction component of OCB and COB predicts 

perceived service quality and customer satisfaction. This interaction effect is such that 

when OCB is low, the relationship between COB and perceptions of service quality and 

customer satisfaction will be low; however, for high levels of OCB, COB will be strongly 

related to customer perception of service quality and, thus, to customer satisfaction.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


35

Therefore, this study also includes a test o f the multiplicative effect of OCB and 

COB in the prediction of service quality and customer satisfaction.

Summary

This chapter began by asserting that the research on OCBs and COBs rarely 

addresses the possible consequences of these behaviors at the group level of analysis.

This study argued that two of the consequences of OCB and COB in the aggregate will be 

service quality and customer satisfaction. The general rationale for the positive 

relationship between OCBs and service quality and customer satisfaction is that the 

intangibility of services results in perceptions o f service quality mainly based on the 

functional characteristics of services, and these functional characteristics include OCBs.

In other words, one of the main characteristics of service is its intangibility. Thus, 

evaluating a service may be compared to evaluating an experience (Pugh,  1997) because 

evaluation is more difficult when there is no hard evidence on which to base a judgment. 

“In the absence of tangible evidence to evaluate quality, consumers must depend on other 

cues” (Parasuraman et al.,  1985, p.42). I proposed that one of those cues was 

organizational citizenship behavior. Further, I assert that the determinants of service- 

quality perceptions are related to the interaction between the service provider and the 

customer (Bitner et al.,  1990). Moreover, satisfactory customer encounters are the result 

of the service employee’s behaviors in creating value for their customers by meeting their 

needs and expectations, in other words in being customer orientated. This value leads to 

customers’  enhanced perceptions of service quality and satisfaction. All o f these are 

examples of OCB or customer orientation. Simply put, I want to know if organizational

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


36

citizenship behaviors and customer orientation from service employees translate into 

improved service perceptions and attitudes for customers. Additionally, I assert that an 

additive relationship between OCB and COB with perceptions of service quality and 

customer satisfaction will discover a stronger relationship between service quality and 

customer satisfaction when both OCB and COB are high than when one or both variables 

are low.  Finally, because service employees usually depend on one another to render 

good service (Berry et al.,  1990), I argue that a multiplicative interaction component of 

OCB and COB predicts perceived service quality and customer satisfaction. This 

interaction effect is such that when OCB is low, the relationship between COB and 

perceptions of service quality and customer satisfaction will be low; however, for high 

levels of OCB, COB will strongly relate to customer perceptions of service quality and to 

customer satisfaction.

As discussed above, to my knowledge, no study has addressed the OCB-service 

quality relationship, and only one study (Walz & Niehoff,  1996) has examined the 

relationship of OCB-customer satisfaction in the aggregate. As argued earlier, however, 

the study by Walz and Niehoff has methodology limitations that will be addressed in the 

present research. Also, although the COB-service quality/customer satisfaction 

relationship may be direct, there is a paucity of empirical studies on the subject (Jaworski 

& Kohli,  1996). Studying these variables involved acquiring data from external resources 

such as customers and comparing the data with internal resources such as branch 

managers who report the internal culture and behaviors of employees. Additionally, 

researching these constructs required gathering data from internal sources (i.e., managers) 

and comparing them with external sources (i.e., customers). In addition, to my

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


37

knowledge, no study has addressed the additive relationship or the multiplicative 

interaction between OCB and COB with customer service evaluations. If this study’s 

hypotheses are supported, this study will show that group level organizational citizenship 

behaviors and group level customer orientation translate into perceptions of improved 

service quality and customer satisfaction. Further, the test o f the multiplicative interaction 

component of OCB and COB with perceived service quality and customer satisfaction 

will enhance our knowledge o f the role played by the externally oriented behaviors 

(COBs) in combination with the internally oriented behaviors (OCBs) and their 

consequences for customer service evaluations. These findings will add to the known 

benefits of organizational citizenship behaviors and customer orientation, enhance our 

understanding of organizational effectiveness, and bridge the gap between organizational 

behavior and marketing research.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


38

CHAPTER D: METHODOLOGY

The hypotheses described in Chapter 1  were tested in multiple branches of a 

bank in Monterrey, Mexico. Data were collected from two different sources:  1) 

managers from each branch, and 2) customers of each particular branch. This 

chapter describes the data site, the procedures used for data collection, the 

participant characteristics, the sample size, the measures used, and the statistical 

analyses used to test the hypotheses.

Data Site, Participants, and Data Collection Procedures

This research was conducted at 71 branches of a bank in Monterrey, Mexico (the 

bank has about 80 branches total). The researcher chose branches of the same bank 

because using units or branches from the same organization allows a researcher to control 

for differences that may result from the product, service, industry, or even the nature of 

the activities performed (Podsakoff et al.,  1997). The city is divided into three different 

territories. After getting approval from top management, the researcher attended three 

different meetings organized by the bank to collect the data from managers. At the 

beginning of each meeting I asked branch managers to participate, explained the purpose 

of the research, and answered any questions managers raised.

The service group studied was the tellers. The researcher collected OCB behaviors 

by means of a paper and pencil survey of branch managers. Each branch manager 

completed a questionnaire for the group of tellers at his/her branch. The branch managers

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


39

evaluated tellers as a group on the five different dimensions of OCB and customer 

orientation behaviors (COB). Each branch manager received a consent form and one 

questionnaire. See appendices A and B for the consent form and the questionnaire.

Branch managers read and signed the consent form before they started answering the 

questionnaire. As soon as each manager finished, the researcher picked up the consent 

form and the completed questionnaire. All branch managers in the three meetings 

participated in the study.

The bank was so interested in the study that it decided to hire a company to gather 

customer data. Customer data were collected through exit interviews after a customer 

completed a transaction with any of the branches’ tellers. The measures of service quality 

and customer satisfaction were included on the customer questionnaire. The researcher 

participated in all the data gathering process. For instance, the researcher helped train the 

group of people who worked at the company and collected the data. Because the customer 

exit interview is time consuming, I limited the number of customers’ questionnaires 

collected from each branch to 20. Customers’ verbal assent to completing an anonymous 

questionnaire was considered informed consent. The statement read to customers 

soliciting their participation in the study and the questionnaire is presented in Appendix 

C.

Sample Size

Power analysis (Cohen,  1977) is a tool that helps determine a minimum number of 

subjects or groups needed to reject a null hypothesis. A particular power, alpha, and an 

estimated effect size are needed to determine the sample size. Appropriate studies are

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


40

available on which to base effect size estimates (e.g. George & Bettenhausen,  1990; 

Johnson,  1996; Bettencourt & Brown,  1997; Podsakoff et al.,  1997). These studies show 

correlations between discretionary behaviors (or items that can be indicators o f OCBs) 

and measures of effectiveness such as sales performance or quantity produced. 

Correlations between these variables have been found to range from .22 (Bettencourt & 

Brown,  1997) to .69 (Johnson,  1996). Thus, I estimated a conservative effect size at a 

range of  .30, with an alpha of .05 and a desired power level of  .70, requires 66 groups 

(branches). However, the number of branches that participated in the study was 71.

Measures

The measures used in this research are described in this section. I divide the 

measures into those collected from the supervisors and those collected from customers.

Organizational Citizenship Behavior (OCB) Measures

Because social desirability (Schnake,  1991) may bias self-report measures of 

OCB, the branch managers rated the branches’ organizational citizenship behaviors. Most 

OCB researchers have used employee supervisors to rate discretionary behaviors (e.g., 

George,  1991; Williams & Anderson,  1991; Organ & Konovsky,  1989; Bettencourt & 

Brown,  1997; Motowidlo & Van Scotter,  1994; MacKenzie et al.,  1993; Puffer,  1987; 

Setoon, Bennett, & Liden,  1996). Further, Bettencourt and Brown (1997) note that “the 

theoretical position in defining these behaviors presupposes a firm perspective in 

evaluation” (p.45). The bank branch manager is, arguably, the best person in the bank to 

provide this perspective.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


OCB dimensions were measured using a scale slightly modified from that 

developed by Konovsky and Organ (1996). I modified the wording of some of the items 

to rate the average level of OCB displayed by group members instead of rating OCB 

behaviors at the individual level. This scale has been used in several different studies 

(e.g., Konovsky & Pugh,  1994). This measurement consists of 32 items that describe 

employee behaviors. Supervisors rated the group on a 7-point scale ranging from strongly 

disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). Konovsky and Organ calculated a reliability of .90 for 

altruism, .84 for conscientiousness,  .88 for sportsmanship, .87 for courtesy, and .80 for 

civic virtue. Konovsky and Pugh obtained the following reliabilities: conscientiousness 

(.84), altruism (.90), and sportsmanship (.88). The set of items comprising this scale can 

be found in Appendix B. Items  1  to 32 are the items that measure OCB.

Customer Orientation Behaviors (COB)

This variable was measured using one slightly modified scale developed by 

Schneider (1990). The scale consists of four items that include service behaviors group 

member (tellers) may display. Supervisors considered group behaviors at their branches 

on a seven-point scale from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). Schneider obtained 

a reliability for this scale of .88, .89, and .89 in different studies conducted during  1990, 

1991, and 1993. The items comprising this scale can be seen in Appendix B and are items 

33 to 36. Additionally, two items from Schneider’s knowledge (competency) scale were 

used. Schneider’s scale was generated specifically to rate bank personnel regarding their 

ability to solve customer problems and handle special requests. The scale consists of five 

items. However, only two items were used in this study because they were designed to

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


42

measure behaviors toward customers. The other three items measure organizational 

support toward employees (e.g., the extent to which the bank provides employees with 

adequate tools and training to do a job). Supervisors rated group behaviors at the branch 

on a seven-point scale from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). The items (37 and 

38) comprising this scale can be seen in Appendix B.

Finally, branch managers were also asked to provide demographic information 

describing each group member. The questionnaire included a set of demographic 

questions used to describe each teller. These variables included age, education, and 

average length of time with the organization. Finally, the manager answered two 

questions related to branch characteristics, branch size and location.

Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction Measures

Customer data were collected during an exit interview. After the customer 

finished a transaction with any of the group of tellers, he/she was approached. The 

interviewer identified themselves and asked the customer to answer a few questions. If a 

customer declined to answer the questions, the interviewer recorded the apparent 

demographic data for that customer and looked for another customer. If the customer 

agreed to answer the questions, the interviewer proceeded to read the instructions and 

recorded the answers as given in Appendix C. Thus, the interviewers obtained tacit 

consent from customers because they verbally agreed to answer or refused to respond to 

the questions.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


43

Service Quality

In the development of the SERVQUAL instrument, Parasuraman et al., (1985) 

reported ten dimensions that customers use in forming perceptions of service. The authors 

empirically tested their model in a study across four service industries: retail banking, 

credit card, security brokerage, and product repair and maintenance. In a revision of the 

SERVQUAL scale, Parasuraman et al., (1988) redefined the number of factors and 

changed the determinants of service quality from ten to five (reliability, responsiveness, 

assurance, empathy, and tangibles).

Because the interest of this research is on an overall perception of sendee quality, 

the items to measure service quality were combined for an overall score and averaged to 

obtain a group (branch) level score. The original SERVQUAL scale measures gap scores 

and the difference between customer expectations and actual performance of service. 

However, other researchers (e.g. Cronin & Taylor,  1992; Gotlieb, Grewal, & Brown,

1994; Babakus & Boiler,  1992) argue for using a performance-only scale of service 

quality. These authors posit that a performance-only measure is more efficient and 

generalizable than the original SERVQUAL (Hartline & Ferrell,  1996). Moreover, after 

doing further research, the original authors of SERVQUAL (Parasuraman et al.,  1988) 

argue that measuring service quality perceptions as performance-only are as reliable and 

as valid as the original measure (Parasuraman, Zeithaml, & Berry,  1994). Thus, the 

measure of perceptions of service quality for this research followed the scale developed 

by Gotlieb et al., (1994) and Teas (1993), which incorporates two items for each of the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


44

five dimensions. Using Cronbach’s alpha, Gotlieb et al. (1994) obtained a reliability for 

the scale of  .95. The items comprising this scale are displayed in Appendix C.

Overall Customer Satisfaction

A three-item scale taken from Oliver (1980), was used to measure customer 

satisfaction. This scale has been used in other studies (e.g., Mano & Oliver,  1993; Gotlieb 

et al.  1994; Pugh,  1997).  Gotlieb et al. (1994) found a reliability for the scale of .97. 

Scores on the items were averaged to determine the overall score and averaged to obtain a 

group (branch) level score. The items of this scale are displayed in Appendix C.

Demographic Variables

At the end o f the questionnaire, the interviewer also recorded customer 

demographic variables such as gender and approximate age. Additionally, the interviewer 

asked customers the length of time they have been bank customers. Finally, the 

interviewer also recorded the branch code.  See Appendix C for these items.

Questionnaire Translation

As stated before, this research was performed in Monterrey, Mexico. Thus, the 

scales and letters included in Appendices A and B were translated into Spanish. To 

accomplish this task, the researcher followed the methodology recommended by Wemer 

and Campbell (1970) and Brislin (1980). In general, the methodology consisted of a back 

translation: the questionnaires were first translated from English to Spanish by one PhD 

student in the organizational behavior area and then back into English by a second PhD 

student. After this procedure, an independent person (bilingual) reviewed the back 

translation to ensure that the meaning of the items was the same in the two languages.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


45

Scoring Procedures and Assessment of Interrater Agreement

As mentioned previously, the OCB and COB variables were rated at the group 

level. In other words, the referent for this measure is the group. Therefore, branch 

managers rated their teller groups’ on OCB and COB. As mentioned in Chapter 1, this 

approach is justified by the ASA framework (Schneider,  1987) that posits that similar 

people will be attracted to, selected by, and retained in a work setting. Also, training 

programs standardize customer orientation behaviors among service employees.

The individual customer evaluations of service quality and customer satisfaction 

were aggregated to the bank-branch level. Individual customers rated perceptions of 

service quality and customer satisfaction, and I calculated scale scores on the measures 

for each individual adding the items for each scale for that customer. Individual scale 

scores then were aggregated to the branch (group) level of analysis by averaging the 

customers’  responses for each branch. As discussed in Chapter 1, the marketing literature 

notes that customers interact with or have several service encounters with different 

employees of the same group. Thus, perceptions of service quality and customer 

satisfaction may come from the aggregated encounters the customer has had with service 

employees. Additionally, Borucki and Burke (in press) demonstrated that customers may 

have similar perceptions of customer service evaluations because management strategies 

often concentrate on customers to enhance store performance. In sum, similarity of 

service quality and customer satisfaction within settings can be expected.

Because the individual level measures of service quality and customer satisfaction 

were aggregated, assessment of interrater agreement is necessary to justify aggregation of

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


46

individual measures to a group level.  To evaluate interrater agreement, I followed the 

James, Demaree, and Wolf (1984) and the Burke, Finkelstein, and Dusig (1997) 

procedures. The James et al. (1984) methodology compares the observed-response 

distribution for the scale to a hypothesized null response distribution. This distribution 

represents the agreement expected by chance. Because no response bias is expected the 

null response distribution supposed will be rectangular or uniform. I also used the Burke 

et al., (1997) procedure to calculate interrater agreement from the median response 

obtained for each scale. The Burke et al., (1997) procedure posits the use of the average 

deviation indices for assessments of within-group interrater agreement. The researchers 

argue that “the average deviation indices may provide for a more direct conceptualization 

and assessment of interrater agreement because they yield magnitude estimates of 

interrater agreement in the metric (units) of the original scale” (p.21). The findings of 

these analyses are presented in the results section.

Data Analysis

SPSS was used to conduct preliminary analyses and to test the hypotheses. 

Preliminary analyses included examining the differences between respondent customers 

and non-respondent customers on demographic variables. The meaning of the significant 

differences found are discussed in the results section. Additionally, I examined all scales 

for the internal consistency reliability using Cronbach’s (1951) procedure. Additionally, 

the item analysis results were examined to assess the validity of each scale item. Factor 

analysis was conducted to further evaluate all scales. Because the sample size is too small 

(N = 71), a confirmatory factor analysis is not recommended. However, I examined the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


47

factor structure of the scales using principal axis factor analysis and varimax rotation. 

According to Podsakoff et al. (1997), this procedure demonstrates whether items load on 

their expected factors and do not have high cross loadings on non-expected factors. Items 

that do not have a substantial loading on the hypothesized factor or items that cross-load 

were eliminated. The cut-off for the items’  loadings on their hypothesized factor was .35. 

The scale items for service quality and customer satisfaction were averaged to form the 

measures. Hypotheses one and two were tested by examining inter-scale correlations. The 

additive relationship of OCB and COB was tested using multiple regression. Two 

regression equations were formed, one for service quality and one for customer 

satisfaction. The two measures of customer service perception, service quality and overall 

customer satisfaction, were then regressed on the aggregate level measures of OCB and 

COB. Finally, the significance of the multiplicative interaction between OCB and COB 

on service quality and customer satisfaction was tested using hierarchical regression 

(Cohen & Cohen,  1983). Therefore, to test hypothesis 4, OCB was entered into the 

equation, followed by COB. Finally, the multiplicative interaction between OCB and 

COB was included in the third step. The results of this test showed, at each step, if the 

variables entered in the equation made a significant contribution to explained variance 

(AR2).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


48

CHAPTER III: RESULTS

This chapter reports the major findings of the research study and is organized as 

follows: First, I present information about the sample characteristics. Then, I provide 

descriptive statistics on scale properties and intercorrelations among study variables. 

Next, the chapter presents results for inter-rater agreement analyses. Additionally, the 

results of testing the four hypotheses are presented and summarized. Finally, post—hoc 

analyses are described that analyze data for nonlinear relationships.

Teller Information

Sample Characteristics 

This research was conducted at a bank in Monterrey, Mexico. Organizational 

citizenship behaviors (OCB) and customer oriented behaviors (COB) data were collected 

from 71  branch managers. Each manager completed one questionnaire rating the 

behaviors that tellers have as a group. The branch managers’  response rate was  100%. 

The total number of tellers rated was 432. The tellers rated were 32% men and 68% 

women. Bank branches averaged 16 employees and 6 tellers per branch. Of the tellers 

rated, 81% were between 20 and 29 years old;  16% between 30 and 39 years old; and 3% 

over 40 years old. Also, 22% had worked less than one year as a teller; 56% between 1 

and 5 years;  16% between 6 and 10 years; and 6% more than 10 years. Finally, 96% of 

the tellers were full-time employees.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


49

Customer Information

Customers provided data on service quality and customer satisfaction. Twenty 

customer questionnaires per branch were collected. To collect a total of 1,420 customer 

interviews,  1,863 customer contacts had to be made because 443 customers declined to 

answer the questionnaire. Data gathered from customers who declined to participate in 

the research were registered by gender and approximate age. Customers who declined to 

participate in the research were 70% male and 30% female. Among the non-participants, 

3% were less than 20 years old; 30% were between 20 and 29 years old; 33% were 

between 30 and 39 years old; 22% were between 40 and 49 years old; and 12% were over 

50 years old.

Customers who participated in the exit interview were 61% male and 39% female. 

Of these customers, 5% were less than 20 years old; 31% were between 20 and 29 years 

old; 27% were between 30 and 39 years old;  18% were between 40 and 49 years old; and 

19% were over 50 years old. In terms of education level, 52% of customers had a high 

school or less education; 9% had some college education; 34% had a bachelor's degree, 

and 5% had a graduate degree. Also, the interviewers had been bank customers for 

varying times:  15% less than a year, 48% between 1  and 5 years,  17% between 6 and 10 

years, and 20% more than 10 years.

Chi-square tests revealed significant differences between respondents and non­

respondents in the variables of customer gender and customer age. The obtained x2 =

12.1, d f= 1, was significant at the .001  for gender. The obtained x2 = 19.9, d f= 4, was 

significant at the .001  level for age. Getting women to agree to the interview was easier 

than getting men to agree. The percentage of working women in Mexico is still low, so

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


50

women may have had more time to answer the questionnaire than men. Also, people age 

30 to 39 and age 40 to 49 were less cooperative in answering the questionnaire than other 

age groups. Middle-age people tend to be more hurried than younger or older people. 

Additionally, younger people in Mexico may believe that providing information to 

organizations is an important tool for improving services.

Scale Development 

Hair, Anderson, Tnatham, and Grablowsky (1979) recommend factor analysis to 

refine scale measurements. The factor analytic technique has the purpose of summarizing 

information contained in a number of original variables into a smaller set of factors with 

a minimum loss of information. The next section describes a series of factor analyses to 

refine the variables used in this research.

OCB Factor Analysis

Factor analysis was conducted to evaluate the OCB items. The factor analysis of 

the OCB items used all 71  branch managers’ ratings. The scale included a total o f 32 

items, which Organ (1988) groups into five dimensions: altruism, courtesy, 

sportsmanship, conscientiousness, and civic virtue. The factor analyses had the following 

characteristics: (a) there were no missing values; (b) principal axis factoring was used; 

and (c) varimax rotation was employed for interpretation of the factors. Additionally, the 

cut-off for the items loadings on their hypothesized factor was +/- .35. The number of 

factors was restricted to five dimensions that Organ (1988) conceptualized. Table 2 

presents the factor analytic results for the branch manager ratings of the teller groups.

Insert Table 2 about here

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


51

The five factors proposed in previous research did not correspond to the factors 

obtained in this study. For instance, factor 1  in this study included items from three 

different dimensions of OCB: civic virtue, conscientiousness, and altruism. Therefore, in 

an attempt to better delineate the OCB construct, three items from each of the five 

dimensions were chosen for a subsequent factor analysis. The criteria for choosing the 

items were twofold: first, items in each dimension with the highest corrected item-total 

correlation were selected; second, to make alpha highest, the items with the lowest alpha 

were deleted. Table 3 shows the results of this factor analysis. The cut-off for the items 

loadings on their hypothesized factor was +/- .35. A factor loading represents the 

correlation between an original variable and its respective factor. The larger the absolute 

size of the factor loading, the more significant the loading is in interpreting the factor. 

Hair et al. (1979) posit that factor loadings above .30 are considered significant. Items in 

three out of the five dimensions -civic virtue, sportsmanship, and conscientiousness- have 

a loading above 0.35 on the designated factor with no high loading on another factor.  For 

courtesy and altruism, some items have a factor loading over .35 on two different factors. 

The item “try to avoid creating problems for each other” has a loading over .35 for 

courtesy and sportsmanship; the item “help each other when they have been absent” has a 

loading over .35 for civic virtue, altruism, and conscientiousness; and, the item “help 

each other to be more productive” has a loading higher than .35 for civic virtue and 

altruism. However, the highest loading for those items correspond to the appropriate 

factor. Therefore, these  15 items, three for each dimension, were kept for later analyses. 

The alpha reliability (Cronbach,  1951) obtained for the  15-item OCB scale was .90; the 

alpha reliabilities for each OCB dimension were altruism (.88), courtesy (.87),

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


sportsmanship (.76), conscientiousness (.70), and civic virtue (.86). The commonly 

accepted criteria for research purposes is an alpha of .70 (Nunally,  1978).

52

Insert Table 3 about here

COB Factor Analysis

A factor analysis for the Customer Oriented Behaviors (COB) was also 

conducted. The factor analysis of the COB items used all 71  branch managers’ ratings. 

The factor analysis for COB included a total of six items and had the following 

characteristics: (a) there were no missing values; (b) principal axis factoring was used; 

and (c) varimax rotation was employed for interpreting the factors. This analysis was 

restricted to one factor. Table 4 shows the results of this analysis. The results show that 

all six items have a loading above .35; therefore, all items were retained for subsequent 

analyses. The alpha reliability of this scale was .85.

Insert Table 4 about here

Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction Factor Analysis

Tables 5 and 6 show the results of the service quality and customer satisfaction 

factor analyses. The characteristics followed for these analyses were similar to those 
followed in the factor analyses previously described. The only difference was that for 
these constructs, factor analyses were conducted with individual level data. Therefore, the 
total sample size in the service quality and customer satisfaction factor analyses was 
1,420 subjects. For both scales, the results show that all items have a loading well above

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


.35. Therefore, all items for each scale were retained for subsequent analyses. The alpha 

reliability for the service quality scale was .87. For the customer satisfaction scale, it was 
.97.

53

Insert Tables 5 and 6 about here

Assessment of Inter-rater Agreement for SQ and CS

Before aggregating the service quality and customer satisfaction data to the group 

level of analysis, interrater agreement was assessed for service quality and for customer 

satisfaction, using the methodology of James et al. (1984) and Burke et al. (1999). James 

et al. (1984) developed a procedure using the rwg index to compare the observed response 

distribution for the scale to a hypothesized null response distribution. The rwg  indices 

should range from 0 to  1. According to the literature, rwg coefficients greater than .70 

have been considered an acceptable interrater agreement (Burke et al.,  1999). Burke et al. 

(1999) created a procedure that posits the use of the average deviation indices for 

assessments of within-group interrater agreement. Agreement analyses considered ADm 

or ADmd estimates that were less than 1.2 on the 7-point scale as acceptable agreement 

(Burke & Dunlap, 2000).

Table 7 reports the results of the values obtained for service quality and customer 

satisfaction. The average rwg index based on a uniform null distribution obtained for 

customer data in the 71  branches was .955 for service quality and .968 for customer 

satisfaction. The average ADm index obtained was .66 and .52 for service quality and for 

customer satisfaction, respectively. Finally, the average ADmd index obtained for the 71 

branches was .61  for service quality and .46 for customer satisfaction. According to these

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


results, both service quality and customer satisfaction show sufficient agreement to 

justify the aggregation of individual scores on service quality and customers satisfaction 

to the branch level.

54

Insert Table 7 about here

Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Intercorrelations

Table 8 presents the means, standard deviations, internal consistency reliabilities, 

and intercorrelations among the main study variables for the group level data obtained 

from 71 bank branches. As table 8 indicates, all scales exhibited acceptable reliabilities. 

Alpha reliabilities (Cronbach,  1951) ranged from a minimum of .70 to a maximum of .96. 

The commonly accepted criteria for research is .70 (Nunally,  1978).

Because hypotheses proposed for this study are directional, one-tailed tests were 

conducted to calculate the intercorrelations (Chambliss & Dunlap,  1994). As expected, 

most of the intercorrelations among the OCB dimensions were statistically significant (p 

< .01). Also, the intercorrelation between OCB and COB was .56 (p < .01). The 

relationship between service quality and customer satisfaction was .87 (p < .01). 

Intercorrelations among OCB and COB variables with service quality and customer 

satisfaction show mixed results. The correlation between overall OCB and service 

quality, for example, was r = .19 (p = .058); with customer satisfaction, it was r = .15 (p = 

.10). Finally, the correlations between COB and service quality and customer satisfaction 

were r = -.03 (n.s.) and r = -.07 (n.s.) respectively.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


55

Insert Table 8 about here

Test of Hypotheses

The proposed hypotheses describe a partial examination of the framework 

appearing in Figure 2. The results of testing each of the hypotheses are described in this 

section.

Hypothesis 1

Insert Figure 2 about here

Hypothesis  1  proposed a positive relationship between group level OCB (altruism, 

courtesy, conscientiousness, sportsmanship, and civic virtue) and customers’ perceived 

service quality and customer satisfaction at the group level of analysis. When only one 

independent variable exists, R is the simple correlation (Cohen & Cohen,  1983). 

Therefore, as Table 8 shows, results tend to support a marginally statistically significant 

(t p  < . 10) relationship between overall OCB and service quality or customer satisfaction. 

The correlations were r = .19 (p = .058) and r = .15 (p = .10) for service quality and for 

customer satisfaction, respectively. Additionally, I specifically examined each of the 

OCB dimensions (altruism, courtesy, sportsmanship, conscientiousness, and civic virtue) 

and its individual relationship to service quality and customer satisfaction. As Table 8 

shows, all dimensions but sportsmanship are statistically significant with service quality. 

The results obtained were: altruism (r = .21, p < .05), courtesy (r = .21, p < .05), 

conscientiousness (r = .17, p < .10), civic virtue (r = .16, p < .10), and sportsmanship (r =

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


-.01, ns). For customer satisfaction, courtesy was the only dimension that was statistically 

significant (r = .21, p < .05). For the other dimensions the correlations obtained were: 

altruism (r = .13, ns), sportsmanship (r = .01, ns), conscientiousness (r = .12, ns), and 

56

civic virtue ( r -  .12, ns).

Hypothesis 2

Hypothesis 2 proposed a positive relationship between COB and perceived service 

quality and customer satisfaction at the group level of analysis. However, contrary to 

what was expected, no statistically significant relationship exists between COB and 

service quality or customer satisfaction. The correlations contained in table 8 indicate that 

hypothesis 2 received no support. The results show a small, non-significant negative 

relationship between COB and service quality (r = -.03) and between COB and customer 

satisfaction (r = -.07)

Hypothesis 3

Hypothesis 3 stated that OCB and COB will additively predict perceived 

service quality and customer satisfaction at the group level. Table 9 contains the results 

of the regression analysis for this hypothesis, and these results indicate that hypothesis 3 

received no support. As table 9 shows, no significant relationship exists between OCB 

and COB and service quality (R2 = .06, ns) and customer satisfaction (R2 = .06, ns). A 

similar analysis was conducted for each OCB dimension, and the results followed a 

similar pattern.

Insert Table 9 about here

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


57

Hypothesis 4

Hypothesis 4 stated that the multiplicative interaction o f OCB and COB will 

predict perceived service quality and customer satisfaction. To conduct the hierarchical 

regression analysis, OCB was entered into equation in the first step. In the second step, 

COB was entered into the equation. Finally, in the third step, the interaction term of OCB 

and COB was entered into the equation. Table  10 indicates no significant relationship 

between the multiplicative interaction of OCB and COB with service quality (AR2 = .02, 

ns) or customer satisfaction  (AR2 = .02, ns).  A similar analysis was conducted for each 

OCB dimension, and the results followed a similar pattern. The R2 changes obtained from 

the hierarchical regressions for each of the OCB dimensions follow: altruism (AR2  =

.03), courtesy (AR2  = .00), sportsmanship  (AR2  = .01), conscientiousness (AR2  -  .03), 

and civic virtue (AR2  = .02) for service quality as the dependent variable. The results 

obtained for customer satisfaction follow: altruism (AR2  = .05), courtesy  (AR2  = .01), 

sportsmanship (AR2  = .02), conscientiousness (AR2  = .03), and civic virtue (AR2  = .01).

Insert Table  10 about here

Post-Hoc Analysis

Because, unexpectedly, only hypothesis  1  received mixed support, and hypotheses 

2, 3  and 4 were not supported, follow-up analyses were conducted. The previous analyses 

conducted to test hypotheses 1  to 4 were designed to test a linear relationship among the 

variables. Therefore, to find out if there were other types of relationships, a test was 

conducted for non-linear relationship. In addition, an eta analysis (Glass & Hakstian,

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


58

1969) to measure the level of association between the variables was conducted. 

Surprisingly, the level for the overall association (eta) between OCB and service quality 

was .69; between OCB and customer satisfaction, .60; between COB and service quality, 

.59; and between COB and customer satisfaction, .64.  Moreover, according to Glass and 

Hakstian (1969), the difference o f the eta square and the correlation square is a measure 

of the degree of nonlinearity of a best-fitting line for predicting a dependent variable from 

an independent variable. Therefore, the results of the relationship o f OCB with service 

quality was .43; of OCB with customer satisfaction,  .34; of COB with service quality,

.34; and of COB with customer satisfaction, .40. Thus, these results show the possibility 

of a nonlinear relationship among the variables under study.

Subsequent to examining the etas, a local lineal regression (LLR) curve or 

smoother was added to the scatterplots of the bivariate relationship to examine the 

underlying form of the nonlinear relationship (Simonoff,  1996; Fan & Marron,  1994).

The LLR curves were computed with SPSS Interactive Graphics  10.0 (SPSS,  1999) using 

the normal kernel (default) and a bandwidth of 3.5.1 should note that the bandwidth 

changes the amount of data included in each calculation of a small part of the smoother. 

The multiplier can range from 0 to  10; the larger the multiplier, the smoother the curve.

Figure 3 presents the smoother for the relationship between OCB and service 

quality. The relationship between OCB and customer satisfaction followed a similar 

pattern of results (Figure 4). Also, Figure 5 presents the smoother for the relationship 

between COB and service quality. The relationship between COB and customer 

satisfaction followed a similar pattern of results (Figure 6). Figures 3 and 4 show that as 

OCB increases, service quality increases, and as OCB increases, customer satisfaction

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


59

also increase. However, this growth ceases at a point and remains unchanged. Figures 5 

and 6 show the relationship between COB, service quality, and customer satisfaction. The 

figures also show an inflection point where, as COB increases, customer service 

evaluation decreases. Further, to test the significance of these relationships, a series of 

quadratic regression equations was calculated. All results show, however, a non­

significant statistical relationship. For instance, results obtained from the OCB and 

service quality relationship show a (AR2 = .02, ns). The other set of relationships 

followed the same pattern of results. Although the non-significant results might be due to 

power issues, the results suggest nonlinearity.

Insert Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 about here 

Summary

Partial support was found for hypothesis  1  and no support was found for 

hypotheses 2, 3, and 4. Overall OCB, altruism, courtesy, conscientiousness, and civic 

virtue were significantly related to service quality. Also, overall OCB and courtesy were 

significantly related with customer satisfaction. Post-hoc analyses consisted of an eta 

analysis and a local linear regression (LLR) curve, or smoother, added to the scatterplots 

of the bivariate relationship. These analyses showed a possible nonlinear relationship 

among the variables under study. A full discussion of the results of testing these four 

hypotheses and the follow-up analyses is provided in the next chapter.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


60

CHAPTER IV: DISCUSSION

This study sought to relate two service employee behaviors, OCB and COB, to 

two measures of organizational effectiveness, service quality and customer satisfaction. 

Results show that at the group level OCBs may lead to better perceptions of service 

quality; however, OCB relationships with customer satisfaction results were generally not 

significant. Also, tests of additive and multiplicative effects of OCB and COB in the 

prediction of customer service evaluations were not supported. Finally, a post-hoc 

analysis shows a probable nonlinear relationship between the variables under study. This 

chapter discusses the theoretical implications of the study’s findings, presents a follow-up 

analysis o f the findings, and concludes by considering the limitations of the study, future 

research directions, and the practical implications of the study.

Study Findings 

Relationship o f OCB to Service Quality

Overall, this research found that, at the group level, OCBs may lead to 

organizational effectiveness and, specifically, to better customer service evaluations. 

Altruism (r = .21, p <  .05), courtesy (r = .21, p < .05), conscientiousness (r = .17, p  = .08), 

and civic virtue (r = .16, p = .09) are OCB dimensions that were modestly related to 

service quality. Through work group helping behaviors, service employees may 

communicate and work together to provide better service quality. Through altruism and 

courtesy, service employees of a bank branch may help each other accomplish their tasks

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


61

or help a coworker with a specific problem (e.g., serving or handling a problematic 

customer). Previous research (e.g., Parasuraman et al.,  1990) has also found that 

cooperation among service employees (teamwork) is important for achieving service 

quality. Berry and Parasuraman (1991) state that “an interactive community of coworkers 

who help each other, commiserate, and achieve together is a powerful antidote to service 

burnout” (p.  162).

Other studies (e.g., Podsakoff et al.,  1997; Walz & Niehoff,  1996) also have found 

that helping behaviors (i.e., altruism and courtesy) tend to have more systematic effects 

on organizational effectiveness than do other OCB dimensions. Unfortunately, none of 

the researchers have provided conceptual explanations for these differences. It is possible 

that the cultural context itself may encourage or discourage certain OCBs (Paine &

Organ, 2000). According to Paine and Organ (2000), collectivist cultures may encourage 

behaviors that benefit the group, such that helping behaviors may be expected among 

members of the group. Behaviors among group members such as altruism and courtesy 

are encouraged and well valued not only by in-group members, but also by out-group 

members (e.g., customers). Mexico is a country that is classified as high on collectivism, 

with a tight social framework (Hofstede,  1980). Consistent with Paine and Organ’s 

arguments about the effect of collectivistic cultures on the exhibition of OCBs, helping 

behaviors may have been more encouraged in the Mexican bank that I studied.

Mexico has been classified as a country with high power distance-- in other 

words, power in institutions and organizations is not distributed equally. Employees in 

high power distance cultures may not be encouraged to make suggestions to management 

or take initiative, because these behaviors may be seen as a challenge to the leader’s

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


62

authority (Paine and Organ, 2000). Behaviors such as complaining (which the measure of 

sportsmanship tapped) may not be encouraged by group members and thus may be at 

relatively low levels in comparison to behaviors for other OCB dimensions. The results 

of this study do in fact show that the level of sportsmanship was lower than behaviors 

associated with other OCB dimensions and varied considerably across bank branches. 

Notably, the level of sportsmanship obtained in this study was considerably lower than 

sportsmanship scores for work teams in a low power distance country (i.e., the US). That 

is, the present mean on the three-item sportsmanship scale (i.e., 4.47) is significantly less 

than the mean on a similar three-item sportsmanship scale presented in Podsakoff et al.

(1997)  for manufacturing crews (i.e., 5.09), (t = 2.59, p < .05).

Another possibility is that sportsmanship and service quality are unrelated since 

tellers may not complain about job conditions in front of customers. One bank executive 

explained that although group members may complain about job conditions, the group 

acts professionally in front of customers and does not show personal dissatisfaction. 

Additionally, because of the close relationship the group has with the immediate 

supervisor, the immediate supervisor may listen to complaints that group members have 

so that the organization can work to resolve them internally, rather than having tellers 

inappropriately vent in front of customers out of a sense of professional frustration. Given 

the flat (i.e., rectangular) distribution of bank branch scores on sportsmanship, 

managerial practices across banks may vary considerably with respect to assisting 

employees in resolving complaints. Future research could examine the potential 

moderating effect of these factors on relations between OCB variables and service 

quality.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


63

Relationship o f OCB to Customer Satisfaction

Although OCB relationships with customer satisfaction are in the expected 

direction, results were generally not significant. Overall OCB was positively related to 

customer satisfaction, but only the dimension of courtesy was significantly related to 

customer satisfaction. Previous studies relating employee behaviors and customer 

satisfaction also have shown mixed results. For instance, while Walz and NiehofF (1996) 

found a relationship between helping behaviors and customer satisfaction (r = .62, p< 

.001), they did not find a relationship between customer satisfaction and sportsmanship or 

civic virtue. Unfortunately, the researchers did not provide an explanation for these 

mixed results.

Customer satisfaction compared with service quality refers to evaluations of the 

bank as a whole, not to the service received. For instance, items measuring service 

quality included “employees of XYZ are consistently courteous” or “XYZ employees 

understand your specific needs.” In contrast, items in the customer satisfaction measure 

included: “I am happy about my decision to use XYZ bank”, “I believe I did the right 

thing when I used XYZ bank”, and “Overall, I am satisfied with my decision to use XYZ 

bank.” Although results are in the expected direction, a weak or a non-significant 

relationship between OCB and four out of five of its dimensions and customer 

satisfaction may exist because the customer satisfaction measure is primarily and more 

narrowly based on core or technical aspects (e.g., Gronroos,  1990) of the bank’s services 

or products (e.g., interest rates or fees charged). Organ (1988) provides support for this 

interpretation:

OCB is not the end-all and be-all that exclusively determines organizational

effectiveness. OCB is worth little if unaccompanied by sound managerial strategy,

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


64

the requisite intellectual and motor skills of members, quality services and 

products, competitive pricing, efficient technologies, and effective systems for 

motivating in-role excellence and productivity (p. 14).

Core or technical aspects of the bank’s services or products, not the functional or 

peripheral elements (e.g., OCB or COB), may be more important aspects of customers’ 

satisfaction ratings. Gronroos (1990) argues that what customers look for in service 

quality is defined by technical and functional aspects. Technical aspects refer to the 

characteristics of the services delivered (e.g., interest rates and fees). Particularly in the 

context of a troubled economy, technical aspects may be what consumers are most 

conscious of, not functional or peripheral elements. Mexico has been through significant 

economic turmoil since  1982. In 1982, the bank industry was nationalized by the 

Mexican government. During these years, Mexico suffered annual inflation rates of 

150%, and the Mexican peso was devaluated 650% —from $20 pesos for $  1  US dollar to 

$150 pesos for $1  US dollar. In the beginning of 1990, the Mexican government decided 

to sell the bank industry again to private investors. However, by the time this process was 

completed, the Mexican government had to interfere again by creating a special 

investment fund so that the bank industry would not collapse or go bankrupt. Again in 

1994, the Mexican peso suffered a 100% devaluation. As a consequence, interest rates for 

a loan rose as high as  100% annually; therefore, families had to stop paying mortgages. 

During 1995, many families lost their houses and cars. As a consequence of these events, 

the bank industry has lost its credibility, even though the situation has improved since 

2000. Therefore, Mexican banking customers may prioritize core or technical aspects of 

the bank’s services or products aspects (e.g., the security of the bank, security of the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


65

deposits, or interest rates) over the functional or peripheral elements (e.g. OCBs) when 

making customer satisfaction ratings.

If customers were basing judgments of their satisfaction with the bank as a whole 

on attributes other than helping behaviors, it follows that behaviors such as OCBs of 

employees should not impact customer satisfaction. Yet, a positive, significant 

relationship between courtesy and customer satisfaction exists. Therefore, evaluations of 

the bank as a whole also seem to include some functional or peripheral elements (e.g., 

helping behaviors) and the technical versus functional or peripheral distinction might not 

fully account for customer satisfaction results.

Organ (1997) defines courtesy as behavior aimed at avoiding the creation of 

problems for coworkers. Podsakoff and MacKenzie (1997) posit that employees who 

display courtesy reduce intergroup conflict and avoid organizational crisis. At the group 

level, this effect may involve not only behaviors among team members of a specific 

branch, but also with other functional groups (Podsakoff & MacKenzie, 1997)— for 

example, with other groups inside the same branch, with groups of other branches, or 

with groups at the corporate offices. Therefore, group members displaying courtesy may 

reduce the number of problems in the organization or bank as a whole. Moreover, Han et 

al. (1998) argue that in periods of high market turbulence, such as what the Mexican bank 

industry has been suffering for the last 20 years, interfunctional coordination is an 

important component to help organizations cope with crisis. Therefore, courtesy may 

involve behaviors that affect the functioning of the bank as a whole and therefore that 

affect customer satisfaction with the bank as a whole. Future research, however, is 

necessary to test this interpretation and to explain why these broader organizational and

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


66

customer satisfaction effects may be uniquely disproportionately associated with 

courtesy.

Relationship o f COB to Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction

Contrary to hypothesis 2, no support was found for the relationship between COB 

and service quality or customer satisfaction. A number of reasons, methodological and 

theoretical, may explain why this relationship did not emerge.

One reason for the failure to establish a relationship between COB and customer 

service evaluations may involve the manner in which the independent variable was 

operationalized. On the COB scale, some items may have described customer oriented 

behaviors that branch managers or customers do not expect a teller to display— for 

example, such items as “Are willing to solve customer problems.” According to bank 

policy, when customers need help solving a specific problem, they should go directly to 

the branch manager or to a specific service executive who can help them. Because the 

tellers do not have to handle these problems, other customers spend less time waiting in 

line. Another item that may not be relevant to the customer oriented behaviors that a 

teller displays is “frequently allow customers to stay long enough to get to know them.” 

Customers of a bank probably want to complete their transaction as soon as possible, 

without being interested in personal interaction with a bank teller. Therefore, to rate 

COB’s of tellers, different scale items may be necessary. This scale should be designed to 

represent fully the behaviors that both the organization and the customers want tellers to 

display.

Other considerations for the failure to demonstrate a relationship between COB 

and service quality or customer satisfaction may also exist. A possible reason for the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


67

failure to demonstrate a relationship between COB and customer service evaluations is 

that to display service employee courtesy/friendliness, physical proximity to customers 

may be necessary. In Mexico, however, all banks have taken security measures because 

o f the economic and social situation and because of governmental regulations. For 

instance, the bank where the data were gathered had installed, among other security 

devices, about a half an inch of glass between tellers and customers. Only a small open 

space exists so that cash, papers, or forms can be exchanged during the service encounter. 

Therefore, bank tellers may have difficulty displaying, and customers may have difficulty 

fully perceiving, any kind of friendly or helpful attitude. For this reason, service 

evaluations may not be a function of COBs.

What has been going on in the Mexican bank industry since  1982 also may help 

explain why, for Mexican customers, service quality and customer satisfaction are a 

function of other variables than COB. COB may not be crucial to Mexican consumers; 

for example, receiving courteous attention from a teller may not be important as the 

interest rate the bank is charging. These priorities may be related to what Han et al.

(1998)  call “market turbulence” (p. 32). In other words, such core variables as cost- 

benefit considerations may be more important to Mexican customers than how the service 

is delivered (Schmit & Allscheid,  1995).

Still another possible explanation for the results between COB and service quality 

or customer satisfaction may be cultural differences in what customers look for in service 

encounters. For example, Winsted (1997) found cultural differences between United 

States and Japan that may affect service encounters. For example, whereas friendliness is 

important in the United States, friendliness may mean impoliteness in Japan, and thus

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


68

formality is chosen. Additionally, the research found that in Japan, promptness is an 

important service factor; that is, in Japan, many customers prefer a service employee who 

is unfriendly but quick. Therefore, differences across cultures may explain why COB and 

service quality were not significantly related. Mexicans, in contrast to those other cultures 

such as the United States, may prefer prompt, quick service over fuller but slower 

service.

A finai approach to explaining a linear relationship between the variables is that 

interactions between tellers and customers may be classified as highly structured (Pugh, 

1997). Customers wait in line, their transactions are processed by the teller, and then the 

teller processes transactions for the next customer in line. Thus, transactions processed by 

tellers are usually highly standardized. A bank executive asserts that bank tellers in 

Mexico mainly perform four tasks: provide balance o f accounts, receive deposits, cash 

checks, and process utilities payments (e.g., telephone and electricity). Therefore, 

transactions are highly routinized, and the average time of the service encounter is short. 

Price et al. (1995) discuss how duration, affective content, and spatial proximity perform 

important roles in the development and the outcome o f the service encounter (p. 83).

Price et al. classify a customer-bank teller relationship as an encounter with low affect, 

brief duration, and high social/public distance. Therefore, as with convenience stores, 

banks may also be settings in which transactions between tellers and customers should be 

brief. As Sutton and Rafaeli (1988) posit, customers look for rapid and friendly service; 

however, customers are willing to give up friendly service for rapid service. Moreover, as 

Schneider and Bowen (1992) argue, customers may have different definitions of good 

service, and the setting in which the service is rendered may influence customers’

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


69

definition of good service. For instance, in a beauty shop, some customers may enter into 

intimate conversations with the service employee. However, in a bank branch where 

people wait in line to receive service, customer expectations may only be to receive 

quick, reliable service. Ostrom and Iacobucci (1995) also found that customers may be 

willing to trade-off different service requirements. Therefore, although friendliness may 

be an important service attribute in some service circumstances --such as in the 

interaction between customers and beauticians— in a bank service encounter between 

customers and tellers, friendly front-line personnel may have less or no impact on the 

way consumers evaluate a service.

In support of this latter explanation, follow-up analyses indicated that a nonlinear 

relationship may more adequately describe the relationship between several sets of 

variables. Therefore, a post-hoc analysis was conducted. A discussion of these findings is 

presented in the next section.

Follow-Up Analysis

The hypotheses presented in this study proposed a linear relationship between the 

variables; therefore, all statistical analyses conducted in this study were to test for this 

kind of relationship. However, as mentioned previously, hypothesis  1  received mixed 

support, and hypotheses 2, 3, and 4 were not supported. A post-hoc analysis suggested 

non-linear relationships. Even though the non-linear relationships were non-significant, 

most probably because of statistical power issues, the results are suggestive of 

nonlinearity.

Figures 3 and 4 show the relationship between OCB and service quality and 

customer satisfaction. The figures show that as OCB increases, service quality and

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


70

customer satisfaction also increase. However, an inflection point exists where, even 

though OCB increases, customer service evaluations remain unchanged. These results 

may indicate that OCB raises customer service evaluations only to a certain level. Some 

plausible explanations for this relationship exist. If high quantity of OCBs are displayed, 

they may turn out to be for the benefit of personal or group goals rather than for the 

benefit of the organization. Brief and Motowidlo (1986) called these behaviors 

dysfunctional behaviors, behaviors that involve helping others to achieve personal goals, 

but at the expense of the organization. Podsakoff and MacKenzie (1997) assert that 

helping behaviors may enhance team spirit and cohesiveness. However, if cohesiveness is 

too high, the group may evolve into a social club in which group members have a good 

time and look the benefits to the group rather than looking for benefits to the 

organization. Moreover, in coilectivistic cultures such as that in Mexico, employees are 

expected to act according to the interests of the group (Hofstede,  1991). Therefore, this 

behavior may promote being more loyal to the group than to the organization. This group 

loyalty may, turn, negatively impact organization effectiveness.

Another possible reason for controlling and maintaining the amount of OCBs at a 

certain level is that helping behaviors are displayed at the expense of core or technical 

work behaviors (Lam, Hui, & Law,  1999). For instance, experienced bank tellers who 

help inexperienced tellers may neglect their own work activities. Podsakoff and 

Mackenzie (1994) found a significant negative correlation between OCB and helping 

behaviors. They speculate that although inexperienced sales agents may increase their 

outcomes with the help of other sales agents, the decrease in the outcomes of the 

experienced employees may be greater. In sum, OCB’s may help organizational

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


71

effectiveness. However, after a certain level, these behaviors may cease to be beneficial 

or even become detrimental to the organization.

Additionally, Figures 5 and 6 show the relationship among COB, service quality, 

and customer satisfaction. The figures also show an inflection point where COB no 

longer helps improve customer service evaluations. Higher COB may even have negative 

effects on service quality and customer satisfaction.

Although the reason for the negative effects of COB on service quality and 

customer satisfaction is not clear, several interpretations are viable. Sutton and Rafaeli 

(1988) found an unexpected negative relationship between employees’ display of positive 

emotions to customers in retail stores. The researchers found that in fast-paced stores 

with high sales and long lines, there was an implicit agreement that the indication of 

pleasant feelings was not essential. Being friendly to a customer caused clerks to move 

slowly and thus cause longer lines.  Staying longer in a line caused customers to become 

irritated. This irritation occurs mainly in such service settings as a convenience store or 

bank in which transactions between service employees and customers must be brief. The 

point here is that greater COB does not necessarily result in a more positive service 

experience. Solomon et al. (1985) argue that the result depends upon the particular 

requirements of the situation.

Two examples described below explain the negative outcome for service quality 

and customer satisfaction as a consequence of extremely high customer oriented 

behaviors. On a recent trip to a first-class international hotel on a nice beach in Mexico, I 

had the opportunity to talk with one of the service employee supervisors. He explained 

the rigorous training program through which all hotel employees have to go so that the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


hotel can guarantee excellent service. He also explained that the hotel has had to lower 

the service it delivers to its customers. For instance, hotel service employees who 

observed a guest approaching the beach used to approach the guest to find out how to 

help the guest -for example, if the guest might have needed beach towels or an umbrella 

for protection from the sun. However, the supervisor I spoke to explained that the 

management found out that guests were not pleased to be constantly approached by the 

hotel employees, even though the employees approached to help the guests. The hotel 

found out that guests also need time to be alone to think and to decide what activities they 

would like to do.

In another instance, I had the opportunity to have dinner in a nice restaurant in 

Monterrey, Mexico. As soon as my wife and I arrived at the restaurant, we were assigned 

to a table. We were followed by a group of four waiters, including the restaurant captain. 

As soon as we were seated, the four waiters stood in front of us and asked immediately 

what we would like to drink. Even though we wanted to think about it, we felt the 

pressure to order a drink immediately. During the process of reading the menu, ordering, 

eating, and talking after dinner, we were always observed by a waiter who stood close by 

to be available if we needed something. Even though this situation may represent 

excellent service, we felt uncomfortable because of the constant attention. For instance, 

we checked the time it took for the waiter pick up the empty plates after we finished our 

meal, and the approximate time was 30 seconds. In sum, the excessive customer oriented 

behaviors of the waiters became something negative instead of something pleasant or 

positive. These examples may help to demonstrate that although customers are willing to 

receive excellent service from employees, more is not always better.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


73

Limitations of the Study, Future Research Directions, and Practical Implications

This section describes the main limitations of the study and provides some 

possible methodological explanations for the pattern of results obtained. First, results 

showed that relationship between OCB and service quality and customer satisfaction was 

in the predicted direction; however, the sample size may not have been large enough for 

this relationship to reach the level of statistical significance. The sample size for this 

study was calculated estimating an effect size of .30. However, most o f the effect sizes 

obtained for this study were lower than or around .20. Consequently, a larger sample size 

may be required to reach statistical significance. According to the power tables, to get a 

correlation that will be significant at the 5% value with an effect size around .20, and 

have the minimum accepted power level of .60, the necessary sample size is  121  bank 

branches.

Second, branch managers were not accustomed to rating service employees at the 

group level. Typically, managers rate their employees at the individual level; however, 

for this study, branch managers were asked to rate tellers as a group.  Additionally, the 

branch manager rating may be influenced by such variables as experience or tenure in a 

management position (Borman, White, & Dorsey,  1995). Moreover, the weak results and 

nonsignificant findings may also be related to the methods and personalities of branch 

managers. The study did not use the tellers’  self-ratings because they would have a 

tendency to be biased positively towards themselves (Schnake,  1991). However, ratings 

from supervisors may have other limitations. For example, such tendencies of branch 

managers as leniency or strictness may distort the actual differences in teller OCB and 

COB between branches and thus confound survey results.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


74

Third, the branch managers may not have been the best people to rate tellers 

because the managers may not have been close enough to the tellers to evaluate their 

performance. The branch managers in this study had direct or indirect responsibility for 

all branch employees from service or account executives to security. Therefore, branch 

managers may have lacked opportunities to observe specifically their tellers’ daily 

performance. Moreover, the branch manager was not the immediate teller supervisor; a 

teller supervisor was in charge of controlling the tellers’ work. This person may be better 

qualified to rate tellers’ behavior. Future researchers, however, need to remember that the 

teller supervisor may him or herself perform as a teller. Therefore, teller supervisors 

would also be rating their own behavior, a situation that may lead to other biases such as 

inflating their rating to enhance the evaluation (Steel & Ovalle,  1984). As discussed 

above, one option for measuring OCB is to use a self-evaluation. A self-evaluation 

process, however, also has its limitations. For instance, participants may be biased in the 

assessments of their performance. Participants may tend to inflate their ratings of their 

group’s performance either because they believe they have performed well, or because 

the participants might believe they must have a high evaluation to defend a low 

evaluation from external sources.

Therefore, one challenge for future research lies in addressing the methodological 

issues raised above. Additionally, the way COB was operationalized in this study may 

not be the best measure for a bank environment in which the relations between customers 

and tellers are highly structured. Therefore, for future research, new COB items should be 

developed to investigate specifically what behaviors customers expect from a teller. The 

last limitation of the study results front the cross-sectional nature of the data obtained.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


75

Because the data were gathered at one point in time, determining causality between the 

variables is difficult. Moreover, because the data are cross-sectional, they are only 

capable of exposing a net effect of OCB’s and COB’s at a specific point in time. 

Therefore, it is possible that even though COB’s do not have a significant effect in the 

short run, they may have consequences in the long run. Thus, for future research, 

longitudinal studies will have advantages over cross-sectional data.

Additionally, future research must explore the nonlinear relationship among the 

variables. For instance, future research should attempt to determine the point of inflection 

for OCB. In other words, it may be interesting to find out up to what point a manager 

should promote OCB among his/her employees in order to obtain better customer service 

evaluations. Another interesting follow-up would be finding the point where COB begins 

to have a negative effect on service quality and customer satisfaction. It also might be 

important for further research to identify other forms of OCB and COB behaviors and 

their effects. These behaviors can be sales or non-sales related.

Although this study obtained only partial support for one of the hypotheses, it 

may still have practical implications. First, managers must be aware that OCB’s at the 

group level are related to service quality. In other words, OCB’s may translate into 

improved service perceptions. Additionally, observing the smoothers of the bivariate 

relationship suggests nonlinear relationships among study variables. Therefore, managers 

must be cautious about the degree of customer oriented behaviors they enforce among 

service employees. To determine the amount of COB’s customers like to receive, 

organizations must generate a market intelligence system. Through market intelligence, 

organizations can gather information relating to current and future customer needs (Kholi

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


& Jaworski,  1990). In this way, managers can monitor the variables of service quality and 

customer satisfaction and may conclude that they need to increase or perhaps even 

decrease COB’s.

In summary, this study attempted to merge organizational behavior and marketing 

literature variables by studying relationships among OCB, COB, service quality, and 

customer satisfaction constructs. Although strong conclusions about the veracity of the 

hypotheses cannot be reached, results from a post-hoc analysis suggest nonlinearity and 

are worthy of additional study. If further research establishes a non-linear relationship 

between the variables, results from this study may provide the foundations of important 

theoretical contributions to both organizational and marketing fields.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


77

TABLES

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


78

Table 1. Conceptual Differences between Quality and Satisfaction

Comparison Dimension

Quality

Experience dependency

None required; can be 
externally or vicariously 
mediated

Satisfaction

Required

Attributes/dimensions

Specific to characteristics 
defining quality for 
product or service

Potentially all attributes 
or dimensions of 
product or service

Expectations/standard

Ideals, excellence

Predictions, norms, needs

Cognitive/affective

Primarily cognitive

Cognitive and affective

Conceptual antecedents

External cues (e.g. price, 
reputation)

Conceptual determinants 
(e.g. equity, affect)

Temporal focus 
(short-term versus 
long-term)

Primarily long-term 
(overall or summary)

Primarily short-term 
(transaction- or 
encounter-specific)

Source:  Oliver.  R.  L.  (1997).  Satisfaction: A behavioral perspective on  the consumer. N ew   York,  McGraw-Hill,  p. 177.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


79

5
.00
-.05
.16
.27
.06

.25
.25
.18
.30

.36
.17
.21
.10
.10
.25
.18
-.09

.02
.09

-.03
-.16
.25
.16
-.38

.18

.00
.04
.18
.21
.62

.57
.50

4
.17
.12
.26
.18
.05

.06
.24
.11
-.07

.00
.36
.02
.08
.04
.29
.14
.12

.32
.18

-.02
.21
.09
-.08
.09

.23

.81
.79
.41
.32
.04

.27
.06

1.20
2.36

3.74
7.39

.96
2.00

3.00
6.26

Table 2: Factor Loadings (rotated solution) for OCB (5-factor)

Variables
1.  Stay informed about developm ents  in the com pany (CV )
2. Attend and participate in m eeting regarding the com pany (CV)
3.  Demonstrate concerns about the  image o f  the com pany (C)
4.  Help each other to  be more productive (A)
5.  Help each other w hen they have heavy work loads (A )
6.  Share personal property with others  i f  necessary to help them with 

their work (A )

7. A lw ays do  more than they are required to do (A )
8. Offer suggestions  for w ays to  improve operations (CV)
9.  Help orient new  people even though  it is not required (A )
10.  Look for other work to  do when finished with their assigned work 

(A )

11.  D o not com plain about their work assignments (C)
12.  Have attendance at work that  is above the average (CO N)
13.  Help each other w hen they have been absent (A )
14. N ever abuse their rights  and privileges (C)
15.  Maintain a clean workplace (CO N)
16. A lw ays treats com pany property with care (C)
17. G ive advance notice when they are unable to  com e to work

(CO N)

18. A lw ays follow s the rules o f  the company and the department (C)
19. Are alw ays on tim e (CO N)
20. Express resentment with any changes  introduced by management 

(S )(R )

21. Complain a lot about trivial matters (S) (R)
22. Try to avoid creating problems  for each other (C)
23. Think on ly about their work problems, not others (S) (R)
24. A lw ays find fault with what the organization  is doing (S)  (R)
25.  Pay no  attention to announcem ents, m essages, or printed material 

that provide  information about the company (S) (R)

26. Consult with me or other people who might be affected by their 

actions  or decisions (C)

27.  Inform m e before taking any important actions (C)
28.  A lw ays com plete their work on tim e (C)
29. Are able to tolerate occasional  inconveniences when they arise (C)
30.  Consider the effects  o f  their actions on coworkers (C)
31.  Try to m ake the best o f  the situation,  even when there are 

problem s  (C)

32.  R espect the rights and privileges o f  others (C)

1
.74
.74
.65
.63
.59

.58
.57
.53
.44

.42
.39
.08
.55
.27
.25
.28
.35

.37
.37

.11
.11
.44
.11
.30

-.07

.09
.23
.11
.23
.34

.15
.44

2
.08
.32
.09
.41
.47

.27
.28
.37
.42

.30
.34
.72
.65
.64
.56
.54
.50

.48
.40

.00
.04
.35
.06
.16

.11

.00
.14
.37
.11
.31

.16
.27

Unrotated solution
Rotated Solution

E igenvalue

11.00
5.40

2.0 5
4.3 0

3
.08
.22
.24
.13
.17

.05
-.03
.26
.19

.05
.11
.02
.14
.32
.27
.21
-.07

-.07
.05

.80
.69
.51
.49
.45

.38

.15
.05
-.18
.21

-.14
.28

1.64
2.78

P ercen ta g e o f  V arian ce explained

Unrotated solution
Rotated solution
R= Reverse  Score,  A =  Altruism, C= Courtesy,  S= Sportsmanship,  C O N = C onscientiousness, 
C V = C ivic  Virtue
Items used  for each scale appear in bold  lettering

6.4 0
13.40

34.40
16.88

5.12
8.70

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Table 3  : Factor Loadings (rotated solution) for  OCB

80

Variables

1.  Attend and participate in meetings

Regarding the company (CV)

2.  Stayed inform about developments in the

3.  Offer suggestions for ways to improve

4.  Respect the rights and privileges of

5.  Consider the effects o f their actions on

Company (CV)

Operations (CV)

others (C)

Coworkers (C)

6.  Try to avoid creating problems for each

7.  Complain a lot about trivial matters (S)

Other (C)

(R)

8.  Express resentment with any changes

Introduced by management (S) (R)

9.  Always find fault with what the

Organization is doing (S) (R)

10.  Help each other when they have heavy

11.  Help each other when they have been

12.  Help each other to be more productive

Work loads (A)

Absent (A)

(A)

13. Maintain a clean workplace (CON)
14.  Have attendance at work that is above the

Average (CON)

15. Are always on time (CON)

Eigenvalue

Unrotated solution
Rotated Solution

Unrotated solution
Rotated solution

Percentage of Variance explained

Civic
Virtue

Courtesy

Sports
Manship

Altruism Conscien
tiousness

.78

.75

.68

.25

.14

.28

.05

.07

.18

.32

.38

.42
.19

.13
.29

.19

.11

.29

.85

.83

.51

.04

.19

-.03

.22

.28

.33
.20

.33
.24

6.42
2.40

42.79
15.98

1.43
2.29

9.50
15.26

.17

.14

.12

.09

.14

.39

.78

.77

.59

.18

.08

.12
.18

-.05
.02

1.01
1.88

6.76
12.55

.29

.23

.07

.21

.13

.20

.03

-.05

.27

.78

.63

.45
.18

.27
.29

.20

.04

.34

.12

.26

.34

.12

.01

.03

.22

.44

.33
.82

.39
.38

.65
1.71

4.35
11.37

.46
1.70

3.08
11.33

N ote:  R= Reverse Score,  A =  Altruism, C = Courtesy,  S= Sportsmanship,  C O N = C onscientiousness, CV = 
C ivic Virtue
Items used for each scale appear in bold lettering

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


81

Table 4 : Factor Loadings for Customer Oriented Behaviors (COB) (1  factor)

Variables

1. Always have a friendly, helpful attitude toward customers
2. Treat customers with the respect they deserve
3. Often give the customer their full attention
4. Frequently allow customers to stay long enough to get to know them
5. Are willing to solve customer problems
6. Are willing to handle special requests or problems
Eigenvalue
Percentage of Variance Explained

Factor

.70
.64
.64
.45
.90
.82
2.98
49.74

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


82

Table 5: Factor Loadings for Service Quality (1  factor)

Variables
1. Employees of XYZ can answer your questions
2. Employees of XYZ are consistently courteous
3. XYZ employees understand your specific needs
4. XYZ performs the service right the first time
5. Employees of XYZ are never too busy to respond to your requests
6. When you have a problem, XYZ shows a sincere interest in solving it
7. Employees of XYZ give you prompt service
8. XYZ’s physical facilities are visually appealing
9. XYZ has modem looking equipment
10. XYZ has operating hours convenient to all its customers
Eigenvalue
Percentage o f Variance Explained

Factor

.80
.76
.74
.73
.72
.66
.62
.55
.49
.38
4.32
43.16

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Table 6: Factor Loadings for Customer Satisfaction (1  factor)

Variables
1 .1 am happy about my decision to use XYZ bank
2 .1 believe I did the right thing when I used XYZ bank
3. Overall, I am satisfied with my decision to use XYZ bank
Eigenvalue
Percentage of Variance Explained

83

Factor

.97
.95
.91
2.66
88.64

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without perm ission.


Table 7: rwg, ADm, and ADmd for Service Quality and Customer Satisfaction

84

Variable

Service Quality
Customer Satisfaction

rwg
.955
.968

range

.620  -  .999
.754  -  1.0

Adm
.66
.52

range

.05  -  1.33
0  -  1.26

Admd
.61
.46

range

.11  -  1.19
0  -  1.13

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


85

Table 8: Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Intercorrelations for Study 

Variables a’b,c,d

Variable
1.  O CB
2.  Altruism
3.  Courtesy
4.  Sportsmanship
5.  C onscientiousness
6.  C ivic  Virtue
7.  CO B
8.  Service  Quality
9.  Custom er Sat.

M
5.25
5.57
5.27
4.47
5.47
5.46
5.08
6.25
6.49

SD
.88
1.17
1.13
1.32
.99
1.24
.93
.35
.33

1

(.90)
.85**
.80**
.59**
.76**
.80**
.56**
.19+
.15+

f p < .10; * p < .05; ** p < .01 

a One-tail test

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

(.88)
.63**
.29*
.67**
.68**
.51**
.21*
.13

(.87)
.34**
.59**
.53**
.56**
.21*
.21*

(.76)
.20*
.30**
.22*
-.01
.01

(.70)
.52**
(.86)
.41** .45**
.16+
.17+
.12
.12

(.85)
-.03
-.07

(.87)
.87**

(.96)

b Alpha coefficients are reported in parentheses on the diagonal 

c All variables range from 1  to 7 

d N = 71  branches

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Table 9: Regressions Results for Hypothesis 3a

86

Criterion Variables:

Service Oualitv
13 
.30 
-.20 

R2 
.04
.06 

.02

AR2

Customer Satisfaction

13
.28
-.23

R2  AR2
.02
.06 

.04

Predictor
Variables

Step  1: OCB
Step 2  : COB

a N = 71  branches

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Table  10: Regressions Results for Hypothesis 4a

87

AR2 

Service Quality 
B 
.83 
.44 
-1.04 

R2 
.04 
.06 
.08 

.02 
.02 

Criterion Variables:

Customer Satisfaction

B 
.15 
-.23 
-1.11 

R2 
.02
.06 
.08 

AR2

.04
.02

Predictor 
Variables 

Step  1: OCB 
Step 2: COB 
Step 3: OCB*COB 

a N = 71  branches

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


FIGURES

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Figure  1: Theoretical Framework

89

OCB

COB

OCB*COB

SERVICE
QUALITY

C USTO M ER
SA TISFA C ­

TION

OCB*COB

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Figure 2: Results of the Proposed Theoretical Framework

90

OCB*COB

AR2 = .02, n.s

OCB

r =.19, p = 0.058

SERVICE
QUALITY

COB

r = -.03, n.s.

= -0.7, n.s.

r =.15, p =.10

C U STO M ER
SA TISFA C ­

TION

AR2= .02, n.s.

OCB*COB

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Figure 3: Local Lineal Regression Curve for the OCB/SQ Relationship

91

oO

6.00

5.00
ocb

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Figure 4 : Local Lineal Regression Curve for the OCB/CS Relationship

92

oo

GO  O

3.00

ocb

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Figure 5: Local Lineal Regression Curve for the COB/SQ Relationship

93

©  oo

o o

o o

cob

7.00

2.00

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Figure 6: Local Lineal Regression Curve for the COB/CS Relationship

94

o o

o©

€ .00'

\0O

cob

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


95

APPENDICES

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix A: Consent Form for Branch Managers

96

I have been informed that this study will involve completing a questionnaire 

designed to study if discretionary behaviors and customer orientation have a relationship 
with service quality and customer satisfaction.

I understand that my participation in this study is voluntary, and that I may decide 

at any time to stop participating.

I hereby give my consent to participate as a respondent.

Participant’s Signature 

Date

Please, return this consent form with your questionnaires in the enclosed envelope

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


97

Appendix B: Branch Manager Questionnaire

Instructions:  Please  indicate  how   m uch  you  agree  with  each  o f  the  follow in g  statements  by  circling  the 
sin gle  best  response  below .  Your  answer  must  represent,  on  average,  the  behaviors  that  your  tellers 
display as a group.

I

S tron gly
d isagree

2

D isagree

■<>j

S ligh tly
d isagree

4  

N either agree 
nor disagree 

5 

S lig h tly  
a g ree 

6 

A gree 

7 

Strongly 

agree

1 

I 

1 

1 

I 

1 

1 

1 

I 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

I 

1 

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

Always do more than they are required to do

Are always on time

Maintain a clean workplace

Always complete their work on time

Look for other work to do  when  finished with  their assigned  work

Have attendance at work that  is above the average

Give advance notice when they are unable to com e to work

Always follows the rules o f  the company and the department

Never abuse their rights and privileges

Always treats company property with care

Help each other when they have been absent

Help each other when they have heavy work loads

Help orient new people even  though  is not required

Share personal  property with  others if  necessary to  help 
them with their work

Help each other to  be more productive

Do not complain about their work assignments

Always find  fault with what the organization  is doing

Try  to  make  the  best  o f   the  situation,  even  when  there  are 
problems

Complain a lot about trivial  matters

Express resentment with any changes  introduced by management

Are able to tolerate occasional  inconveniences  when they arise

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 

Strongly 
disagree 

2 

D isagree 

3 

Slightly 
disagree 

98

4 

5 

6 

7

N either agree  Slightly agree 
nor disagree_____________________________________agree

Agree 

Strongly

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

Inform me before taking any important actions

Consult me or other people who  might be affected by
Their actions or decisions

Respect the rights and  privileges o f others

Consider the effects o f their actions on coworkers

Try to  avoid creating problems  for each other

Think only about their work problems,  not others

Demonstrate concerns about the image o f the  company

Attend and  participate  in meetings regarding the company

Stay informed about developments in the company

Offer suggestions  for ways to  improve operations

Pay  no  attention  to  announcements,  m essages,  or  printed
material  that provide information about the company

Always  have a friendly,  helpful  attitude toward  customers

Treat custom ers with the respect they deserve

Often give the customer their full attention

Frequently  allow   customers  to  stay  long  enough  to  get  to
know them

Are w illing to solve customer problems

Are w illing to  handle special  requests or problems

Finally,  I will ask you to  provide demographic  information describing each group member:

E m p lo y ee  1

Average A ge (check one): □
Average tenure  in this position: □
Em ployee status: □

2 0 - 2 9

3 0 - 3 9

□
□
□

Full Time

Part Time

□
□

4 0 - 4 9

□
□

50 and over

under  1  year

1  - 5 years

6 - 1 0  years

10 and over

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


under  1  year

6 - 1 0  years

10  and over

Full Time

2 0 - 2 9

E m ployee 3

E m ployee 2

Average Age (check one): □
Average tenure in this position: □
Employee status:- □
Average Age (check one): □
Average tenure in this position: □
Employee status: □
Average Age (check one): □
Average tenure in this position: □
Employee status: □

Em ployee 4

2 0 - 2 9

2 0 - 2 9

Full Time

Full Time

3 0 - 3 9

3 0 - 3 9

4 0 - 4 9

4 0 - 4 9

1  - 5 years

□
□

□ □
□ □
□Part Time
□
□
□
□
□
□

□
□

1  - 5 years

I  - 5 years

Part Time

4 0 - 4 9

3 0 - 3 9

Part Time

99

50 and over

□
□

□
□

□
□

50 and over

50 and over

under  1  year

6 - 1 0  years

10 and over

under  1  year

6 - 1 0  years

10 and over

B ranch:____
Location:___
Branch size:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


100

Appendix C: Customer Questionnaire

DATE:

00 

GENDER 

| 

I  M 

| 

I  F 

SURVEY
N O .:

Branch C ode (B C ):__________

.  W e  are  conducting
G o o d ________________ (m orning  or  afternoon),  m y  name  i s  
research  with  the  support  o f  X Y Z   Bank  any,  in  an  attempt to  understand the  custom er service  process. 
W e  w ould  appreciate  your  help  in  answering  about  20   questions  that  w ill  take  about  five  minutes.  Do 
y ou  w ish to continue and respond to questions about X Y Z  Bank’s service?

C O N T  A C TS 
GE.NDE

o o

(Use for persons who denied answering the survey).

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

R
M
F

-2 0
20-29
30-39
40-49
50 +

SUM: UNDER 20 ( 

APPROXIMATE  AGE

SUM MALE ( 
)  20 — 29 ( 

)  SUM FEMALE ( 

)  3 0 - 3 9 (  

)  4 0 -4 9   ( 

)

)  50O R O V E R ( 

)

Instructions:  The  follow ing  set  o f  statements  relates  to  your  feelings  X Y Z   Bank.  For  each  statement, 
please  indicate the  extent to w hich you  believe X Y Z  Bank has  the  feature described  by the  statement on 
a  scale  from  1  to  7.  1  m eans  that  you  strongly  disagree  that  X Y Z  Bank  has  that  feature,  and  7  means 
that you  strongly  agree.  Y ou  m ay  indicate  any o f  the  numbers  in  the m iddle  that describe your  feelings. 
There  are  not  right  or  w rong  answers,  all  w e  are  interested  in  is  the  num ber  that  best  shows  your 
perceptions o f  X Y Z  Bank.

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7

Strongly 
disagree______________________disagree______ nor disagree___________________________________ agree

Slightly agree 

N either agree 

D isagree 

Slightly 

A gree 

Strongly

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

XYZ Bank has modem  looking equipment

XYZ Bank has physical  facilities are  visually appealing

When you  have a problem,  XYZ  Bank show s  a sincere  interest  in
solving it

XYZ Bank performs the service right the  first time

Employees o f  XYZ Bank give you prompt service

Employees  o f XYZ  Bank  are  never  to  busy  to  respond  to  your
request

Employees o f  XYZ Bank are consistently courteous

Employees o f  XYZ Bank can answer your questions

XYZ Bank employees understand your specific needs

XYZ Bank has operating hours convenient to all its customers

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Instructions:  Read and record (overall custom er satisfaction).  U sing the sam e scale, tell m e the extent to 
w hich you agree or disagree with these questions.

1

1

1

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

4

4

5

5

5

6

6

6

7

7

7

I am happy about my decision to use XYZ Bank

I believe  I did the right thing when  I  used X Y Z Bank

Overall,  I am satisfied with  my decision to  use XYZ Bank

101

IM P O R T A N T

T he  follow in g section  m u st be an sw ered   a fter h aving  resp o n d   to th e q u estion s above.

W ould vou please tell  me vour aae:
What is your name?

To  verify that I did my work 

well would you please give 

me your phone number? 

Phone number:

Which was your  last academic 
degree?
O  Elementary 
O  Junior High 
O  High School 
O Some College 
O  Completed College 
O  Some Graduate School 
O  Completed Graduate 
School

How long had you been a 
X Y Z Bank customer?
O  Under 1 year 
O  1-5 years 
0   6-10 years 
O  10 years or over

Tim e at which the application o f  this survey w as finished:_____________ (Use a 24 hrs scheme).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


102

References

Babakus, E., & Boiler, G.W. (1992). An empirical assessment of the SERVQUAL scale. 

Journal of Business Research, 24, 253-268.

Bateman, T.S., & Organ, D.W. (1983). Job satisfaction and the good soldier: The 

relationship between affect and employee “citizenship”, Academy of 
Management Journal. 26. 587-595.

Berry, L.L., Zeithaml, V.A., & Parasuraman A.(1990). Five imperatives for improving 

service quality. Sloan Management Review, 29-38.

Berry, L.L., & Parasuraman A. (1991). Marketing Services. New York: Free Press.

Berry, L.L. (1995). Relationship marketing of services- Growing interest, emerging 

perspectives. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 23, 236-245.

Bettencourt, L.A., & Brown, S.W. (1997). Contact employees: Relationships among

workplace fairness, job satisfaction and prosocial behaviors. Journal of Retailing, 
73,39-61.

Bitner, M.J., Booms, B.H., & Tetreault, M.S. (1990). The service encounter:

diagnosing favorable and unfavorable incidents. Journal of Marketing, 54. 71-84.

Bitner, M.J., Booms, B.H., & Mohr, L.A. (1994). Critical service encounters: The 

employee’s viewpoint. Journal of Marketing, 58. 95-106.

Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1993). Expanding the criterion domain to include 

elements of contextual performance. In N. Schmitt & W.C. Borman (Eds.) 
Personnel selection in organizations (pp.71-98). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass

Borman, W.C., White, L.A., & Dorsey, D.W. (1995). Effects of ratee task performance 

and interpersonal factors on supervisors and peer performance ratings. Journal of 
Applied Psychology. 80,  168-177.

Borucki, C., & Burke, M. (In press). An examination of service-related antecedents to 

retail store performance.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


103

Bowen, D. E., & Schneider, B. (1985). Boundary-spanning role employees and the

service encounter: Some guidelines for management and research. In J.A. Czepiel, 
M.R.  Solomon, & C. Surprenant (Eds.), The encounter (pp.127-148). Lexington 
Books.

Brislin, R.W. (1980). Translation and content analysis of oral and written material. In 

H.C. Triandis & J.W. Berry fEdsl.. Handbook of cross-cultural psychology Vol. 
2:Methodology:349-444. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Brief, A.P., & Motowidlo, S.J. (1986). Prosocial Organizational Behaviors. Academy of 

Management Review.  11. 710-725.

Burke, M., Finkelstein, L. & Dusing, M. (1997). On average deviation indices for 

estimating interrater agreement. Organizational Research Methods. 2^ 49-68.

Burke, M. & Dunlap, W.P. (2000). Estimating interrater agreement with the average 

deviation (AD) index: A user's guide. Manuscript in preparation.

Campbell, J. P. (1990). Modeling the performance prediction problem in industrial and 

organizational psychology. In M. D. Dunnet & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of 
Industrial Organizational Psychology (Vol.  1): 687  732. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press.

Chambliss and Dunlap W. (1994). Experimental design and analysis. Manuscript in 

preparation.

Chen, X., Hui, C., & Sego, D. (1998). The role of organizational citizenship behavior in 

turnover: Conceptualization and preliminary test of key hypotheses. Journal of 
Applied Psychology. 83. 922-931.

Christopher, M., Payne, A., & Ballantyne, D. ('19911. Relationship marketing: Bringing 

quality, customer service and marketing together. London: Butterworth- 
Heinemann.

Cohen, J. (1977). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. New York: 

Academic Press.

Cohen, J. & Cohen, P. ('19831. Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the 

behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. 

Psvchometrika.  16, 297-334.

Cronin, J.J., & Taylor, S.A. (1992). Measuring service quality: A reexamination and 

extension. Journal of Marketing. 56. 55-68.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


104

Deshpande, R., Farley, J., & Webster, F. (1993). Corporate culture, cost orientation, and 
innovativeness in Japanese firms: A quadrad analysis. Journal o f Marketing. 57. 
23-27.

Fan & Marron (1994). Fast implementation of nonparametric curve estimators. Journal of 

Computational and Graphical Statistics, 3, 35-56.

George, J.M. (1990). Personality, affect, and behavior in groups. Journal of Applied 

Psychology, 75,  107-116.

George, J.M., & Bettenhausen, K. (1990). Understanding prosocial behavior, sales

performance, and turnover: A group-level analysis in a service context. Journal of 
Applied Psychology. 75. 698-709.

George, J.M. (1991). State or trait: Effects of positive mood on prosocial behaviors at 

work. Journal of Applied Psychology. 2. 299-307.

George, J.M., & Brief, A.P. (1992). Feeling good-doing good: A conceptual analysis of 
the mood at work-organizational spontaneity relationship. Psychological Bulletin. 
112.310-329.

Glass, G.V. & Stanley, J.C. (1969).  Statistical Methods in Education and Psychology. 

New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

Gotlieb, J.B., Grewal, D., & Brown, S.W. (1994). Consumer satisfaction and perceived 
quality: Complementary or divergent constructs?, Journal of Applied Psychology.
79, 875-885.

Gronroos, C. (1990). Relationship approach to marketing in service contexts: The 
marketing and organizational behavior interface.  [Special Issue:  Services 
Marketing]. Journal of Business Research. 20. 3-11.

Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Thatham, R.L., & Grablowsky, B.J. (1979). Multivariate Data 

Analysis with Readings. Oklahoma: The Petroleum Publishing.

Han, J., Kim, N., & Srivastava, R. (1998). Market orientation and organizational

performance: Is innovation a missing link? Journal of Marketing, 62. 30-45.

Hartline, M.D., & Ferrell, O.C. (1996). The management of customer-contact service 

employees: An empirical investigation. Journal of Marketing, 60, 52-70.

Hofstede, G. (1980). Motivation, leadership, and organization: Do American theories 

apply abroad? Organization Dynamics. (Summer), 42-63.

Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and Organizations. London: McGraw-Hill.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


105

Hogan, J., Hogan, R., & Busch, C. (1984). How to measure service orientation. Journal 

of Applied Psychology, 69.  167-173.

Iacobucci, D., Grayson, K.A., & Ostrom, A.L. (1994). The calculus of service quality and 

customer satisfaction: Theoretical and empirical differentiation. In Advances in 
Services Marketing and Management. (Vol. 3, p. 1-67). Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press.

James, L.R., Demaree, R.G., & Wolf, G. (1984). Estimating within group interrater 
reliability with and without bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69. 85-98.

Jaworski, B., & Kohli, A. (1996). Market orientation: Review, refinement, and 

roadmap. Journal of Market Focused Management, 1,  119-135.

Johnson, J.W. (1996). Linking employee perceptions of service climate to customer 

satisfaction. Personnel Psychology. 49. 831-851.

Karambayya, R. (1990). Contexts for organizational citizenship behavior: Do high

performance and satisfying units have better “citizens”. (Working paper). York 
University, North York, Ontario, Canada.

Kelley, S. (1992). Developing customer orientation among service employees. Journal of 

the Academy of Marketing Science, 20, 27-36.

Kizilos, M. (1995). Employee involvement, prosocial organizational behavior, and 
organization performance. Unpublished dissertation. University ofSouthem 
California, CA.

Klein, K.J., Dansereau, F., & Hall, R.J. (1994). Level issues in theory development, data 

collection, and analysis. Academy of Management Review,  19.  195-229.

Kohli, A.K. & Jaworski, .J. (1990). Market orientation: The construct, research

propositions, and managerial implications. Journal of Marketing, 54,  1-18.

Konovsky, M.A., & Organ, D. (1996). Dispositional and contextual determinants of

organizational citizenship behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior.  17, 253- 
266.

Konovsky, M.A., & Pugh, S.D. (1994). Citizenship behavior and social exchange. 

Academy of Management Journal. 37, 656-669.

Lam, S.S.K., Hui, C., & Law, K.S. (1999). Organizational citizenship behavior:

Comparing perspectives of supervisors and subordinates across four international 
samples. Journal of Applied Psychology. 84, 594-601.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


106

MacKenzie, S.B., Podsakoff, P.M., & Fetter, R. (1991). Organizational citizenship

behavior and objective productivity as determinants of managerial evaluations of 
salespersons’ performance. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes. 50.  123-150.

MacKenzie, S.B., Podsakoff, P.M., & Fetter, R. (1993). The impact of organizational 

citizenship behavior on evaluations of salespeople performance. Journal of 
Marketing, 57. 70-80.

Mangold, W.G., & Babkus, E. (1991). Service quality: The front-stage vs. the back-stage 

perspective. The Journal of Services Marketing. 5^ 59-70.

Mano, H., & Oliver, R.L. (1993). Assessing the dimensionality and structure of the 

consumption experience: Evaluation, feeling, and satisfaction. Journal of 
Consumer Research. 20. 451-466.

McNeely, B.L., & Meglino, B.M. (1994). The role of dispositional and situational

antecedents in prosocial organizational behavior: An examination of the intended 
beneficiaries o f prosocial behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology. 79. 836-844.

Morrison, E.W., (1994). Role definitions and organizational citizenship behavior: The 

importance of the employee's perspective. Academy of Management Journal.
37,  1543-1567.

Motowidlo, S.J., & Van Scotter, J.R. (1994). Evidence that task performance should be 

distinguised from contextual performance. Journal of Applied Psychology. 79, 
475-480.

Narver, J. C., & Slater, S. F. (1990). The effect of a market orientation on business 

profitability. Journal of Marketing. 54. 20-35.

Nunnally, J.C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Oliver, R.L. (1980). A cognitive model of the antecedents and consequences of 

satisfaction decisions. Journal of Marketing Research.  17. 460-469.

Oliver, R.L. (1993). Cognitive, affective, and attribute bases of the satisfaction response. 

Journal of Consumer Research. 20. 418-430.

Oliver, R.L. (1993). A conceptual model of service quality and service satisfaction: 
Compatible goals, different concepts. Advances in Services Marketing and 
Management. 2, 65-85.

Oliver, R.L. (1997). Satisfaction: A behavioral perspective on the consumer. New 

York, N.Y.: McGraw-Hill.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


107

Organ, D.W. (1988). Organizational citizenship behavior: The good soldier syndrome. 

Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Organ, D.W., & Konovsky, M. (1989). Cognitive versus affective determinants of

organizational citizenship behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology. 74.  157-164.

Organ, D.W., & Ryan, K. (1995). A meta-analytic review of attitudinal and dispositional 
predictors o f organizational citizenship behavior. Personnel Psychology. 46. 775- 
802.

Organ, D.W. (1997). Organizational citizenship behavior: It’s construct clean-up time. 

Human Performance.  10, 83-97.

Ostroff, C. (1992). The relationship between satisfaction, attitudes, and performance: An 

organizational level analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology. 77. 963-974.

Ostrom, A. & Iacobucci, D. (1995). Consumer trade-offs and the evaluation of services. 

Journal o f Marketing. 59.  17-28.

Paine, J.B. & Organ. D.W. (2000). The cultural matrix of organizational citizenship 
behavior: Some preliminary conceptual and empirical observations. Human 
Resource Management Review.  10. 45-59.

Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A., & Berry, L.L. (1985). A conceptual model of service 
quality and its implications for future research. Journal of Marketing. 49. 41-50.

Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A., and Berry L.L. (1988). SERVQUAL: Amultiple-item 
scale for measuring consumer perceptions of service quality. Journal o f Retailing. 
64,  12-39.

Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A., & Berry, L.L. (1990). An empirical examination of 

relationships in an extended service quality model. Technical working paper 
number 90-122, Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute.

Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A., & Berry, L.L. (1994). Reassessment of expectations as 

comparison standard in measuring service quality: Implications for further 
research. Journal of Marketing. 58.  111-124.

Podsakoff, P.M., Mackenzie, S.M., Moorman, R.H., & Fetter, R. (1990).

Transformational leader behaviors and their effects on followers’ trust in leader, 
satisfaction, and organizational citizenship behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly. 
L   107-42.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


108

Podsakoff, P.M., Mackenzie, S.M., & Hui, C. (1993). Organizational citizenship

behaviors and managerial evaluations of employee performance: A review and 
suggestions for future research. Research in Personnel and Human Resources 
Management.  11.  1-40.

Podsakoff, P.M., & MacKenzie S.M. (1994). Organizational citizenship behaviors and 

sales unit effectiveness. Journal o f Marketing Research. 31. 351-363.

Podsakoff, P.M., & MacKenzie, S.M. (1997). Impact of organizational citizenship 

behavior on organizational performance: A review and suggestions for future 
research. Human Performance.  10.  133-151.

Podsakoff, P.M., Ahearne, M., & MacKenzie, S.B. (1997). Organizational citizenship 
behavior and the quantity and quality of work group performance. Journal of 
Applied Psychology. 82. 262-270.

Price, L.L., Amould, E.J., & Tiemey, P. (1995). Going to extremes: Managing service 
encounters and assessing provider performance. Journal of Marketing. 59. 83-97.

Puffer, S.M. (1987). Prosocial behavior, noncompliant behavior, and work performance 

among commission salespeople. Journal of Applied Psychology. 72. 615-621.

Pugh, S.D. (1997). Service with a smile: The contagious effects of employee affect on 
customer attitudes. Unpublished Dissertation. Tulane University. New Orleans, 
LA.

Rust, R.T., & Oliver, R.L. (1994). Service quality: New directions in theory and practice. 

Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.

Saxe, R., & Weitz, B. (1982). The SOCO scale: A measure of the customer orientation 

salespeople. Journal of Marketing.  19. 343-351.

Schmit, M.J. & Allscheid, S.P. (1995). Employee attitudes and customer satisfaction: 
Making theoretical and empirical connections. Personnel Psychology. 48. 521- 
536.

Schnake, M. (1991). Organizational Citizenship: A review, proposed model, and research 

agenda. Human Relations. 44, 735- 759.

Schneider, B. (1987). The people make the place. Personnel Psychology. 40. 437453.

Schneider, B. (1990). The climate for service: An application of the climate construct. 

Organizational Climate and Culture. B.  Schneider Editor. Edit: Jossey-Bass 
Publishers: San Francisco, pp. 383-412.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


109

Schneider, B., & Bowen, D.E. (1985). Employee and customer perceptions of service in 

banks: Replication and extension. Journal of Applied Psychology. 70. 423-433.

Schneider, B., & Bowen, D.E. (1992). Personnel/human resources management in the

service sector. Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management.  10.  1- 
30.

Schneider, B., & Bowen, D.E. (1993). The service organization: Human resources 

management is crucial. Organizational Dynamics. 21, 39-52.

Schneider, B., & Bowen, D.E. (1995). Winning the Service Game. Boston: Harvard 

Business School Press.

Schneider, B., White, S., & Paul, M. (1998). Linking service climate and customer 

perception of service quality: Test of a causal model. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 83.  150-163.

Settoon, R.P., Bennett, N., & Liden, R.C. (1996). Social exchange in organizations: 

Perceived organizational support, leader-member exchange, and employee 
reciprocity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81. 219-227.

Siguaw, J.A., Brown, G., & Widing II, R.E. (1994). The influence of the market

orientation of the firm on sales force behavior and attitudes. Journal of Marketing 
Research, XXXI,  106-116.

Simonoff, J.S. (1996). Smoothing Methods in Statistics. New York: Springer-Verlag.

Smith, C.A., Organ, D.W., & Near, J.P. (1983). Organizational citizenship behavior: Its 

nature and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychology. 68. 453-463.

Solomon, M.R., Surprenant, C., Czepiel, J.A., & Gutman, E.G. (1985). A role theory

perspective on Dyadic interactions: The service encounter. Journal of Marketing, 
49, 99-111.

Steel, R. P. & Ovalle, N. K.  (1984).  Self-appraisal based upon supervisory feedback. 

Personnel Psychology, 37, 667-685.

Sutton, R.I. & Rafaeli, A. (1988). Untangling the relationship between displayed

emotions and organizational sales: The case of convenience stores. Academy of 
Management Journal. 31, 461-487.

Teas, R.K. (1993). Expectations, performance evaluation, and consumers’ perceptions of 

quality. Journal of Marketing, 57, 18-34.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


110

Van Dyne, L., Cummings, L.L., & Parks J.M. (1995). Extra-role behaviors: In pursuit of 

construct and definitional clarity (a bridge over muddied waters). Research in 
Organizational Behavior,  17, 215-285.

Van Scotter, J.R., & Motowidlo, S.J. (1996). Interpersonal facilitation and job dedication 
as separate facets of contextual performance. Journal of Applied Psychology. 81, 
525-531.

Walz, S.M., & Niehoff, B.P. (1996). Organizational citizenship behaviors and their effect 

on organizational effectiveness in limited-menu restaurants. In J.B. Keys & L.N. 
Dosier (Eds.) Academy of Management best papers proceedings (pp.307-311). 
Briarcliff Manor, NY: Academy of Management.

Werner, O., & Campbell, D. (1970). Translating, working through interpreters, and the 
problem of decentering. In R. Naroll & C. Cohen (Eds). A Handbook of Method 
in Cultural Anthropology: 398-420. New York: Natural History Press.

Werner, J.M. (1994). Dimensions that make a difference: Examining the impact on in­

role and extrarole behaviors on supervisory ratings. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 79, 98-107.

Williams, L.J., & Anderson, S.E. (1991). Job satisfaction and organizational commitment 

as predictors of organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors. Journal of 
Management.  17. 601-617.

Winsted, K.F. (1997). The service experience in two cultures: A behavioral perspective. 

Journal of Retailing, 73, 337-360.

Zeithaml, V.A., Parasuraman, A., & Berry, L.L. (1985). Problems and strategies in 

services marketing. Journal of Marketing, 49, 33-46.

Zeithaml, V.A., Parasuraman, A., & Berry, L.L. (1990). Delivering Service Quality. New 

York: The Free Press.

Zeithaml, V.A., & Bitner, M.J. (1996). Services Marketing. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Zemke,R. & Schaaf, D. (1989). The Service Edge. New York: Penguin Books.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Ill

BIOGRAPHY

Cesar J. Sepulveda-Martinez was bom in Monterrey, Mexico on November 7, 

1958. He received his bachelor’s degree in Marketing at Tecnologico de Monterrey in 

December,  1978. He also obtained a master’s degree in Business Administration at the 

University o f Notre Dame in May,  1984. Mr. Sepulveda has been a professor at the 

Marketing department at Tecnologico de Monterrey since  1984, teaching undergraduate 

and graduate classes in the areas of marketing, sales, marketing research, and services 

marketing. He was director of the Undergraduate Marketing Program from  1997 through 

2001. Mr. Sepulveda currently serves as the Chairman of the Marketing Department at 

the Tecnologico de Monterrey. Mr. Sepulveda has taught as visiting professor in 

countries such as Belgium, Honduras, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and United States, and has 

worked as a consultant for companies in Mexico and Panama.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.

