CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 1

Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management
Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/csr.051

ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING 
BY INDIAN CORPORATIONS

A. Sahay*

Management Development Institute, India

Environmental management has entered
boardrooms, factories and business
premises with economic, social and legal
consequences. Sound environmental
management provides corporations with
a competitive advantage in addition to
fulﬁlling corporate social responsibility
and adding value to the business. The
command and control policy of
governments, the world over, has not
produced the desired result. Corporate
environmental reporting is emerging as a
tool for the same. Indian corporations,
like their counterparts in developed
countries, took hesitant steps towards
environmental protection – most of them
driven by legal compliance. A selected
few companies, however, took to
environmental protection, enhancement
and reporting through overall business
considerations. The study indicates that
environmental reporting, barring a few
cases, is unsystematic and non-
comparable. Though good work is being

* Correspondence  to:  Dr.  A.  Sahay,  National  Management  Pro-
gramme,  Management  Development  Institute,  P.O.  Box  No.  60,
Mehrauli Road, Sukhrali, Gurgaon 122 001, India.

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment.

done by some industrial sectors and some
units in different sectors, the reports seem
to be aimed more at publicity than
providing environmental facts and
ﬁgures. A good quality of environmental
reporting, like good environmental
performance, needs to be encouraged and
rewarded. Copyright © 2004 John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment.

Received 30 June 2003
Revised 17 September 2003
Accepted 19 September 2003

INTRODUCTION

The last few decades of the 20th century

have witnessed a growing awareness of
not only the severity but also the diver-
sity  of  environmental  problems.  Further,  the
expansion of knowledge about ecosystems has
resulted  in  concerns  about  the  environmental
effects  of  production  processes,  product  per-
formances  and  business  practices.  To  thwart
the  adverse  effect  on  the  environment,  a
plethora  of  laws  has  been  enacted  but  their
enforcement  is  poor  all  over  the  world. 
Managing  environmental  responsibilities  has
become  an  integral  part  of  doing  business  in

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 2

1

the  global  economy.  Poor  environmental  per-
formance  can  damage  a  company’s  public
image,  prevent  it  from  achieving  its  strategic
goals  and  diminish  its  ﬁnancial  performance
(Dasgupta,  1997).  Today,  organizations  must
bring the same rigorous attention to managing
their environmental activities as they do to all
other  functions  crucial  to  their  operations.
While  capital  and  labour  were  earlier  pro-
pounded  to  be  limiting  factors  for  develop-
ment,  modern  management  gurus  (Solow,
1957;  Narayanan,  2001)  today  swear  by  tech-
nology but it is the natural resources – the envi-
ronment (UNEP et al., 2003) – that will be the
limiting  factor  for  development  tomorrow.  A
new  concept  of  resource  conservation  and
environmental consumerism (Ike and Dorinda,
1998) is emerging.

Business cannot be established without envi-
ronmental clearances and cannot run without
continuously  meeting  environmental  norms.
Management  has,  therefore,  become  strategic
in nature. Its implementation is both strategic
and operational in character. The environment
is a business concern all over the globe as some
of  the  environmental  impacts,  such  as  global
warming  (DeCanio,  1992),  ozone  depletion
(Morisette, 1989), acid rain (Rycroft, 1988) etc,
do not observe geographical boundaries. Envi-
ronmental  risks  (Sahay,  2003)  have  today
become  astronomical  in  magnitude.  A large
number  of  laws,  rules  and  agreements  have
emerged at the state, national and international
levels to tackle these issues. While nations and
states are playing their part in environmental
protection through legislation, regulation and
promotion,  corporate  enterprises  have  made
special dispensation about the environment in
their strategic and operational plans. Compa-
nies  with  their  eyes  on  growth  and  market
share  are  focusing  on  greening  (Willits  and
Giuntini,  1994)  themselves.  The  increasing
concern  for  the  environment,  both  in  public
and  industry,  is  compelling  management  to
build  synergy  between  their  economic  and
environmental  policies.  Management  of  envi-
ronmental resources and their reporting to the

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

A. SAHAY

stakeholders  has  become  a  necessity.  More
than  2000  companies  worldwide  are  publish-
ing environmental reports. Australia, Belgium,
Denmark,  France,  the  Netherlands,  Norway
and the EU are reported to make environmen-
tal/sustainability  reports  mandatory.  Those
that are outstanding are awarded for both their
environmental performance and the quality of
their environmental report.

SUSTAINABILITY AND 
ITS REPORTING

Sustainable  development  is  deﬁned  as  devel-
opment  that  meets  the  needs  of  the  present
generation  without  compromising  the  ability
of future generations to meet their own needs.
Corporate  sustainability  is  the  capacity  of  an
enterprise to maintain economic prosperity in
the  context  of  environmental  responsibility
and  social  stewardship.  It 
is  a  business
approach  that  creates  long-term  stakeholder
value by embracing opportunities and manag-
ing  risks  deriving  from  economic,  social  and
environmental  developments.  Corporate  sus-
tainability  leaders  (Knoepfel,  2001)  achieve
long-term  stakeholder  value  by  gearing  their
strategies to harness the market’s potential for
sustainability  products  and  services  as  well 
as  reducing  and  avoiding  sustainability  costs
and  risks.  Leading  sustainability  companies
display high levels of competence in address-
ing global and industry challenges in a variety
of  areas.  Their  strategy  is  to  integrate  long-
term  economic,  social  and  environmental
aspects  in  their  business  while  maintaining
global  competitiveness  (Cornelius,  2003)  and
green brand equity (Davis, 1991).

The  sustainability  reporting  varies  from
organization  to  organization,  making  it  difﬁ-
cult  for  the  stakeholders  to  evaluate  the
company for their investment and other deci-
sions.  Various  reporting  methods  have  been
propounded  from  time  to  time  by  different
agencies. Important among them are Respon-
sible  Care  (1988),  the  Coalition  for  Environ-

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

2


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 3

ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING BY INDIAN CORPORATIONS

the  European  Chemical 

mentally  Responsible  Economies  (1989),  the
ICC Business Charter (1990), the Global Envi-
ronmental  Management  Initiative  (1990),  the
CBI  Environment  Business  Forum  (1992),  the
Rio  Business  and  Industry  Agenda  (1992), 
the  Eco-Management  and  Audit  Scheme
(1992), 
Industry
Council  (1993),  the  Global  Environmental
Charter  (1993),  the  Public  Environmental
Reporting Initiative (1993), the World Business
Council  for  Sustainable  Development  (1995),
the ACBE Guide (1997), the Guide to Environ-
mental and Energy Reporting and Accounting
(1997), ISO 14031 (1999) and the Global Report-
ing Initiative (2000, 2002).

The  Global  Reporting  Initiative  (GRI)  is  a
multi-stakeholder  process,  which,  of  late,  has
been gaining acceptability worldwide. It is an
independent  institution  whose  mission  is  to
develop  and  disseminate  globally  applicable
sustainability  reporting  guidelines.  These
guidelines are voluntary in nature but becom-
ing popular among organizations for reporting
on  the  economic,  social,  and  environmental
dimensions of their activities (processes), prod-
ucts  and  services.  The  GRI  incorporates  the
active  participation  of  representatives  from
business,  accountancy,  investment,  environ-
mental,  human  rights,  research  and  labour
organizations from all over the world. Started
in  1997  by  the  Coalition  for  Environmentally
Responsible  Economies  (CERES),  the  GRI
became  independent  in  2002.  It  is  an  ofﬁcial
collaborating  centre  of  the  United  Nations
Environment  Programme  (UNEP)  and  works
in  cooperation  with  the  Global  Compact
(UNIDO et al., 1999).

LITERATURE REVIEW

environmental 

Corporate 
reporting  has
attracted attention from researchers for almost
two decades. Environmental reporting, of late,
has become a sub-division of the larger area of
corporate  social  reporting  (CSR).  As  in  other
social  disciplines,  there  is  considerable  dis-

agreement amongst academics and practition-
ers  regarding  the  theoretical  base  of  social
reporting  and  environmental  reporting.  Envi-
ronmental  reporting  is  a  multi-disciplinary
subject and hence does not have concentration
of  a  particular  management  discipline.  Strat-
egy, marketing, operation, HRD and account-
ing  areas  have 
looked  to  environmental
reporting  but  from  different  angles.  While 
top  management 
looks  at  environmental
reporting as part of business strategy, market-
ing views it as eco-product development and
green  marketing,  HRD  as  training  and  skill
development  of  the  employees,  operations  as
making plant operations compliant with envi-
laws,  accounting  as  the  money
ronment 
involved 
in  environmental  activities  and
return thereon and so on.
Traditional  accounting 

to 
focus  on  ﬁnancial  issues,  but  because  of  the
movement  to 
increase  the  scope  of  the 
stakeholder  group  of  corporations  to  include
the  general  public  (which  includes  environ-
mentalists  and  environmental  groups)  as
stakeholders, 
the  area  of  concern  has 
increased. Environmentalists and environmen-
tal  groups  generally  do  not  need  elaborate
information  on  environmental  performance
from corporations to make ﬁnancial decisions
but they certainly need it to make other deci-
sions,  such  as  whether  to  launch  a  campaign
against  a  corporation’s  activities  that  they 
consider  ‘ungreen’  and  thus  undesirable  for
society.

theory 

tends 

Sagoff (1990) states that economic measures
are not always useful for the purpose of envi-
ronmental  decision  making.  The  newer  theo-
ries  such  as  stakeholder  theory,  legitimacy
theory and politico-economic theory recognize
the  fact  that  economics,  politics,  society  and
corporations interact. According to Gray et al.
(1996), the CSR appears to be

• unsystematic,
• not related to proﬁt in the same period,
• related to company size,
• related to industry,

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

3

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 4

A. SAHAY

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

• related  to  country  of  reporting  and  owner-

ship and

• related  to  capital  intensity,  age  of  corpora-

tion, strategic posture etc.

Gamble et al. (1995) conﬁrm that there are dif-
ferences between industries and that there is an
increase  in  environmental  disclosures  over
time. The differences were found even between
industries  in  the  same  sector,  which  should
have  made  uniform  environmental  disclo-
sures.  They  observed  that  environmental
reporting  was  generally  of  poor  quality 
and  concluded  that  the  information  needs  of
stakeholders  were  not  covered  adequately.
Robertson  and  Nicholson  (1996)  found  that
industry  differences  exist  in  the  emphasis  on
various  stakeholder  groups.  They  also  com-
mented on the predominance of general state-
ments  and  rhetoric  in  CSR  rather  than  the
reporting of speciﬁc action plans. Deegan and
Gordon  (1996)  state  that,  for Australian  com-
panies, the amount of voluntary environmen-
tal  information  provided  is  low  and  the
disclosures  in  the  report  are  typically  self-
laudatory. The amount of environmental infor-
mation has increased over time. Companies in
environmentally sensitive industries are more
likely  to  report  on  environmental  issues.  The
ﬁrm size, too, has an inﬂuence on the amount
of disclosure.

KPMG (2002) have done research in various
countries over the last few years, mainly as a
marketing  tool  for  their  environmental  ser-
vices.  The  2002  report  is  based  on  survey  of
2000 companies, including the top 250 compa-
nies of the global Fortune 500 and the top 100
companies  in  19  countries.  The  results  show
that reporting and veriﬁcation of these reports
are becoming mainstream business. There is a
signiﬁcant  increase  in  the  number  of  compa-
nies  issuing  environmental,  social  or  sustain-
ability  reports  in  addition  to  their  annual
ﬁnancial reports. The highest numbers of com-
panies reporting were from countries such as
the USA, Japan, Germany, France and the UK,
which  have  large  corporations.  Within  these

countries,  chemical  and  synthetics,  pharma-
ceuticals,  electronics  and  computers,  automo-
tive and oil and gas industry were the highest
reporting sectors. Reporting rates are increas-
ing  in  other  emerging  sectors  as  well.  The
largest  increase  in  reporting  rates  occurs  in
countries that have experienced or are about to
experience mandatory reporting or disclosure.
Annual  reports  and  corporate  reports  are
becoming two distinct entities.

The  amount  of  information  provided  is
related  to  country,  industry  and  size  of  ﬁrm.
Currently,  corporations  are  observed  to  be
shifting  towards  the  GRI  reporting  system.
Issues such as greenhouse gases, ozone deplet-
ing substances and acid rain, which know no
national  boundaries,  are  being  reported  in
addition to air, water and soil contamination.
Though environmental  reporting  has  tradi-
tionally  been  a  voluntary  method  of  commu-
nicating environmental performance, a debate
is  going  on  as  to  whether  environmental
reporting  should  be  made  mandatory.  Coun-
tries such as Denmark, New Zealand and the
Netherlands  have  moved  quite  a  bit  in  this
direction.  The  European  Eco-Management 
and  Audit  Scheme  (EMAS)  also  requires 
that  environmental  statements  be  produced,
although the International Standard ISO 14001
does  not  specify  that  they  be  made  publicly
available.

CERES  reporting  requirements  call  for  the
use  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  indicators
in  environmental  reporting.  Reporters  are
asked  to  provide  context,  explanations  and
commentary  on  performance 
trends  and
unusual  events.  Where  possible,  reporting
organizations are asked to provide information
not only for the current year but also for like
the previous two years as performance trends
can only be determined through the provision
of  at  least  three  years  of  data.  Information
should be provided in both absolute terms and
normalized  form,  which  is  consumption/
saving  per  unit  of  a  chosen  denominator. 
Environmental  reports  are  generally  required
to state the following particulars.

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

4


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 5

ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING BY INDIAN CORPORATIONS

• Introduction from the chief executive.
• Background 
about 
organization.

information 

the 

• The organization’s environmental policy.
• The  organization’s  overall  position  with

regard to the environment policy.

• Progress  made  towards  speciﬁc  targets

established in previous reports.

• Setting  of  new  environmental  targets  and

action plans for the future.

Despite these prescriptions, the style of report-
ing  changes  from  company  to  company.  The
internet allows organizations to be even more
ﬂexible in the type and amount of information
available.  They  are  utilizing  the  interactive 
and multimedia capabilities to attract a wider
range of stakeholders and receive greater feed-
back  from  them.  These  reports  communicate
the  environmental  initiatives  and  focus  on
their environmental efforts.

INDUSTRIALIZATION AND
ENVIRONMENTAL LEGISLATION 
IN INDIA

Indian  business  is  relatively  young.  Industri-
alization  practically  started  after  indepen-
dence,  but  it  gained  direction  only  after  she
became  a  republic  and  industrial  policy  was
formulated.  Unfortunately,  the  policy  looked
inward  and  concentrated  on  import  substitu-
tion rather than export growth. There was cen-
tralized planning on the pattern of the erstwhile
USSR. The public sector was assigned a greater
role and made the engine for growth though the
policy  propounded  growth  through  a  mixed
economy.  Private  sector  units  not  doing  well
were  nationalized,  the  main  consideration
being the protection of jobs. Soon it was appar-
ent  that  the  propounded  policy  of  the  public
sector  being  the  industrial  temple  of  modern
India  was  not  working.  In  the  last  decade,
industrial  policy  took  a  U  turn.  Privatization
became the new mantra for economic growth
and  in  pursuance  thereof  many  public  sector

units (PSUs) were put on the block. Chanting
the privatization mantra was easier but imple-
menting  it  proved  very  difﬁcult  because  of
political  and  social  issues.  The  fallout  of  the 
privatization  exercise  made  the  mandarins  of
PSU pull up their socks, which resulted in con-
siderable  improvement  in  their  performance.
The  Thatcher  era  debate  (Elliott  and  Treanor,
2000) as to how wise it is to sell the family silver
is still going on, but the government has been
pursuing  its  policy  of  privatization  of  PSUs,
keeping  in  mind  political  exigencies,  with
limited success. Privatization has been further
necessitated because of the new WTO regime.
Indian  companies  ﬁrst  took  to  quality  stan-
dards such as ISO 9000, QS 9000 etc, but with
environmental  legislation  coming  in  and  the
environmentalists  getting  active,  they  were
obliged to meet all the legislative requirements
if they were to continue their operations.

The  Bhopal  disaster  (Rahman,  1992)  in
December 1984 made a paradigm shift in envi-
ronmental  and  safety  issues.  It  exposed  the
environmental fragility of companies as well as
differential environmental behaviour of multi-
nationals.  It  threw  a  new  challenge  to  the
country with respect to environmental gover-
nance.  Though  environmental  laws  existed
prior to this disaster (legislation began in 1974
itself),  the  Indian  Parliament  enacted  a  com-
prehensive  law  called  the  Environment  (Pro-
tection)  Act  (1986).  Under  the  act  new  rules
and regulations are framed from time to time,
which  business  and  industry  are  obliged  to
meet.  Some  of  the  important  environmental
rules  and  regulations  framed  thereafter  are
Hazardous  Wastes  (Management  and  Han-
dling) Rules (1989), Public Liability Insurance
Act  (1991),  Bio-Medical  Waste  (Management
and  Handling)  Rules  (1998),  Manufacture,
Storage  and  Import  of  Hazardous  Chemicals
Rules  (1989),  Recycled  Plastics  Manufacture
and Usage Rules (1999), The Ozone Depleting
Substances  (Regulation  and  Control)  Rules
(2000),  Noise  Pollution 
(Regulation  and
Control)  Rules  (2000),  The  Municipal  Solid
Wastes  (Management  and  Handling)  Rules

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

5


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 6

(2000),  The  Batteries  (Management  and  Han-
dling)  Rules  (2001),  Forest  (Conservation)
Rules (2003) etc.

In  view  of  emerging  legislation,  rules  and
regulations, companies found it meaningful to
obtain  ISO  14001  certiﬁcation,  which  obliges
them  to  at  least  meet  all  legislative  require-
ments  and  install  an  environmental  manage-
ment  system  (EMS).  Indian  industries  (over
750  units  have  obtained  ISO  14001  certiﬁca-
tion)  are  no  different  in  their  motivation  for
formulation, implementation and maintenance
of EMS compared with industries in developed
countries,  for  whom  meeting  legal  require-
ments was the ﬁrst reason for formulation and
implementation  of  EMS  followed  by  preven-
tion of prosecution and adhering to the indus-
try/sector norms. Customer demand, ﬁnancial
markets  and  social  pressure  were  of  lower 
priority.  Notwithstanding,  there  are  a  few 
companies  that  are  aiming  at  environmental
excellence.  The  current  status  of  India’s  envi-
ronment shows that the regulatory mechanism
has failed to control industrial pollution. This
is because the policies and institutions control-
ling pollution and degradation of the resource
base are weak and a market mechanism has yet
to be in place.

Pollution  is  rising  rapidly  with  economic
growth  and  has  already  reached  unbearable
proportions, as happened in the industrialized
countries  in  the  1950s  and  1960s,  within  a
decade or so of the Second World War. The eco-
nomic boom brought environmental calamity.
If  pollution  grows  at  this  rate,  there  will  be
public  protests,  and,  given  the  space  that
Indian  democracy  provides,  either  the  politi-
cians or the courts will have to respond. Com-
munity  and  civil  society  protests  and  judicial
activism are already biting the industries. The
Indian supreme court has actively intervened
in many environmental issues on public com-
plaints. In such a situation, industries ﬁnd their
investment  most  threatened.  Therefore,  for  a
country  such  as  India,  it  is  in  the  industry’s
own interest to adopt a proactive role in envi-
ronmental management.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

A. SAHAY

ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING 
IN INDIA

There  appears  to  be  global  interest  in  the
subject as reporting not only makes all stake-
holders  aware  of  the  environmental  perfor-
mance of the company but also gives food for
thought  and  a  plan  for  further  action  to  the
company  itself.  Further,  availability  of  sufﬁ-
cient  data  alone  can  establish  a  relationship
between economic and environmental perfor-
mance. In a developing country such as India,
such a study is all the more essential as it will
make  the  politicians,  economists,  technolo-
gists,  sociologists  and  company  managers
aware  of  the  limitations  of  growth  as  well  as
the suitable course of growth without damag-
ing the environment. Creating a databank and
benchmarking  of  environmental  performance
(Lefebvre  et  al.,  2003)  will  increase  the  com-
petitiveness  to  the  advantage  of  customers 
as well as society at large. It should also pave
the  way  for  amendment  of  the  company  and
environmental 
laws  and  regulations  and
enable national stock exchanges to create new
indexes  in  line  with  the  Dow  Jones  Sustain-
ability Index to the advantage of the investors
and shareholders.

Therefore,  research  was  planned,  based  on
the selection of leading 250 companies (ranked
by sales) reported by the Economic Times in ET
500  (2003).  Some 
leading  companies  not
included  in  this  list  were  also  considered  for
the study. The questionnaire for the study was
based  on  that  developed  by  Ghobadian  et  al.
(1998) for the study of corporate environmen-
tal behaviour of UK companies. The question-
naire  was  tested  on  sample  companies  and
modiﬁed  based  on  the  feedback.  Some  of  the
companies  in  the  proposed  study  were  con-
tacted  on  the  phone.  The  majority  of  them
diverted the call to their environmental depart-
ment,  some  to  safety,  some  others  to  quality
and  yet  some  others  to  the  administration
department. The initial contact made it evident
that  collection  of  relevant  data  on  environ-
mental  reporting  would  be  difﬁcult  and  take

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

6


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 7

ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING BY INDIAN CORPORATIONS

much longer than contemplated earlier. Thus,
it  was  thought  appropriate  to  publish  the
paper on the basis of desk research and carry
on  the  work  incorporating  the  suggestions
received.  This  would  disseminate  available
information in the ﬁeld and enable interaction
with  those  working  in  the  ﬁeld,  which  will
enrich understanding of the problem and help
create a large database for future research.

FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION

Six out of the top ten companies belong to the
oil  and  gas  sector.  Other  leading  companies
belong  to  the  automobile,  banking,  cement,
chemical and fertilizer, engineering, FMCG, IT,
mining and metallurgy, pulp and paper, phar-
maceutical, power and telecom sectors. These
companies have their annual reports placed on
the  web.  The  conservation  of  energy  ﬁnds  a
place  in  the  report  of  the  board  of  directors
because of the provisions of Indian Company
Law.  Some  companies  have  reported  their
social  and  environmental  performance  but 
sustainability  reporting  is  scarce.  The  envi-
ronmental/social/sustainability 
if
provided,  were  mostly  unsystematic  and
varied in content and character, the emphasis
varying from sector to sector.

reports, 

Some of the banking, telecom and IT sector
units belong to the billion dollar club but none
of  them  have  reported  their  sustainability  or
environmental performance. The State Bank of
India, the biggest player in the banking sector,
has hardly reported its environmental respon-
sibility and so is the case with other bankers.
The telecom companies are not different as far
as environmental reporting is concerned. This
is perhaps, because they think that economics
and technology are their only concern. The IT
sector  in  India  has  three  main  sub-sectors,
namely  hardware,  software  and  IT  enabled 
services.  While  hardware  facilities  seem  to 
be  environmentally  aware,  their  reporting  is
scarce.  Software  and  IT  enabled  services
sectors do not consider the environment to be

an aspect of their business. In contrast to this,
the  Paharpur  Business  Center  (2003),  a  soft-
ware  technology  infrastructure  provider,  has
reported its environmental performance based
on  the  triple  bottom  line  and  is  planning  its
next  report  in  GRI  format.  The  leading  soft-
ware units such as TCS (2003), INFOSYS (2003)
and  WIPRO  (2003)  have  been  reporting  their
performance more on social than environmen-
tal counts. The ﬁndings of some other sectors,
where the environment has been considered as
a business concern, are given below.

Automobiles
With  the  liberalization  policy  of  the  Indian
government, almost all multinational automo-
bile  companies  have  entered  this  market.
However, the top slot, both four wheeler and
two wheeler, is occupied by joint venture com-
panies and the second position by the Indian
companies. Automobile  units  have  ISO  14001
certiﬁcation and thus have a deﬁned environ-
mental  management  system.  The  exhaust
emission  (regulated  since  1965  in  developed
countries but since 1991 in India) is their major
environmental concern. Aggressive steps initi-
ated towards the introduction of cleaner fuels,
inspection  and  maintenance,  stringent  emis-
sion  standards,  trafﬁc  management  and  good
governance in air quality issues have yielded
good environmental results. Reduction of CO
by 68.5%, hydrocarbon by 68.5% and NOx by
55.5%  has  already  been  achieved  since  then.
Automobile  companies  are  working  closely
with the oil and gas industry for development
of  appropriate  fuel  and  lubricants  while  con-
tinuously  improving  engine  design.  These
units have web sites where environmental per-
formance  is  reported  but  more  in  terms  of
product performance rather than overall busi-
ness performance. Their manufacturing plants
are  meeting  legislative  requirements  and  the
same is being extended across the supply chain
and service organizations. A recent study (CSE,
2001) on environmental practices in the auto-
mobile sector clearly shows that they have still

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

7


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 8

2

to  drive  a  long  way  in  the  green  direction  as
the overall rating of the automobile sector was
two leaves (score 31.4%).

Chemicals and fertilizer
The chemicals and fertilizer sector is environ-
mentally  very  sensitive.  The  industry  is  of  a
peculiar nature in that pollution at plant level
is minimal but peaks the moment the products
leave  the  plant.  The  industry  has  no  control
over  the  products  it  manufactures.  The  life
cycle  assessment  also  becomes  difﬁcult
because it undergoes continuous change from
one  form  to  another.  Chemicals  and  fertilizer
come under the red category and therefore are
closely monitored by pollution control boards.
The Bhopal unit producing methyl isocyanide
belonged  to  this  category  of  industry.  The 
environmental  disaster  took  a  toll  of  more 
than  4000  lives  and  crippled  the  whole  sur-
rounding  area.  The  gas  leak  constituted  the
ﬁrst international environmental case pursued
in numerous courts in India and the USA. The
compensation was settled in an Indian court at
$495  million  but  thousands  are  still  suffering
and  the  poisoning  effects  will  spill  over  for
generations.  The  incident  exposed  the  envi-
ronmental credibility of multinational compa-
nies, especially with respect to their plants in
developing  countries.  The  Green  Rating  for
Caustic  –  Chlorine  Sector  (CSE,  2002)  found
that  the  environmentally  best  performing
company  had  scored  a  46.6%  green  rating. 
The  study  reported  that  the  performance
swings  from  as  good  as  the  global  best  to  as
bad as it can be. No company, however, quali-
ﬁed  for  the  ﬁve  leaves  award  –  the  highest
rating.

Mining and metallurgy
Both  mining  and  metallurgical  industries  are
considered  dirty.  They  are  energy  intensive
and  environment  damaging.  Iron  and  steel
forms the backbone of this sector. Primary steel
producers  have  shown  concern  for  the  envi-

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

A. SAHAY

ronment and have reported their environmen-
tal performance in different ways. The leading
steel  producer,  SAIL (2003),  has  reported
reduction  in  particulate  matter  emission  by
60%, water consumption by 47%, efﬂuent dis-
charge  quantity  by  32%,  energy  consumption
by  9%  and  an  increase  in  solid  waste  utili-
zation  by  14%.  TISCO  (2003),  the  most  cost 
effective  steel  company,  has  reported 
its 
environmental  performance  in  GRI  format,
which  has  been  duly  veriﬁed  by  Pricewater-
house  Coopers.  The  company  has  exceeded
regulatory  compliance  standards. 
It  has
achieved a reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions  by  9.0%  (against  a  target  of  5%), 
speciﬁc energy consumption by 1.8% (against
a target of 4%), raw material consumption by
10.8%  (against  a  target  of  5%)  and  water 
consumption by 10.2% (against a target of 5%)
and  has  increased  waste  reuse  and  recycling
from  70.2  to  72.6%  (against  a  target  of  72%)
during the year. The company has also under-
taken  a  CDM  project.  In  the  mining  sector,
NALCO’s  (2003)  bauxite  mine  has  won  an
environmental  award  but 
this  has  been
reported more as publicity rather than in a data
based form.

Oil and gas sector
The players in this sector rank high in the ET
survey  and  carry  great  environmental  risk.
Most of their facility is ISO 14001 certiﬁed. In
fact,  the  Koyali–Ahmedabad  pipeline  of  the
Indian  Oil  Corporation  (2003)  was  the  ﬁrst
pipeline in the world to attain ISO 14001 certi-
ﬁcation.  They  have  generally  reported  their
environmental policy and environmental per-
formance  over 
the  years.  Environmental
aspects  in  their  processes  and  products  have
been recognized and revealed. This sector has
done  and  reported  laudable  work  in  foresta-
tion, development of ecological parks and pro-
tection  of  heritage.  Social  aspects  such  as  the
ten point programme for the Taj trapezium (a
world heritage site) has been over-emphasized
by  the  companies  working  in  that  area.  The

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

8


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 9

ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING BY INDIAN CORPORATIONS

environmental  aspects  of  processes  (explo-
ration,  production,  reﬁning  and  blending) 
such as levels of liquid efﬂuents, gaseous emis-
sions  and  hazardous  wastes  have  been
reported and compared with standards rather
than targets set under the continual improve-
ment clause of EMS. As far as products are con-
cerned,  low  sulphur  diesel,  lead-free  petrol
and the development of bio-degradable lubri-
cants  ﬁnd  special  mention,  though  these  are
not  evaluated  against  targets.  The  sector,
despite  good  work,  has  yet  to  report  its 
environmental  performance 
in  a  globally 
recognized format.

even appointed a committee of directors on the
environment.  They  have  created  a  facility  for
online  analysis  and  monitoring  of  SOx,  NOx
and  SPM  in  the  ﬂue  gas  ducts,  an  automatic
weather  monitoring  station  for  monitoring
weather conditions, ambient air quality moni-
toring  stations  and  a  mobile  environment 
monitoring  van  to  monitor  the  emission 
parameters in the nearby area. Nuclear power
plants  are  of  different  species,  having  very
strict  safety  requirements.  They  are  reporting
more on safety than on environmental aspects.
Hydel  power  plants  were  observed  to  be
reporting more on social aspects.

Power
The  Indian  power  sector  (2003)  is  dominated
by  thermal  power,  having  a  share  of  71.94%,
followed  by  hydel  (25.09%),  nuclear  (2.59%)
and wind (1.44%). The other non-conventional
sources  of  energy  such  as  solar,  geothermal,
tidal  etc.  are 
insigniﬁcant.  The  National
Thermal  Power  Corporation  (2003)  is  the
biggest  player  in  the  thermal  power  sector.
Power  plants  of  state  electricity  boards  are
other  major  players.  Companies  such  as  Tata
Power  (2003)  and  Bombay  Suburban  Electric
Supply  (2003)  are  also  signiﬁcant  players.
Besides these, there are captive power plants of
energy-intensive  industries.  Thermal  power
plants are the biggest greenhouse gas emitter.
They  (other  than  those  of  state  electricity
boards)  have  been  reporting  their  environ-
mental  performance,  but 
in  non-standard
format,  suiting  their  own  requirements.  The
reports  include  the  trend  in  emission  of  par-
ticulate  matters,  SO2,  NOx,  discharge  of  efﬂu-
ents and their hydrogen ion concentration, free
chlorine, COD and BOD levels, coal consump-
tion,  ash  generation,  speciﬁc  oil  consumption
etc. They also have reported plantation of tree
saplings,  pisciculture  in  their  water  ponds
(hydro stations), pollution control equipment,
electrostatic precipitators, height of chimneys,
trial solar energy plants and wind power pro-
jects.  Bombay  Suburban  Electric  Supply  has

resources, 

Pharmaceutical
The  pharmaceutical  sector,  of  late,  is  gaining
importance  worldwide  because  of  the  new
intellectual  property  rights  regime  under  the
WTO. The two Indian players Ranbaxy (2003)
and  Dr.  Reddy’s  Laboratories 
(www.
drreddys.com, 2003) in this sector have taken
great  initiatives.  Multinationals  operating  in
India and Indian units in this sector are envi-
ronmentally conscious. At Ranbaxy, regulatory
consents, compliance with consent conditions,
adequate 
environment-impact
assessment  and  EMS  form  the  ﬁve  absolutes
for  achieving  corporate  objectives  deﬁned  by
their  EH&S  policy.  Environment 
Impact
Assessment  Studies  are  carried  out  periodi-
cally to assess the effect on local environmen-
tal  conditions  affected  by  various  plants.  Dr.
Reddy’s  Laboratories  has  a 
two-pronged
investment  strategy:  one  in  pollution  control
devices and safety equipment and the other in
management systems. They have reported that
their  operations  can  be  sustainable  only  if
safety,  health  and  environment  (SH&E)  man-
agement 
into  production
processes and manufacturing practices. Learn-
ing to do more with less, their focus has shifted
to  process  improvements  for  yield  improve-
ment from a traditional ‘end-of-pipe’ approach
of waste treatment. The reports, however, are
unsystematic and haphazard.

integrated 

is 

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

9

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 10

Pulp and paper
The  pulp  and  paper  sector is  an  expanding
sector at the cost of deforestation. It uses many
hazardous  chemicals  and  also  releases  haz-
ardous waste. The Green Rating Project (CSE,
1999) in India was launched in this sector only.
A life  cycle  approach  beginning  from  raw
material procurement to product recycling was
adopted.  It  was  observed  that  the  paper  and
pulp  industry  is  a  big  consumer  of  natural
resources  such  as  water,  wood  ﬁbre  and
energy.  During  production  and  disposal
stages, a large portion of these resources comes
out  as  waste.  The  best  environmental  per-
former in the sector had a score of 42.75 out of
100. There is a big difference in environmental
performance  between  the  Indian  pulp  and
paper  industry  and  those  in  the  developed
world,  mainly  on  account  of  the  technology
level and the size of the plant. This sector is not
conscious about environmental reporting and
has  been  more  or  less  dwelling  upon  the
minimum  levels  of  environmental  perfor-
mance.  Recycling  is  increasing  but  mainly
under the pressure of user industries that want
to reduce their waste level.

5

10

15

20

25

A. SAHAY

environmental groups, the general public and
importantly  the  government.  These  ﬁndings
are  primitive  and  similar  to  those  of  other
studies elsewhere in the world. The major dif-
ference  between  the  Indian  situation  and
studies  of  this  nature  in  developed  countries
may be that environmental awareness in India
is  still  at  a  low  level,  though  the  country  is
quite  vulnerable  to  environmental  impacts.
Further, the reports do not lend themselves to
comparison  between  companies  and  between
sectors. This is because environmental report-
ing is unregulated and thus companies are free
to use it to publicize their good environmental
performance  without  giving  factual  data  and
environmental  trends.  The  ﬁne/punishment
system alone for non-compliance has not given
the  desired  result  and  adds  to  the  cost  of
administration. To motivate the companies for
meaningful environmental reporting, rewards
for  good  quality  of  environmental  reporting
should be instituted, similar to the rewards for
good  environmental  performance.  Environ-
mental legislation, perhaps, is adequate. What
is  needed  is  its  enforcement  and  market
rewards.

30

CONCLUSION

Environmental  reporting  by  Indian  corpora-
tions lags signiﬁcantly behind that found in the
developed  world  except  for  a  few  companies
such as TISCO, which have not only reported
in  internationally  recognized  GRI  format  but
have  also  obtained  veriﬁcation  from  Price-
waterhouse Coopers. Environmental reporting
in India is still in its infancy and appears to be
more of a PR work, devoid of strategic intent.
It does not provide relevant information to the
stakeholders  or  a  database  for  continual
improvement.  The  reporting,  in  general,  is
unsystematic, piecemeal and inadequate.

The  reason  for  inadequate  environmental
disclosure  is  probably  that  less  pressure  is
applied to Indian companies by stakeholders,

35

40

45

3

4

5

REFERENCES

Center  for  Science  and  Environment  (CSE).  1999.  Green

Rating Project: Pulp and Paper Industry. New Delhi.

Center  for  Science  and  Environment  (CSE).  2001.  Green
Rating Project: Environmental Rating of Indian Automobile
Sector. New Delhi.

Center  for  Science  and  Environment  (CSE).  2002.  Green

Rating Project: Caustic. New Delhi.

Coalition of Environmentally Responsible Economies. ••
CERES  Reporting.  www.ceres.org/pdf/CERES_short_
form.pdf••

Cornelius  PK.  2003.  Global  Competitiveness  Report

2002–2004. World Economic Forum: Geneva.

Daniel E, Cornelius PK. 2002. Environmental Performance
Measurement.  Oxford  University  Press:  Oxford;  44–
53.

Dasgupta  N.  1997.  Environmental  Accounting.  Wheeler:

New Delhi.

Davis J. 1991. Journal of Business Strategy 12 (4): 14–17.
DeCanio  SJ.  1992.  International  cooperation  to  avert
global warming: economic growth, carbon pricing and

6

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

10


CSR051  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 11

ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING BY INDIAN CORPORATIONS

6

7

8

8

energy  efﬁciency.  The Journal  of  the  Environment  and
Development ••.

Deegan C, Gordon B. 1996. A study of the environmental
disclosure  practices  of  Australian  corporations.
Accounting and Business Research 26 (3): 187–199.

Economic Times. 2003. ET 500, Top 250 Companies Ranked by

Sales.

Elliott L, Treanor J. 2000. Special report. The Guardian ••.
Gamble  GO,  Hsu  K,  Kite  D,  Radtke  RR.  1995.  Environ-
mental  disclosures  in  annual  reports  and  10Ks:  an
examination. Accounting Horizons 9 (3): 34–54.

Ghobadian  A,  Viney  H,  Liu  L,  James  P.  1998.  Business

Strategy and the Environment 7: 13–23.

Global Reporting Initiative. 2002. Sustainability Reporting
www.globalreporting.org/guidelines/

Guidelines. 
2002.asp ••

Gray R, Owen D, Adams C. 1996. Accounting and Account-
ability:  Changes  and  Challenges  in  Corporate  Social  and
Environmental Reporting. Prentice-Hall: London.

Knoepfel I. 2001. Dow Jones Sustainability Group Index:
a global benchmark for corporate sustainability. Corpo-
rate Environmental Strategy 8: 6–15.

Ike  AF,  Dorinda  D.  1998.  Environmental  Ethics  and  the
Global Marketplace. University of Georgia Press: Athens,
GA.

Jain AK.  2001.  Descriptive  Law  on  Pollution  and  Environ-

ment. Akalank: New Delhi.

KPMG. 2002. International Survey of Corporate Sustainabil-

ity Reporting. Universiteit van Amsterdam.

Lefebvre  E,  Lefebvre  L,  Talbot  S.  2003.  Environmental
Performance  in  SMEs.  R  &  D  Management 33 (3):
263–283.

Morisette  PM.  1989.  The  evaluation  of  policy  responses
to  stratospheric  ozone  depletion.  Natural  Resources
Journal 29: 793–820.

Narayanan VK. 2001. Managing Technology and Innovation

for Competitive Advantage. Pearson: Singapore.

Rahman S. 1992. Lessons production managers can learn.

Management Review 21 (2): 58–67.

Robertson DC, Nicholson N. 1996. Expressions of corpo-
rate social responsibility in UK ﬁrms. Journal of Business
Ethics 15: 1095–1106.

Rycroft Risks. 1988. The Acid Rain Controversy. University

of Pittsburg Press: Pittsburg, PA.

Sagoff  M.  1990.  The  Economy  of  the  Earth.  Cambridge 

University Press: Cambridge.

Sahay  A.  2003.  Environmental  risks  relevant  insurance
products. World Congress on Environmental Management,
Palampur.

Solow R. 1957. Technical change and the aggregate pro-
duction function. A Review of Economics and Statistics 39:
312–320.

Swaminathan  MS.  2002.  Presidential  address.  Interna-
tional  Conference  on  Plants  and  Environmental  Pollution
(ICPEP-2), Lucknow.

UNDP–UNEP–World  Bank–WRI.  2003.  World  Resources
2002–2004,  Decisions  for  the  Earth:  Balance,  Voice,  and
Power.

UNIDO–UNEP–ILO–UNDP–HCHR. 

1999. 

Global

Compact: the Nine Principles. New York.

United  Nations.  1991.  Accounting  for  Environmental  Pro-
tection  Measures,  Paper  E/C.10/AC.3/1991/5,  United
Nations CTC ISAR. New York.

Willits SD, Giuntini R. 1994. Helping your company go

green. Management Accounting 75 (8): 43–47.

9

10

www.bses.com [16 January 2003]
www.drreddys.com [10 February 2003]
www.infosys.com [25 February 2003]
www.iocl.com [25 January 2003]
www.nalcoindia.com [25 January 2003]
www.ntpc.co.in [16 January 2003]
www.ranbaxy.com [10 February 2003]
www.pbcnet.com [10 February 2003]
www.sail.co.in [25 January 2003]
www.tatapower.com [January 16,2003]
www.tatasteel.com [10 February 2003]
www.tcs.com [25 February 2003]
www.teriin [16 January 2003]
www.wipro.com [25 February 2003]

BIOGRAPHY

Dr. A. Sahay is Professor and Chairman of the
National  Management  Programme,  Manage-
mepnt Development Institute, P.O. Box No. 60,
Mehrauli  Road,  Sukhrali,  Gurgaon  122  001,
India.
Tel.:  (direct):  234-6162  (afﬁx  95124  before  the
number from Delhi, and 0124 from anywhere
else)
Tel.: (board): 2349831-36, 8913050-62, extension
333
Fax: 2341189, 2340147
E-mail: asahay@mdi.ac.in

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Copyright © 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment

Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Mgmt 11, 000–000 (2004)

11


Author Query Form (CSR051)  1/15/04  03:11 PM  Page 1

AUTHOR QUERY FORM

Dear Author,

During the preparation of your manuscript for publication, the questions listed below have arisen. Please

attend to these matters and return this form with your proof.

Many thanks for your assistance.

Query
References

Query

Remarks

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Author: UNDP et al. in ref. list — which is correct?
Author: ‘a’ inserted — ok?
Author: please give article titles for all journal refs.
Author: year? please check link & give access date.
Author: is this referred to in text?
Author: vol. & page nos?
Author: date?
Author: are these referred to?
Author: UNEP et al. in text – which is correct?
Author: are these referred to?

CSR051

