New Service  Development: 

User Collaboration  in a Unique  Process 

BY 

GARY R. SCHIRR 

B.S. Miami University, 1976 

M.S. Carnegie Mellon University, 1978 

DISSERTATION 

Submitted as partial fulfillment  of the requirements 

for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Business Administration 

in the Graduate College of the 

University of Illinois at Chicago, 2008 

Chicago, Illinois 


UMI Number:  3327441 

Copyright 2008 by 

Schirr, Gary  R. 

All rights reserved. 

INFORMATION TO  USERS 

The quality of this reproduction  is dependent  upon the quality of the copy 
submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality  illustrations  and 
photographs, print bleed-through, substandard  margins, and  improper 
alignment can adversely affect reproduction. 

In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete  manuscript 

and there are missing pages, these will be noted.  Also, if unauthorized 
copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion. 

® 

UMI 

UMI Microform  3327441 

Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. 

All rights reserved.  This microform edition is protected  against 

unauthorized copying under Title  17, United States Code. 

ProQuest LLC 

789 E. Eisenhower  Parkway 

PO Box 1346 

Ann Arbor, Ml  48106-1346 


Copyright by 

GARY R. SCHIRR 

2008 


This  dissertation  is  dedicated  to  my  wife,  Laurel,  who  has  always  encouraged  me  to 

pursue my dreams. Without her support this dissertation would never have been accomplished. 

in 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

I would  like to thank  Al  Page who  has  been  a mentor  as well  as  advisor  throughout  this 

process. Abbie  Griffin  and Al  encouraged  me to begin this journey  five years  ago and they  have 

provided  extraordinary  support  throughout  this  dissertation.  Abbie  functioned  as  a  virtual  co-

chair  with  excellent  guidance  for  this  dissertation  and  beyond.  Joseph  Cherian  shared  some 

valuable  insights,  for  example  "extreme  service  innovation."  Gerry  Hills  was  a  consistent  voice 

of  encouragement  throughout  my  studies  and  the  dissertation.  Benet  DeBerry-Spence  provided 

valuable  input  as  I  planned  and  began  the  qualitative  studies.  I  would  like  to  thank  my  entire 

committee  for persuading me that three empirical chapters is the maximum to  consider! 

I  acknowledged  the  unwavering  support  of  my  wife  Laurel  on  the  preceding  page.  I 

would  also  like  to  thank  Christine  and  Stephen  for  their  patience  and  encouragement  as  our 

lifestyle  changed.  Diligent  proofreading  by  Laurel  and  Christine  were  helpful  to  this  effort. 

Three  true  scholars,  my  former  economics  professor,  Bill  Hutchinson,  a  graduate  school 

colleague,  Mike  Hyman,  and  a  friend,  Bob  Webb,  provided  encouragement  and  wise  counsel. 

Rich Leonard urged me to act on my dreams, but also to focus  on getting  it done. Andy  Conway 

taught  an  inspired  doctoral  seminar  on  SEM  which  apparently  included  unlimited  consultations, 

even  after  he  moved  to  Princeton.  Cheryl  Nakata  introduced  me  to  the  benefits  and  beauty  of 

qualitative analysis and urged me to seek further  training. 

Several  colleagues  went  out  of  their  way  to  be  helpful  during  inevitable  tough  periods: 

thanks to David Hansen, Elif Izberk, Wendy Martin, and Anjali  Chaudry for their  support. 

I would  also  like  to thank  the  American  Bankers  Association  -  especially  Jane  Yao  and 

Maggie  Kelly  -  for  their  support  of  the  bank  survey.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  PDMA 

Foundation  for granting me access to the CPAS data base. 

iv 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 
A.  Customer Collaboration  or Co-creation 
B.  A  Schematic of the Dissertation 
C.  Overview  of the Dissertation 
D.  Three Chapters: Four Empirical  Studies, Four Data Sets, Three Methods 

1.  Three Empirical  Chapters 
2.  Three Unique Chapters 

II. 

LITERATURE  REVIEW 
A.  NSD and Customer Co-creation:  Gaps in the Literature 
B.  New  Service Development 

1.  Formal  Structure 
2.  Differences 

C.  Customer Collaboration  in NPD 
1.  The Voice of the Customer 
2.  Customer Active Paradigm and Lead Users 
3.  Experience in the Market Place 
4.  Market Learning 
5.  Categories  of Customer  Involvement  in NPD/NSD 

C.  Methods to Engage Customers 
D.  Customer Collaboration  in Service Innovation 
E.  Innovation  in Financial  Services 
F.  NSD For Internet  Services 
G.  Antecedents  and Models of NSD  Success 
H.  Summary  of Literature Review 

III. 

A GROUNDED  STUDY OF NEW  SERVICE DEVELOPMENT 
A.  Summary 
B.  Introduction 

1.  The  Study 

C.  Methods 

1.  "Five Traditions" of Qualitative Inquiry 
2.  A Grounded  Study of Diverse  Service Firms 
3.  Procedures of this  Study 
4. 
Iterate until you  Saturate 
5.  Fine-tuning the Instrument -  Me 
6.  Using NVivo  Software 

v 

1 
2 
4 
7 
9 
9 
11 

12 
12 
18 
18 
18 
20 
20 
21 
22 
23 
23 
24 
27 
29 
29 
31 
32 

33 
33 
34 
34 
35 
35 
37 
38 
40 
41 
43 


TABLE OF CONTENTS  (Continued) 

D.  Subjects 
E.  Results: New  Service Development  is Different 
F. 
G.  Customer-based Antecedents of NSD  Success 

It is ALL ABOUT  THE CUSTOMERS 

1.  Hearing the Customers: Market Research to Collect  Customer Needs 
2.  Planning for Customer  Collaboration 

H.  Other Antecedents of NSD  Success 

1.  NSD is Iterative, but  Some  Structure may be Useful 

I.  A Proposed Model of NSD  Success 
J.  Other  Sources of NSD  Ideas 
K.  Vendor Alliances 
L.  Doctor-centric, not User-centric 
M.  Summary of Propositions 
N.  Conclusion 

IV. 

User Collaboration  in New Service  Development 
A.  Summary 
B.  Opening vignette 
C.  Introduction 

1. 

Structure of this Chapter 

D.  Literature Review 

1.  NSD  in financial  services 
2.  Self-Service  Technology ("SST") 

E.  The  Study 
F.  Subjects 
G.  Methods: Case  Study 

1.  Classic Case  Study 
2.  Theory-building  and Construct-  & Theory-testing 
3.  Understanding and  Theory-development 
4.  Data Collection 
5.  Supplementary  Materials 
6.  Reflexivity  and Me: the Instrument 
7.  Data Analysis 
8.  "Getting it right" and Triangulation 
9.  Unit of Analysis: Program and Project 

H.  Stories of New  Service Development 

VI 

43 
47 
50 
53 
56 
58 
60 
60 
63 
65 
67 
68 
76 
78 

80 
81 
83 
83 
84 
84 
85 
86 
89 
93 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
97 
99 
100 
101 
102 


TABLE OF CONTENTS  (Continued) 

I.  BankClearing:  Going Online to Compete 

1.  The Case 
2.  Propositions about NSD Process Changes 

J.  OTC Derivatives -  Now Online 

1.  BankDealerFX 
2.  DealerFDEnergy 
3.  A Proposition 

K.  BankTreasury:  Meeting Corporate Client Needs 

1.  The Case 
2.  A  Set of Propositions 

L.  Global Derivatives Exchanges Climb "out of the pits" 

1.  ExchangeFDl 
2.  ExchangeFD2 
3.  Propositions  about NSD  for  online  services 
M.  Wholesale Financial  Services for  Independent Firms 

1.  BankMortgage 
2.  SecuritiesIB 
3.  Summary  of Wholesaling Financial  Services 
4.  Proposition: Customization  for the Masses 

N.  Coding the Cases 
O.  Discussion of Results 
P.  Further Research 
Q.  Limitations, Implications, and Impressions 

1.  Limitations  of the Research 
2.  Managerial  Implications 
3.  An overall impression: joy 

R.  Closing Vignette 

V. 

QUANTITATIVE  TESTS 
A.  Summary and Introduction 
B.  Study  1: Testing Customer Research Antecedents with the CPAS dataset 

1.  Literature  Review 
2.  Proposed Constructs and Hypotheses 
3.  Data: CPAS from  PDMA 

a.  Survey Development 
b.  Sample and Survey Administration 
c.  PDMA Response Rates 
d.  Supplemental  Respondents 
e.  Marketing Research  Tools 

vil 

104 
104 
110 
112 
113 
116 
118 
119 
119 
125 
128 
129 
133 
134 
136 
136 
138 
139 
139 
140 
143 
145 
145 
145 
146 
146 
147 

148 
148 
149 
151 
154 
157 
157 
158 
159 
160 
161 


TABLE OF CONTENTS  (Continued) 

4.  Methods 
5.  Constructs and HI 

a.  Market Research  Constructs:  ICE and GCR 
b.  Exploratory Factor Analysis 
c.  Cronbach's  Alpha 
d.  Confirmatory  Factor Analysis of ICE and CGR 
e.  Success Measures 

6.  Results 

a.  More Innovative NPD 
b.  Services vs. Goods 

7.  Conclusion 
8.  Limitations 
9.  Future Research 
10.  Managerial  Implications 

C.  Study 2:  Tests of Antecedents & a Model of NSD  Success 

1.  Summary 
2. 
3.  Hypotheses and Constructs 

Introduction 

a.  The Use of Market Research Methods 
b.  Measures  of the Firm's Culture 
c.  NSD Process Measures 
d.  Generalized Model of NSD  Success 

4.  Developing Constructs 

a.  The use of market research methods 
b.  Measures  of the firm's  culture 
c.  NSD process measures 
d.  Success measures 

5.  The  Survey and Data 

a.  Survey development 
b.  Sample Administration:  with the American Bankers Association  . 
c.  Response Rates and Representativeness 

6.  Methods 
7.  Construct Review and Reliability 

a.  The Use of Market  Research Methods 
b.  Measures of the Firm's Culture 
c.  NSD Process Measures 
d.  Success Constructs 
e.  CFA for Process and Success 
f  Missing Data 

viii 

163 
164 
165 
165 
166 
167 
168 
173 
177 
178 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
185 
186 
186 
186 
187 
188 
189 
191 
191 
192 
193 
194 
195 
195 
197 
198 
203 
204 
204 
205 
207 
207 
208 
209 


TABLE OF CONTENTS  (Continued) 

8.  Results: Antecedents ofNSD  success 

a.  The use of market research methods: ICE and GCR 
b.  Cultural Measures: IO, CO, P-CO 
c.  NSD Process measures: Formal Process, Iterative Process 
d.  Effect  Sizes and fit  Statistics for  individual  antecedents 

9.  Results: Models of NSD  Success 

a.  Testing with Multiple  Process and Market Research Variables  .... 
b.  Using all the Variables 

10.  Results by Innovativeness  of NSD 

a.  Bank  Culture and NSD  Success by Innovativeness 
b.  Use of market research  methods  and NSD  Success 
c.  Process variables and NSD  success 

11.  Testing a Culture-Tools-Process  Model of NSD  Success 

a.  Using Proactive Customer Orientation in the Model 
b.  Exploratory path analysis 

12.  Conclusion 

a.  A Culture-Tools-Process  Model of NSD  Success 
b. 

Incremental,  Innovative and Radical NSD 

13.  Limitations 
14.  Future Research 

VI.  CONCLUSION 

A.  Research Questions 

1.  How are new services developed? 
2.  What is the Role of Customer  Collaboration  in NSD? 
3.  The Migration to the Internet  and Customer Collaboration  in NSD 
4.  Another Theme: the Innovativeness  of NSD 
B.  The Culture-Tools-Process  Model of NSD  Success 
C.  New Measures  as Antecedents of NSD  Success 
D.  Questions  for Further  Study 

1.  How can  Structure be introduced to an NSD process? 
2.  How can "Professional  Organisations" innovate? 
3. 
4.  Does it make  sense to Measure  Success of an Overall NSD Program? 

Is NSD  for Web-based  Service simply "Extreme Programming"? 

E.  Summary 
F.  Limitations 

References 

ix 

210 
210 
211 
213 
214 
215 
215 
217 
219 
223 
224 
226 
227 
230 
231 
233 
234 
235 
236 
236 

237 
238 
238 
238 
239 
239 
240 
242 
244 
244 
245 
249 
251 
251 
253 

254 


TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued) 

Appendices 

•  Appendix A: Study 1  Questionnaire outline 
•  Appendix B: Information  Sheet 
•  Appendix C: Open question outline for B2B migration study 
•  Appendix D: Constructs 
•  Appendix E: Correlation of single-value terms used in model tests 
•  Appendix F: IRB approvals for this dissertation 

Vita 

268 
268 
271 
272 
273 
277 
278 

282 

x 


LIST OF TABLES 

Table  2.1: Categories  of customer involvement  in product  innovation 

Table 2.2: Summary of Selected Customer/User  Engagement  Methods 

Table 3.1: Comparing three traditions  (Creswell  1998) 

Table 3.2: BEA service sectors and the subjects 

Table 3.3: The subjects  of the grounded study 

Table 3.4: Selected words used in interviews 

Table 3.5: Categories of Open Codes 

Table 3.6: A  Summary of Propositions 

Table 4.1:  Initial Constructs  for the case study 

Table 4.2: Subjects  in the Case  Study 

Table 4.3: Most used open codes 

Table 4.4: "Tree Nodes" -  Consolidated categories of codes 

Table 4.5: Summary of propositions  from  the case results 

Table 5.1: Summary  of Selected Customer/User  Engagement  Methods 

Table 5.2: Response Rate Summary: PDMA Members and Web Site Users 

Table 5.3: Response Rate  Summary:  Supplemental  Respondents 

Table 5.4: Mix in CPAS data set 

Table 5.5: Rotated  Component  Matrix—Limit  2 components 

.! 

Table 5.6: ICE and GCR Reliability 

Table 5.7: CFA for  ICE and CGR 

Table 5.8: Cronbach's  Alpha for two Program  Success Measures 

Table 5.9: Cronbach's Alpha for  Innovative  Success 

Table 5.10: Comparison  of Data Available in Tests 

Table 5.11: CFA on the Success Measures  and Independent  Variables 

Table 5.12: SEM Analysis  on CPAS full  data set 

Table 5.13: Testing the same five  models using the 5-item  success model 

Table 5.14: ICE compared to other process antecedents  of NPD  Success 

Table 5.15: SEM testing the five models for  More Innovative  Success 

Table 5.16a: Frequencies  of Methods—Goods  versus  Services 

Table 5.16b: SEM  Summary  for  Services versus Goods using simple direct model 

XI 

24 

27 

36 

44 

46 

51 

52 

76 

88 

92 

140 

141 

144 

152 

159 

160 

161 

166 

167 

168 

169 

170 

171 

172 

175 

176 

176 

178 

179 

180 


LIST OF TABLES  (Continued) 

Table 5.17: Items for ICE and GCR 
Table 5.18: Response Rates -  Gross and Qualified (211 total responses) 
Table 5.19: Number that started the survey vs. completion level 
Table 5.20: Diverse Group of Respondents involved in Bank NSD 
Table 5.21: ICE and GCR Reliability 
Table 5.22: Reliability, Customer Orientation 
Table 5.23: Reliability, Proactive Customer Orientation 
Table 5.24: Reliability, Innovative Orientation Reliability 
Table 5.25: Formal Process and Iterative Reliability 
Table 5.26: Reliability, Success-met bank objectives 
Table 5.27: CFA for IT, Formal and Success-Objectives 
Table 5.28: Data sets for testing antecedents of success 
Table 5.29: Usage of Market Research Tools as antecedents of NSD success 
Table 5.30: Individual Culture Measures as antecedents of NSD Success with Objectives 
Table 5.31: SEM Analysis: Multiple Cultural Factors 
Table 5.32: Process and MR Tools as antecedents of NSD success 
Table 5.33: Process and MR methods in combination 
Table 5.34: Proactive Customer Orientation plus second variable vs. success objectives 
Table 5.35: Success measure for incremental, innovative and Radical NPD success 
Table 5.36: Data sets for testing antecedents of success by innovativeness of NSD 
Table 5.37: Correlations of NSD innovativeness and predictor variables 
Table 5.38a: Culture Measures and incremental/innovative/radical NSD success 
Table 5.38b: Culture Measures -  single variables and success by innovativeness of project.... 
Table 5.39a: Regressions of success versus use of market research methods 
Table 5.39b: Single variable regressions on use of market research methods 
Table 5.40a: Formal and Iterative Process, two variable regression 
Table 5.40b: Formal and Iterative Process: Single Construct vs. Interactive 
Table 5.41a: Regressions on a culture-tools-process model by innovativeness 
Table 5.41b: Two-term models with independent variables significant at p < .05 
Table 5.42a: Substituting proactive customer orientation in a three-term model 
Table 5.42b Reduced-term sparse reduced models 

192 
200 
201 
202 
204 
205 
206 
206 
207 
208 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 
216 
218 
220 
220 
222 
223 
224 
225 
225 
226 
226 
228 
230 
230 
231 

xn 


LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure 1.1: Dissertation Schematic 

Figure 1.2: Outline of the remaining chapters of the dissertation 

Figure 2.1: (Cooper 1990): Traditional Stage-Gate® Model 

Figure 2.2: Iterative Stage-Gate® 

Figure 3.1: New Open Codes from coding successive subject firms 

Figure 3.2: A grounded model of NSD success 

Figure 5.1: Proposed Categories/Constructs for Customer Engagement 

Figure 5.2: Categories/Constructs from CPAS "Market Research" 

Figure 5.3: Model to test hypotheses 

Figure 5.4: The three models supporting H2, H4 and H5b...And two not 

Figure 5.5: A culture-tools-process model of NSD Success 

Figure 5.6: Revised culture-tools-process model of NSD 

Figure 5.7a: Single grounded culture-tools-process model of NSD success 

5 

8 

15 

17 

40 

64 

154 

162 

162 

173 

190 

218 

227 

Figure 5.7b: Linear regression grounded culture-tools-process model of NSD success ...  228 

Figure 5.8: A path analysis of innovative NSD success 

Figure 5.9: Culture-tools-process model of NSD success 

Figure 6.1: A customer-centric, culture-tools-process model of NSD Success 

Figure 6.2: A general customer-centric model of NSD Success 

Figure 6.3: Iterative Stage-Gate® 

Figure 6.4: Service Co-creation Checkpoints 

231 

234 

240 

241 

246 

247 

xiii 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

American Bankers Association 

Confirmatory  Factor Analysis 

Customer Orientation 

2003 Comparative Performance Assessment Study (from the PDMA) 

"Group of Eight" -  seven democratic prosperous nations plus Russia 

Group or Constrained Research; a category of customer research methods 

Gross Domestic Product 

Individual Customer Engagement - category of customer research methods 

New Product Development 

ABA 

CFA 

CO 

CPAS 

G8 

GCR 

GDP 

ICE 

NPD 

NPD-goods 

New Product Development for goods 

NSD 

P-CO 

PDMA 

R&D 

SEM 

VOC 

New Service Development 

Proactive Customer Orientation 

Product Development & Management Association 

Research and Development 

Structural Equation Modeling 

Voice of the Customer (Griffin  and Hauser 1993) 

xiv 


New Service Development: User Collaboration in a Unique Process 

Summary 

The  key  research  questions  of  this  dissertation  are: How  are new  services developed? 

What  is  the  role  of  customer  collaboration  in  new  service  development?  How  does  the 

migration  of  services  to  web-delivery  affect  customer  collaboration  in  new  service 

development? 

After  an  introduction  to  the  questions  and  the  format  of  the  thesis,  a  literature  review 
examines research in new product and service development, key differences  between goods and 
services, the impact of the differences  on new service development, customer and user input and 
involvement  in new product  development  and new  service development,  and the impact  of the 
internet  on  communication  as  well  as  a  platform  to  deliver  services.  The  stated  research 
questions are shown to fit an important gap in new product and service development research. 

Propositions  about  the  process  of  new  service  development,  the  role  of  customer 
collaboration in service innovation and the change in service innovation as a service migrates to 
the  Internet  are  explored  in  two  qualitative  studies.  Selected  hypotheses  and  a  culture-tools-
process  model  of  NSD  success  are tested  by  a  quantitative  survey  of  service  firms.  Both  the 
tested  hypotheses,  as  well  as  the  untested  propositions;  contribute  to  theory  of  new  service 
development and customer collaboration in new service development. 

xv 


I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Although  it is true  that  "in the  most  advanced  service  economies  such  as  the  USA  and 

UK, services  create  up to three-quarters  of the  wealth  and  85%  of the  employment...  we  know 

little  about  managing  innovation  in this sector"  (Tidd and Hull  2003, p.  ix). 

The  service  economy  is here! The  service  sector continues to grow and the percentage  of 

GDP  accounted  for  by  service  industries  keeps  increasing.  Service  is  now  83%  of  the  U.S. 

economy  according  to  Bureau  of  Economic  Affairs  and  Commerce  Department  classifications 

(Luther  and  Oh  2008).  The  growth  and  importance  of  service  to  an  economy  is  not  just  a 

phenomenon  of  "advanced  economies,"  service  is  now  a  majority  of  the  world  gross  domestic 

product (UN  1998). 

The  authors  of  an  award-winning  article  declaring  that  "all  marketing  is  service 

marketing" advocate a new service-dominant  logic for marketing  (Vargo and Lusch 2004a). This 

service-dominant 

logic  provides  a  theoretical  justification 

for 

the  centrality  of  service 

independent  of  its  GDP  dominance  (Vargo  and  Lusch  2004a;  Vargo  and  Lusch  2006).  In  a 

service-dominant  paradigm  of  marketing,  service  is  the  "unifying  purpose  of  any  business 

relationship"  (Ballantyne  and  Varey  2008,  p.  11;  Lusch  and  Vargo  2006).  Under  the  new 

dominant  logic,  marketing  focuses  on  the  value  creation  that  occurs  when  a  service  or  good  is 

used (Payne et al. 2008; Vargo and Lusch 2004b). 

A  content  analysis  of  leading  academic journals  in  new  product  development  ("NPD"), 

management,  marketing,  and R&D  confirmed  a dearth  of research  on new  service  development: 

past  research  on  new  product  development  has  focused  primarily  on  physical  goods  (Page  and 

Schirr  2008).  Similarly  a  leading  services  marketing  text  notes,  "Most  of the  research  into  new 

product  success  factors...has  emphasized  studies  of  the  development  process  for  new  physical 

goods" (Lovelock  and Wirtz 2004, p. 121). Just as early research in service marketing  focused  on 

1 


2 

differences  and similarities to traditional marketing  of goods (Zeithaml  1991), much  of the  study 

of  new  service  development  ("NSD")  or  ideas  for  managing  new  service  development  have 

focused  on  adapting  ideas  and  procedures  originating  in  new  product  development  for  goods 

(Edvardsson  et  al.  1995; Johne  and  Storey  1998). Thus  service  development  has  been  looked  at 

as a special case of NPD-goods rather than viewed as a unique process. 

A.  Customer collaboration or  co-creation 

A  considerable  literature  has  developed  on  the  collaboration  of  customers  in  the 

innovation  and  new  product  development  of  a  firm.  In  the  mid  1970's,  von  Hippel  publicized 

the  customer-active  paradigm  ("CAP")  of new product  development  showing  that  customers  in 

turbulent,  B2B,  high  tech  markets  went  beyond  product  suggestions  to  actually  develop 

prototypes and working versions of new products (von Hippel  1976; von Hippel  1977b). As will 

be  discussed  in  the  literature  review  of  Chapter  Two,  a  number  of  articles  since  von  Hippel's 

CAP  research  have  investigated  improving  new  product  development  by  capturing  customer 

ideas  and  development  (Urban  and  von  Hippel  1988;  Urban  and  Hauser  2004),  by  being  a 

customer-centric  organization  (Griffin  and  Hauser  1993;  Jaworski  and  Kohli  1993)  and 

experiential  development  involving  users  (Lynn  and  Morone  1996;  Thomke  1998).  Several 

streams  of  research  have  focused  on  techniques  used  by  companies  to  foster  customer 

collaboration  in  the  new  product  development  (Lynn  and  Morone  1996;  Thomke  1998;  von 

Hippel  1986). 

The  key  role  of  the  customer  in  the  service  exchange  or  event  is  an  essential  part  of 

understanding  services  marketing  (Grove  and  Fisk  1983).  Customer  actions  and  behaviors,  and 

the  fit  with  expected  behaviors  or  roles,  are  an  important  determinant  of  the  success  of  the 

service  delivery  (Bitner  et  al.  1990;  Suprenant  and  Solomon  1987).  Despite  the  demonstrated 

involvement  of  customers  in  service  delivery,  with  the  exception  of  studies  of  open  software, 


there  is  "a  dearth  of  research  on how  users  are  involved  in new  service  development"  (Alam 

2002, p. 250). 

This  dissertation  will  address  both  "dearths"—the  lack  of  focus  on  new  service 

development and on the role of users in new service development. The key questions driving this 

3 

dissertation are: 

/.  How are new services developed? 

2.  What is the role of customer collaboration in new service development? 

Increased use of the internet for communication and web delivery of services may impact 

new  service  development  by  fostering  collaboration  through  easier  communication.  Enhanced 

communication facilitates testing prototypes (Dahan and Srinivasan 2000), indeed "past research 

has already shown how the Internet can be used in earlier and later stages of the NPD process" 

(Ozer  2004,  p.  355).  "Co-opting  Customer  Competence"  shows  that  the  internet  facilitates 

tapping  customer  "knowledge  and  skills...,  willingness  to  learn  and  experiment,  and  ...active 

dialogue" (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2000, p. 80). By tapping dialogues between prospects and 

"virtual  advisors",  unmet  customer  needs  can  be  identified  inexpensively,  tapping  their 

competence  without  their  awareness  (Urban  and  Hauser  2004).  This  leads  to  another  question 

related to both 1  and 2: 

2a.  How does the migration of services to web-delivery affect customer collaboration 

in new service development? 

These questions  are important:  as noted,  service  is the dominant  component  of GDP in 

affluent  economies and a majority  in the world; there is growing interest in a service dominant 

logic  of  marketing;  yet  little  is known  about  new  service  development  or the  role  of users  in 

service  innovation.  In  a  world  where  "all  marketing  is  service  marketing"  (Vargo  and  Lusch 

2004),  it may be true that  new product  development  is  increasingly  new  service  development. 

Continuing  innovation  in  the  service  sector  is  vital  to  the  economy;  understanding  service 


innovation  is  necessary  to  understand  new  product  development  in  an  era  where  nearly  all 

products  have  a  significant  service  component.  These  questions  can  be  separated  as  above  but 

they  are  also  closely  related:  the  inseparability  of  production  and  consumption  indicates  that 

customers  will be very  involved  in services. Therefore  this  dissertation  is guided by  a  multi-part 

question: 

How  are  new  services  developed?  What is the  role  of customer  collaboration  in 

new  service  development?  How  does  the  migration  of  services  to  web-delivery 

affect  customer  collaboration  in new service  development? 

B.  A Schematic  of the  Dissertation 

This  dissertation  addresses the  dearth  of research  on new  service  development  through  a 

literature review and four  studies in three empirical  chapters: 

(1)  A  grounded  qualitative  study  of  new  service  development  in  a  broad  range  of  diverse 

services organizations through long interviews with executives involved  in NSD; 

(2)  A  multiple  case  study  of  user  collaboration  in  NSD  for  services  that  have  migrated  to 

Internet delivery;  and 

(3) 

Two quantitative tests of selected hypotheses derived from the qualitative  studies. 

These  stand-alone  studies  fit  a  logical  progression:  theory-building  qualitative  studies 

(with  some  replication  and  comparison  to  Literature  Review)  in  empirical  studies  1 and  2; to  a 

quantitative  test  of  some  of hypotheses  and  proposed  model  derived  from  the  literature  and  the 

qualitative  studies. This dissertation  is thus a "hybrid",  a combination  of the traditional  empirical 

quantitative  dissertation  and the "multiple-essays  on a topic (usually three)" format  that seems to 

be gaining in popularity  (Hyman 2008). In the early planning  stages of the dissertation proposal I 

envisioned  the three  empirical  chapters  as  semi-independent  studies. However  in this  final  form, 

illustrated  in  Figure  1.1,  this  dissertation  adheres  fairly  closely  to  the  traditional  format  of  a 


quantitative thesis: review the literature, some qualitative work to choose constructs and develop 

hypothesis, and a test of hypotheses. The difference  that merits it being considered a "hybrid" is 

the depth of the qualitative studies; they are stand-alone research  studies in their own right and 

produce significant propositions that are not tested in this dissertation. 

& 

1 

Grounded Study 

Diverse Services 
Chapter Three 

Figure 1.1: Dissertation Schematic 

A 

LITERATURE 

REVIEW 

Chapter Two 

K 

k. 

Multiple-case  Study 
Internet Financial B2B 

Chapter  Four 

7 

' 

Quantitative 

Testing 

Chapter  Five 

One  of the  changes  in the  schematic  from  the  original  dissertation  proposal  was to 

convert  the connectors  from  the literature  review  to the two qualitative  studies  into  two-way 

arrows.  Based  on discussions  with  new service  development  executives  and emerging  theory 


6 

from the analysis of the qualitative data I naturally looked for literature that address those ideas. 

In some cases the articles were merely noted with the results or within a short literature review 

section  in the qualitative  studies, but  in  some  cases the  articles had more  general  applicability 

and needed to be included in the Literature Review. Therefore  the Literature Review grew and 

changed  as the qualitative  studies progressed.  The arrow between the two qualitative  studies is 

also a two-way connector. NSD for services that had migrated to the Internet had characteristics 

noted  in the  diverse  study:  customer  engagement,  experiment  and  trial-and-error,  and  flexible 

iterative  progress.  Each  of  these  attributes  seemed  to  be  magnified  by  the  migration,  but  the 

results also served as a confirmation  of the observations of the grounded study. 

The literature review establishes the importance of the research questions and frames the 

three studies. Propositions are developed in the two qualitative  studies. Selected hypotheses are 

derived from the propositions in the two qualitative studies and then are tested through a single-

industry  survey.  However,  each  of  the  empirical  studies  contributed  to  theory  about  service 

innovation. Each should be considered for its own contribution as well as its impact on the other 

studies. 

Within the  grounded  study a model  of new  service development  success emerges. That 

model is tested in the third empirical section, Chapter Five. If the grounded study was reduced to 

the development of the model of success, as it likely may for journal submissions, Chapter Two, 

Three and Five could form a traditional dissertation  study: literature review, qualitative work to 

develop  a  model  and  grounded  measures,  and  quantitative  testing.  What  differentiates  this 

dissertation  from the standard dissertation  format  is the detail of the two qualitative studies that 

go beyond the model and produce some additional testable propositions. 


7 

C.  Overview of the Dissertation 

An  outline  of  the  remaining  chapters  and  major  sections  is  shown  as  Figure  1.2.  It  is 

essentially  a  summary  form  of  the  table  of  contents  with  some  of  the  subjects  combined  and 

compressed.  The  two  efforts  that  are  common  to  all  chapters  -  defining  antecedents  of  new 

service  development  success  and  developing  and  testing  a  model  of  NSD  success  -  are 

emphasized  in bold type. All of the Literature  Review and the Conclusion  could,  of course be 

considered part of this common  effort. 

Figure  1.2  again  illustrates  the  dual  nature  of  this  dissertation.  If  you  focus  on  the 

highlighted  sections, it is a fairly  standard dissertation  structure for a study of antecedents and a 

model  of  a  phenomenon:  Literature  Review;  some  qualitative  work  to  define  measures  and  a 

model; and quantitative tests of the antecedents and model. Chapter Four would not be essential 

in  that  mission,  though  its  findings  do  replicate  the  key  themes  from  the  grounded  study  of 

Chapter Three. 

The  fact  that  each  qualitative  study  is  a  full  study  in  its  own  right  and  that  there  are 

conclusions  beyond  the  model  and  antecedent  studies  are  characteristics  of  the  three-essay  or 

multiple-paper type of dissertation. The additional sections of Chapter Three; the case studies of 

Chapter  Four;  and  the  other  areas  from  the  Conclusion  address  the  research  question  of  this 

dissertation and contribute to research and knowledge in new service development. 


8 

Figure  1.2:  Outline  of the  remaining  chapters  of the  dissertation 

Chapter  Two: Literature  Review 

•  Dearth of research on new service  development 
•  Review  of literature on (a) new product processes  and (b) NSD  processes 
•  Review  of literature on (a) user involvement  in NPD and (b) users and NSD 
•  NSD  for  Internet-based  services 

Chapter Three: Grounded  Study of NSD -  what is it and how are customers  involved? 

~  In twenty seven diverse service  organizations 

•  The  Study; Methods;  Subjects 
•  NSD is different;  It is all about  customers 
•  Antecedents  of success -  customer  centric 
•  A proposed model of NSD  success 
•  Other antecedents, Other sources of Ideas, Role of vendors 
• 
• 

"Professional  organizations" and  innovation 
Summary of Propositions; Conclusions; Implications; Further research 

Chapter Four: Multiple-case  study of NSD  after  services migrate to the  Internet 

~  Five cases from  eight B2B financial  services  organizations 
Introduction;  Short Lit Review; The  Study; Subjects;  Methods 

• 
•  Results  presented  as  five  cases:  Bank  Clearing;  OTC  Online  (2);  Bank  Treasury; 

Derivatives Exchanges  (2); Wholesale Financial  Services  (2) 

•  Coding the cases 
•  Discussion  and  Summary of  Propositions 
• 

Implications; Further  Research 

Chapter Five: Quantitative  studies and tests of hypotheses  from  qualitative  studies 

Study of market research methods  as NSD  success antecedents using PDMA  CPAS 
• 
Short Lit  Review 
•  Hypotheses to test 
•  Data-CPAS; Methods;  Constructs 
•  Results of testing market research  antecedents 
•  Conclusions; Limitations; Implications; Future  Research 

Test  of  Antecedents  of  NSD  success  and  culture-tools-process  model  of  NSD  success 
using 2007 Bank  Survey with  ABA 

•  Hypotheses and models 
•  Constructs; Survey and Data; Methods; Construct  reliability 
•  Results on for all NSD: (a) Antecedents; (b) Model 
•  Results for NSD by innovativeness: (a) Antecedents; (b)  Model 
•  Conclusion; Limitations; Future  Research 

Chapter  Six:  Conclusion 

•  Research  Question 
•  Model of NSD  Success 
•  New Measures  as Antecedents of NSD  Success 
•  Further  Study: Alternatives to Stage-Gate® or other rigid processes for  NSD 
• 
• 
• 

Further  Study: NSD in "professional  organizations 
Further  Study: Extreme NSD  for  Internet  and non-Internet  services? 
Further  Study:  Should NSD  success s be studied by categories  of  innovativeness? 

Chapter  Seven:  References 


9 

D.  Three Chapters; Four Empirical  Studies, Four Data Sets, Three  Methods 

The  empirical  research  of  this  dissertation  comprises  four  studies  ~  two  qualitative 

studies and two quantitative  studies. Three of the studies create new data sets; the fourth  analyzes 

a  secondary  set  in a new  fashion.  The two  quantitative  studies are combined  in a  single  chapter. 

The  objectives  and  accomplishments  of  these  three  empirical  chapters  are  outlined  in  the 

following  paragraphs. 

1.  Three Empirical  Chapters 

Chapter  Three  is grounded  research  from  interviews  with  executives  involved  in 

new  service  development  in  a  diverse  set  of  twenty  seven  service  organizations.  The  first  two 

components  of  the  research  question  of  this  dissertation—How  are  new  services  developed? 

What  is  the  role  of  customer  collaboration  in  new  service  development?—inspired 

this  effort. 

Managers 

involved 

in  new  service  development 

in 

twenty-seven 

theoretically-selected 

organizations  discussed  how new  services came  into being. Organizations  were  selected due to a 

reputation  for  innovativeness  and  to  cover  a  variety  of  industries.  The  set  of  subjects  met  both 

the  classical  Glaser  and  Strauss  (1967)  objective  of  rich  data  set  and  the  pre-testing  diversity 

suggested by Eisenhardt (1989). 

Chapter  Three produced  a set of propositions  including  some related to the uniqueness  of 

new  service  development,  antecedents  of  NSD  success,  exogenous  effects,  and  differences  in 

"professional  organizations"  (Mintzberg  1989). A  central  theme  of  the  analysis  is  that  it  is  "all 

about the customers." From the antecedents of NSD  success emerges a customer-centric, culture-

tools-process model of new service development  success. 

Chapter  Four  is  a  multiple  case  study  of  the  changes  in  new  service  development 

processes  after  a  B2B  financial  service  migrates  to  the  Internet  and  becomes  a  web-based 

service. Thus Chapter Four addresses the final  component  of the dissertation research question — 


10 

How  does  the  migration of  services  to  web-delivery affect  customer collaboration in  new 

service development? Three of the eight  cases are paired with a  similar one,  so the results are 

discussed  in five sections. The goal of Chapter Four was to use case analysis to both illustrate 

how new  services development  changes as services migrate to the Internet  and generate theory 

about NSD for Internet-based services. 

As  noted  already,  the  case  study  of  Chapter  Four  extended  some  of  the  results  of  the 

grounded  study,  showing that the same characteristics  of NSD were magnified  and accelerated 

from  the migration  of the  service to the  Internet.  The  five  sections  or  stories  of  Chapter  Four 

illustrate NSD for Internet services and should give future researchers a conceptual view to work 

with.  In  the  Conclusion  (Chapter  Six)  Extreme  Service  Development,  a  metaphor  of  Internet 

service innovation that emerged from the case analysis, is discussed. This view of NSD may lead 

to further insight on service innovation for Internet and non-Internet services. 

Chapter  Five  includes  quantitative tests  of  antecedents  of  new  service  development 

success  from  the  grounded  study  and  a model  of NSD  success  also  derived  in Chapter  Three. 

Two data sets are used in the tests in the chapter. I was granted access to a data set collected by 

the  Product  Development  &  Management  Association,  the  leading  new  product  development 

association  (www.PDMA.org). In addition a new data set was developed for this dissertation in 

cooperation  with  the  leading  U.S.  banking  industry  association,  the  American  Bankers 

Association. 

Chapter Five provides evidence supporting the grounded culture-tools-process model on 

a  single-industry  data set. Perhaps as important, in the process it provides  support  for two new 

constructs,  customer  engagement  and  an  iterative  process,  as  antecedents  to  NSD  success,  as 

well as investigating a not often used organizational culture measure. These measures should be 

a part of future NSD research. 


11 

2.  Three Unique  Chapters 

Each of the three empirical  chapters not only employs  different  research methods; 

each  is  also  written  in  a  different  style.  The  qualitative  studies  are  necessarily  written  in  a 

narrative  format  focusing  on  observations:  the  author  is  a part  of  the  observation  process,  must 

acknowledge  that  role,  and  should  refer  to  himself  in  the  first  person  (Holliday  2002;  Wolcott 

1990).  The  grounded  study  in  Chapter  Three  focuses  on  the  developing  theory  and  cites 

interviews  selectively  to  support  propositions,  while  the  cases  of  Chapter  Four  are  presented  as 

stories in order to better describe the phenomenon.  Both studies in Chapter Five, the  quantitative 

tests  chapter,  are  written  in  "journal  survey-research  style":  there  is  the  standard  structure  -

introduction,  literature review, hypotheses, methods, data, results and conclusion;  and the style is 

formal -  the author focuses  on the data and refers  to himself as "the  author." 

A  difference  in  the  format  of  this  dissertation  from  the  standard  is  that  there  is  not  a 

"methods" chapter  following  the literature review  of Chapter  Two.  Since the methods  employed 

in  each  chapter  are  different,  it  is  logical  to  present  methods  within  each  empirical  chapter. 

Except  for  a short  general  discussion  of qualitative  methods  in Chapter  Three that  compares  and 

contrasts  the  different  methods  of  qualitative  analysis,  each  section  is  entirely  distinct  and  self-

contained.  Even  though  each  chapter  is  distinct  with  different  methods  and  presentation  styles 

they each address the research questions of this  dissertation: 

How  are  new  services  developed?  What is  the  role  of customer  collaboration  in 

new  service  development?  How  does  the  migration  of  services  to  web-delivery 

affect  customer  collaboration  in new service  development? 


II 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

A.  NSD and Customer  Co-creation or Collaboration: Gaps in the Literature 

As  noted  in  the  introduction,  a  content  review  of  16  years  of  new  product 

development  in  leading  marketing,  management,  R&D, and NPD journals  found  a  "paucity  of 

research  on new service  development"  (Page  and Schirr  2008). Indeed,  "service  innovation and 

new  service  development  are poorly  researched  and understood  areas  within  services  marketing 

and  management  (Edvardsson  et  al.  1995;  Gronroos  1990;  Martin  and  Home  1993)" 

(Edvardsson et al. 2000, p. 9). It is surprising that "in the most  advanced  service economies  such 

as  the  USA  and  UK,  services  create  up  to  three-quarters  of  the  wealth  and  85%  of  the 

employment,  and yet we know  little  about  managing  innovation  in this  sector"  (Tidd  and  Hull 

2003, p. ix). Enhanced  capabilities  for new service or product  development  is a primary  concern 

of business  firms  and organizations for the foreseeable  future  (Scott  1999). 

A  review  of  the  new  service  development  literature  found  that  three  groups  "must  be 

managed in an effective  development project:  (1) the development  staff;  (2) the customer-contact 

staff;  and (3) the customers" (Johne and Storey  1998, p. 203). The authors took  it a step  further: 

"The  more  involvement  by  customers  the  better"  (Johne  and  Storey  1998,  p.  204).  This 

conclusion  should not be surprising  given that a key identifier  of a service is the inseparability of 

producer  and  consumer  (Zeithaml  et  al.  1985):  it  would  seem  logical  that  user  involvement 

would be important in new service  development. 

Two  studies of new  service development  in banks noted that very  little was known  about 

the role of customers in NSD (Alam 2002; Alam and Perry  2002). A more recent  review  of new 

service  development  and an agenda  for  service  innovation  study  reiterated  this  key point  about 

research  in new service  development:  "...there  has been  little  mention  of customers'  roles (e.g. 

12 


13 

co-producer,  resource)"  (Akamavi  2005).  Finally  two  articles  have  noted  that  "little  is  known 

about how customers engage in co-creation" (Payne et al. 2008; Woodruff  and Flint 2006). 

The  focus  of this  literature review  is to  address  the research  question  of the  dissertation: 

How  are  new  services  developed?  What  is  the  role  of  customer  collaboration  in  new  service 

development?  How  does 

the  migration  of  services 

to  web-delivery  affect 

customer 

collaboration  in new service  development? 

The  articles  cited  in  this  section  as  well  as  the  Introduction  to  this  dissertation  make  it 

clear  that  by  addressing  these  questions  this  dissertation  is focused  on  significant  gaps  in  the 

innovation  and  new product  development  literature.  Services  are  a majority  of the world's  GDP 

(UN  1998),  a  "new  dominant  logic  of  marketing"  views  all  exchanges  as  service  (Lusch  et  al. 

2006),  yet  little  is  known  about  developing  new  services  or  the  customer  role  in  such 

development  (Johne  and  Storey  1998; Payne  et  al. 2008; Woodruff  and  Flint  2006). How  could 

there be a clearer call for  action/research? 

The  remainder  of  the  literature  overview  is  focused  on  supporting  the  three  empirical 

chapters of the dissertation. The Literature Review has eight sections: 

1.  Overview -  new product  development, 

2.  Overview ~  new service  development, 

3.  Customer collaboration in NPD, 

4.  Methods to engage customers, 

5.  Customer collaboration in service  innovation, 

6.  Financial  service  innovation, 

7.  NSD and the Internet,  and 

8.  Antecedents and models of NSD  success. 

There  are  three  reasons  for  the  inclusion  of  the  two  sections  primarily  focused  on  NPD 

for goods. First, as noted there has been relatively little research on new service development  and 


14 

many  of  the  NSD  articles  primarily  focus  on  applying  principles  from  NPD  goods  to  NSD 

(Johne  and  Storey  1998; Page  and  Schirr  2008).  Second, under  the  service-dominant  logic  of 

marketing  goods  are not  truly  separate  from  service  but  are  a  special  type  of  service  offering 

(Ballantyne and Varey 2008). From a practical point of view goods are a not-unimportant  subset 

of service: goods account for over  15% of the US GDP (Luther and Oh 2008) and over 45% of 

the world economy (UN 1998). 

This Literature Review was created in multiple phases: (1) in support of the dissertation 

proposal defense, (2) in advance of each study, (3) during each of the three studies in response to 

issues  that  came up  and  (4)  at the  end  of  the  studies  to  survey  new  articles  since  the  project 

began. In the case of specialized topics that only related to one of the studies, literature might be 

mentioned  in  only  one  of  the  chapters.  This  chapter  serves  as  an  overview  for  the  entire 

dissertation. There seems to be a surge in articles on new service development  in the two years 

that  this  dissertation  has  been  underway.  This  increase  in research  on  service  innovation  is a 

positive development: the 'significant  gap' in the innovation literature is being addressed! 

OVERVIEW -  NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 

New product  development  research  has  concentrated  on process  variables  (Henard  and 

Szymanski  2001).  The  Stage-Gate®  model  of  phased  NPD  is  a  benchmark  widely  used  to 

describe the managed development process (Cooper  1990). In its early and most basic form it is 

a linear process, as illustrated in Figure 2.1. 


Figure 2.1; (Cooper 1990): Traditional Stage-Gate® Model 

Ideation 

15 

Launch) 

> S > -H  Stage l f ^ >H  Stage l[±<& 

^ ^H  Stage  n l *^ 

In  Figure  2.1, stages  are  shown  in  rectangles,  followed  by  a  corresponding  diamond 

which represents the gate to assess that stage. The tasks in each stage are performed by the group 

responsible  for developing the new product, according to Cooper (1990), ideally using a multi 

function  team. The gates are staffed  by executives who are (1) independent of the development 

team,  (2) capable  of assessing the likelihood  of  success  for that  stage of development,  and (3) 

responsible for scarce resources that must be used in the NPD. The fact that the gatekeepers are 

independent  of  the  project  should  reduce  the  risk  of  decision  biases  such  as  escalation  of 

commitment (Schmidt and Calantone 2002) and the fact that they represent key resources should 

help set organizational priorities (Cooper 2008). 

Recent research casts  doubt on the relevance and usefulness  of traditional NPD process 

paradigms  such  as  the  Stage-Gate®  model  (Cooper  1990)  in many  circumstances.  Traditional 

models of NPD processes are not applicable to firms in high tech, turbulent markets (Eisenhardt 

and  Tabrizi  1995;  Workman  1993).  Both  studies  found  an  environment  that  was  more 

experimental  and iterative with marketing research bypassed  in favor  of direct contact between 

firm  engineers and customers. Marketing research,  a key part of the phased model, can blind a 

firm to the potential in radical, disruptive or novel new products (Christensen  and Bower  1996; 

von Hippel  1986). Customers seek improvements  in existing products that they are  comfortable 


16 

with:  Christensen  and  Bower  (1996)  suggest  that  a  radical  product  must  be  protected  from 

customers and marketing analysis, while von Hippel (1986)  suggests that Lead Users—those  few 

poised  to benefit  from  the  innovation,  whether  customers  or not—must  be  identified  apart  from 

typical  customers. 

An  Academy  of  Management  Research  article  cites  evidence  that  the  "variation-

decreasing  and  efficiency-oriented 

focus  of  process  management  spreads  to  centers  of 

innovation,  or  variation  creation  activity 

in  organizations, 

it 

increasingly  affects  an 

organization's  dynamic  capabilities"  (Benner  and  Tushman  2003, p. 239). Benner  and  Tushman 

(2003)  thus  make  the  argument  that  all  process  improvement  management,  including  new 

product  development  processes  such  as  Stage-Gate®,  TQM,  and  assorted  quality  processes, 

hinder  true  innovation.  A  possible  solution  is  to  identify  "innovative"  NPD  efforts  and  shield 

them from process management using an ambidextrous  or dual-innovation  approach  (Benner  and 

Tushman 2003; O'Reilly  and Tushman 2004). 

The Benner and Tushman  (2003) argument  is buttressed by empirical results presented  at 

the  past  two  PDMA  conferences  indicating  a  negative  relationship  between  a formal  NPD 

process  and  innovativeness  (Sethi  and  Iqbal  2004)  and  a  significant  negative 

relationship 

between  a formal  NPD  process  and  NPD  performance  (Kleinschmidt  et  al.  2005).  However, 

shielding high tech and innovative NPD from the phased development model suggests that a dual 

process  approach  (Benner  and  Tushman  2003)  could  limit  traditional  formal  NPD  processes  to 

simple  line  extensions  with  very  little or no  innovativeness.  As noted,  a number  of  studies  have 

suggested  that  a  Stage-Gate  process  inhibits  more  innovative NPD  (Benner  and  Tushman  2003; 

Kleinschmidt  et al. 2007; Tushman  and O Reilly  1999) and may interfere  with corporate  learning 

(Sethi and Iqbal 2008). 


17 

Cooper  (2008) responded  to this criticism in a recent  article  stressing  that  Stage-Gate® 

has  evolved  in  practice  and  need  not  be  a  linear  process.  He  argues  that  organizations  have 

adapted  Stage-Gate®  to  open  innovation,  six-sigma,  lean,  iterative  and  other  approaches.  My 

rendering  of the Cooper  (2008) updated  Stage-Gate®  is represented  by Figure 2.2. This model 

specifically  includes  iterations  and  customer  involvement  in  every  stage  (Zahay  and  Griffin 

2004; Zahay et al. 2004). In addition note that the arrow from gate Gl  does not point to a fixed 

stage; some or all of the stages can be done without concern for the order performed.  Figure 2.2 

shows  a decision  method  for  prioritizing  and  whether  to  continue  a project  that  is not  a rigid 

process and in fact can be adapted to a variety of NPD processes. 

Figure 2.2:  Iterative  Stage-Gate® 

M _oi___or 

Customer involvement  or co-creation 

I 
.Launch) 

ox__ 

I 

There  are wide  variations  on the basic  staged  model:  there  may  be  more  or  fewer  stages  and 

gates; for speed it is suggested that some steps can be done in parallel; some of the gates can be 

staffed  by market  researchers  or financial  analysts; there can be external  input  from  customers 

and suppliers; some feedback  loops may be deployed. However the basic model of completing a 

stage followed by third-party reviews for a go/no-go decision is consistent (Cooper 2001). 


18 

B.  New Service Development 

Several  antecedents  of  success  generally  not  cited  as  leading  factors  in  the  traditional 

NPD  literature,  including  a  "customer-focused"  development  process  and  excellent  customer 

communications  during  launch,  clearly  differentiated  successful  new  retail  and  institutional 

financial  services (Cooper et al.  1994). Factors little mentioned  in NPD literature, including the 

cooperation  of  the  customer  service  staff,  were  key  to  new  service  success  (Storey  and 

Easingwood  1996). Two  studies  of  success  factors  in institutional  financial  services  supported 

these results (de Brentani 1995; de Brentani and Cooper 1992). 

1.  Formal Structure 

Several  studies  have  indicated  that  service  firms  employing  phased  process 

development  outperformed  the services firms not using phased processes  (Cooper and Brentani 

1991;  Cooper  et  al.  1994; Easingwood  1986),  which  lends  support  to  NSD  following  goods-

development  models.  However,  it  is  noteworthy  that  service  firms  were  found  to  use  formal 

Stage-Gate®  and  related  processes  far  less  frequently  than  goods-firms  (Griffin  1997b).  The 

development of service products may be more complex than for tangible goods: when designing 

a new  service product  an iterative process  is recommended  (Akamavi  2005; Johne  and  Storey 

1998). Kelley  and  Storey  found  that  "new  service  development  initiation  strategies  are  largely 

informal processes" (p. 60), and "service firms continue to approach new service development in 

a less than systematic way (Kelly and Storey 2000, p. 61). 

2.  Differences 

A  Journal  of  Marketing  article  urged  "Breaking  Free  From  Product  Marketing" 

(Shostack  1977). Four fundamental differences  distinguishing services from goods are the: 

(1) Intangibility of services, 

(2) Inseparability of producer and consumer, 


19 

(3) Heterogeneity  of the product,  and 

(4) Perishability  of the product (Zeithaml et al.  1985). 

Zeithaml  (1985)  argued  that  these  fundamental  differences  justified  a  separate  study  of  services 

marketing; the  same logic would  argue for a unique form  ofNSD,  differing from  NPDfor  goods. 

Most  new  service  development  studies  have  focused  on  differences  and  similarities  to  goods-

NPD by testing NPD models, not by focusing  on NSD as a unique process. 

An  article  on  service  innovation  asserts that  for  purposes  of  exploring  differences  in  the 

organization  of  innovation  processes,  intangibility  and  the  inseparability  of  producer  and 

consumer  or production  and consumption  are the two key  factors  of the  four  traits  of  services  to 

explore  (Vermeulen  and  van  der  Aa  2003).  The  authors  argue  that  perishability  is  sometimes  a 

factor  for  goods  and  is  a planning  and  logistical  function,  and  that  heterogeneity  is  becoming  a 

factor  in goods markets  due to the need  for mass customization.  This argument  is not  completely 

convincing,  as  most  goods  are  far  removed  from  mass  customization,  therefore  heterogeneity 

could  likely  also point  to key  differences  in  service  innovation.  Vargo  and  Lusch  (2004b)  argue 

against  the  validity  or  value  of  the  four  fundamental  differences  of  Zeithaml  (1985),  but 

acknowledge  that  the  standardization  of  goods  may  account  for  differences 

in  product 

development. 

Intangibility  increases  the  need  for  intensive  communication  and  shared  understanding 

between  everyone  involved  in  the  innovation  and  production  of  the  service.  Similarly, 

simultaneous production  and consumption also requires close integration of everyone involved  in 

production  and  consumption  (Vermeulen  and  van  der  Aa  2003).  Vermeulen  and  van  der  Aa 

(2003) note that because  of inseparability  and intangibility,  separation of front-  and back-  office, 

marketing  and  production,  or  the  firm  and  the  customer  must  be  avoided.  Even  more 


20 

fundamentally,  the inseparability  of producer and consumer means that the consumer  is  involved 

in the production of the service (Booms and Nyquist  1981). 

Five major  advantages accrue to the producer  from  customer co-production:  (1)  increased 

productivity  with the customer  actually performing  part  of the service;  (2) supplementary  value-

added  services;  (3)  satisfied  market  niches;  (4)  new  offerings  for  unserved  markets;  and  (5) 

enhanced  customer  loyalty  and retention  (Rodie  and  Kleine  2000, p.  115-16).  Service  providers 

and customers play scripted roles during a service encounter (Grove and Fisk  1983). 

C.  Customer Collaboration in NPD 

Understanding  a  customer's  needs  is  a  key  underpinning  of  Cooper's  NewProd  studies 

(Cooper  1985) and the Stage-Gate® model. A customer orientation has often  been suggested  as a 

positive  to NPD  and  innovation  (Deshpande  et  al.  1993). Eliciting  the  "Voice  of the  Customer" 

using  direct  contact  between  customers  and  key  firm  personnel  including  engineers  and  other 

technical  persons  gathered  more  information  and  more  useful  information  than  focus  groups  or 

interviews  by  third  parties  (Griffin  and  Hauser  1993).  A  qualitative  study  from  structured 

interviews  with  NPD  practitioners  and  information  vendors  supporting  NPD  practitioners 

identified  eight  basic  types  of  information  used  throughout  the  NPD  process.  Identifying  four 

phases  of  the  NPD  process—the  fuzzy  front  end,  development,  testing  and  validation,  and 

commercialization—the  study  found  that customer  information  was  needed  in each phase  of  the 

NPD process  (Zahay et al. 2004). 

1.  The Voice of the  Customer 

To really  understand  problems  and needs  the  firm  should  get  as  close  as  possible 

to  the  customer:  if  possible  in-person,  on-site  meetings  including  technical  staff  to  observe  the 

use  and  problems  in the use  of the product  or  service  (Griffin  and  Hauser  1993). A  firm  should 

be  involved  as deeply  as possible  in the customer use of its products  or services: at times  it  may 


be  very  beneficial  to  actually  "be  a  customer"  (Griffin  1996).  The  in-depth,  tacit  information 

from  on-site visits is so valuable that every customer visit is precious and should be  meticulously 

planned  (McQuarrie  1998). These  studies generally  focused  on B2B  goods  firms;  because  of the 

central  "inseparability"  of services, the "voice  of the customer"  should be even more valuable  to 

21 

new service  development. 

2.  Customer Active Paradigm and Lead  Users 

In  a  series  of  studies  of  high  tech,  turbulent,  industrial  markets,  von  Hippel 

provided  evidence  of  a  customer-active  paradigm  ("CAP")  of  new  product  development  (von 

Hippel  1976; von  Hippel  1978). For  innovative  or "novel" new products  or  services  it is best  to 

work with  Lead  Users, users who  are uniquely positioned  to profit  from  innovation  (von  Hippel 

1986).  Lead  Users  can  often  be  identified  from  product  development  that  they  have  undertaken 

on  their  own  (von  Hippel  1988).  Criticism  that  a  customer-orientation  actually  makes  a  firm 

susceptible  to  competition  from  disruptive  technology  (Christensen  and  Bower  1996),  was 

anticipated  by von Hippel  (1986) who argued that  customers  "are  constrained  by their  own real-

world  experience...  (and  are)...  thus  unlikely  to  generate  novel  product  concepts."  Christensen 

focused  on  the  need  to  sometimes  ignore  customers  (Christensen  1997);  while  von  Hippel 

stressed the advantage of working with Lead Users (von Hippel  1988). 

An  ethnography  studying  NPD 

in  an  early-cycle  computer  firm  observed 

that 

"Marketing.. .had a minor or limited role.." as "Engineers  spent a significant  amount of time with 

clients" to get "unfiltered  input" (Workman  1993, p. 412). A study of innovation  in 36  computer 

firms  in the  U.S., Asia,  and  Europe  (Eisenhardt  and  Tabrizi  1995)  found  that  these  firms  relied 

on  direct  customer  input.  The  original  customer-active  paradigm  studies  showing  customers 

doing  development  on  their  own  (Eisenhardt  and  Tabrizi  1995; von  Hippel  1977a;  von  Hippel 

1976;  von  Hippel  1977b),  the  need  for  unfiltered  input  (Workman  Jr.  1993),  and  the  value  of 


user toolkits  (von  Hippel  and  Katz  2002)  indicate  that  key  customer  information  is not  easily 

transferred.  "Sticky  information"  is  a  theoretical  underpinning  for  the  value  of  tool  kits  and 

customer-as-innovator  (von  Hippel  1998; von  Hippel  and  Katz  2002).  Some  information  can 

only be observed by watching customers use the product(McQuarrie  1998). 

22 

3.  Experience in the Market Place 

Just as customer problems  or needs are most visible when observing them using 

the  good  or  service, the usefulness  of  an innovation  is best  observed  through  use.  "Probe  and 

Learn"  methods,  swift  product  launches  without  marketing  research,  have  been  advocated  to 

accelerate  learning  and  product  development  (Lynn  and  Morone  1996).  Rapid  prototyping 

(Thomke  1998) has been suggested to create customer experimentation and accelerated  learning 

by the firm (Thomke 2001). 

A theory  generally  applied to entrepreneurship, effectuation,  explains the drive noted in 

numerous NPD studies such as those cited in the past paragraph to facilitate  experimentation and 

hasten  customer  and  marketplace  involvement  with  new  products  and  services.  Under 

effectuation,  innovators do not necessarily focus on an opportunity, plan the product, and gather 

resources  to  meet  a goal; under uncertainty  they may use their resources  to probe,  experiment 

and participate  in an environment  in order to  find  a  suitable  strategy, business model, product, 

and/or  idea  for  their  firm  (Sarasvathy  2001). Effectuation  builds  on the concepts  of  satisficing 

and  design  (Simon  1996)  to  suggest  that  a  decision  process  based  on  experiential  contingent 

problem-solving  and  experimentation  might  be  appropriate  when  the  outcome  is  unknowable 

(Sarasvathy  2004). Effectuation  thus  suggests a neat  solution to Benner and Tushman's  (2003) 

suggestion  for  a dual-track  of innovation:  markets with predictable  or probabilistic  uncertainty 


should  utilize  marketing  analysis  and  a  standard  NPD  process,  while  those  that  are 

23 

"unknowable" should employ effectuation  (Sarasvathy 2004). 

4.  Market Learning 

A market learning model stressing the importance of information  acquisition, 

dissemination, and sharing/implementation  has been applied to new product development (Lynn 

et al.  1999; Slater and Narver  1995; Veldhuizen  et al. 2006). The learning  process has phases: 

information  acquisition, dissemination and implementation or use. A recent study suggested that 

gathering  customer  information  benefits  new  product  development  directly  and  also  through 

information  acquisition  as  a  part  of  the  market  learning  process  (Berchicci  and  Tucci 

forthcoming).  Team  values  or  culture  may  affect  NPD  under  a  market  learning  model  by 

affecting  how the information  is shared and implemented (Berchicci and Tucci forthcoming). 

5.  Categories of Customer Involvement in NPD/NSD 

From the foregoing  discussion  of customer  involvement  in product  innovation, I 

would  classify  four  categories  of  customer  involvement  in NPD:  (1)  a  focus  on  capturing  or 

discovering  customer  innovation  and  ideas;  (2)  the  customer  oriented  organization  focused  on 

user  needs;  (3)  open  innovation;  and  (4)  experiential  learning  with  customers  and  in  the 

marketplace. Table 2.1 summarizes these four categories. 


24 

Table 2.1: Categories of customer involvement in product innovation 

Categories of Customer  Involvement 

Summary of Approach 

Capture  Customer  Ideas  &  Development 
Customer-active  Paradigm  (von Hippel 1977b) 
Lead Users  (von Hippel 1986) 
Customer visits  (McQuarrie 1991) 

Customers innovate to meet their needs. A 
nimble organization  should be careful  to collect 
those innovations and ideas. Further it should 
take steps to enhance user  innovation. 

The Customer-centric  Organization 
Market Orientation  (Slater and Narver 1995) 
Voice of the Customer (Griffin and Hauser 1993) 
Sticky Information  (Szulanski 2003) 

Understand the customer's needs and problems. 
Information  is often  sticky or contextual, so use 
deep research methods. A customer-centric  firm 
will work to meet the discovered  needs. 

Open  Innovation 

(Chesbrough  2003) 

Eliminate "not-invented-here."  Be open to ideas 
from  competitors, suppliers, from  anywhere in 
the world: have employees scan for ideas. 
Chesbrough has been criticized by von  Hippel 
for not enough attention to customers. 

Experiential  Development  &  Learning 
Probe and Learn  (Lynn and Morone 1996) 
Customer Toolkits  (von Hippel 2001) 
Experimenting  (Thomke 1998) 
Effectuation  (Sarasvathy 2001) 
Open source dev.  (Lakhani 2003) 

Whether you call it "probe and learn" or "rapid 
prototyping," or assorted other names -  get a 
product out to the customer that is good  enough 
and react quickly to feedback  and customer 
insights. Market learning by  effectively 
experimenting  in the  marketplace. 

D.  Methods to Engage Customers 

Beginning  with the customer-active  paradigm of new product  development  (von Hippel 

1978),  there  has  been  extensive  research  on  methods  that  facilitate  individual  customer 

engagement  in  innovation  and  new  product  development  (Griffin  and  Hauser  1993).  These 

methods have common goals of creating a deeper understanding  of the customer (Cooper  1999; 

Flint 2002), uncovering  sticky  information  about product use (von Hippel and Katz 2002), and 

drawing out customer creativity (C. K. Prahalad 2004). 


25 

Since  the  use  of  these  methods  have  common  purposes  and  functions, 

individual 

customer  engagement  ("ICE")  methods  and 

tools  may  form  a  defining  construct 

for 

organizations  involved  in product  innovation.  The extent of use of ICE methods partially  defines 

the  new  product  development  process  of  an  organization.  The  use  of  ICE  methods  by  an 

organization:  (1)  can  be  contrasted  with  the  use  of  traditional,  group  or  constrained  ("GCR") 

market research techniques, (2) measures the solicitation  of individual involvement by  customers 

in  an  organization's  new  product  development  ("NPD")  and  (3)  may  predict  the  likelihood  of 

success in developing new goods and services. 

To really  understand  problems  and  needs  the  firm  should  get  as  close  as  possible  to  the 

B2B customer:  if possible in-person, on-site meetings including technical  staff to observe the use 

and  problems  in  the  use  of  the  good  or  service  (Griffin  and  Hauser  1993).  A  firm  should  be 

involved  as  deeply  as  possible  and  strive  to  fully  understand  the  customer  use  of  its  goods  or 

services. At  times  it may  be  very  beneficial  to  actually  "be  a  customer"  (Griffin  1996). The  in-

depth, tacit information  from  on-site visits is so valuable that every customer visit is precious  and 

should be meticulously planned  (McQuarrie  1998). 

For  innovative  or  "novel" new  goods  or  services  it may be  best  to work  with  lead users, 

users  who  are  uniquely  positioned  to profit  from  innovation  (von  Hippel  1986). Lead  users  can 

often  be identified  from product  development that they have undertaken  on their own (Urban  and 

von Hippel  1988). Since lead users are positioned to most benefit  from  a product  innovation  they 

are  motivated  to  spend  time  working  closely  with  producers  to  aid  new  product  development. 

User  toolkits  are  a  means  to  advance  customer  experimentation  and  facilitate  user  NPD  (von 

Hippel  2001).  Customer  input  is  a  component  of  open  innovation  (Chesbrough  2003a).  During 

the process  of "Co-creating  Unique Value with Customers" (Prahalad  and Ramaswamy  2004), it 


26 

is possible  for a firm to surreptitiously  co-opt customer competence (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 

2000; Urban and Hauser 2004). 

An  ethnography  studying  NPD  in  an  early-cycle  computer  firm  observed  that 

"Marketing.. .had a minor or limited role.." as "Engineers spent a significant  amount of time with 

clients" to  get  "unfiltered  input"  (Workman  1993, 412).  Workman  (1993)  was  observing  two 

phenomena: the value of site visits and the value of direct customer contact with staff involved in 

NPD. A study of innovation in 36 computer firms in the U.S., Asia, and Europe (Eisenhardt and 

Tabrizi  1995) found  that these firms relied on direct customer input with personnel involved in 

product development. 

The original customer-active paradigm studies showing customers doing development on 

their  own  (von  Hippel  1976), the need  for  unfiltered  input  (Workman  1993), and the value  of 

user toolkits  (von Hippel  and  Katz  2002)  indicate  that  key  customer  information  is not  easily 

transferred.  "Sticky information"  is a theoretical underpinning  for the value of tool kits and the 

customer-as-innovator  (von  Hippel  1998).  Some  information  can  only  be  gained  by  watching 

customers use the product, or even enabling them to directly make changes to the product. User 

toolkits  are a means to advance  customer experimentation  and facilitate  user NPD  (von Hippel 

2001). User toolkits make it possible for selected users to easily modify  or customize a product 

or even to  create a new product.  Toolkits benefit  producers  by harvesting  customer  creativity, 

and granting access to sticky information. 

Table 2.2  summarizes  key individual  customer engagement  tools or methods  developed 

by researchers. 


27 

Table 2.2: Summary of Selected Customer/User Engagement Methods 

Engagement  Method  (Sources) 

Background/Ideas 

Concepts & Prototypes from  Users 

Customer-active paradigm of NPD.  Customers  do 

(von Hippel  1978) 

development  work—tap  into it. 

Lead  Users 

(von Hippel  1986) 

"Standard" customers may inhibit novel ideas. Find users 

who gain from  innovation  and encourage  them. 

Voice of the  Customer 

Use of  1-on-l  interviews with customers. Group  techniques, 

(Griffin  and Hauser  1993) 

brainstorming  & focus  groups, are less  effective. 

Customer Contact by NPD  Managers 

(Griffin  and Hauser  1993) 

(Workman Jr.  1993) 

NPD managers, including technical & operations people 

should have direct, onsite contact with customers. 

Rapid Prototyping  &  Development 

Probe and Learn: get a product  "just  good enough" and into 

(Lynn  and Morone  1996) 

the hands of users. Be prepared to make  changes. 

Customer  Site Visits 

(McQuarrie  1998) 

Viewing the customer in action doing work  enhances 

understanding  and relevant  questioning. 

Experimentation 

Flexible tools allow companies to expand  experimenting 

(Thomke  1998) 

beyond testing to  discovery. 

Co-opting  Customer  Competence 

(Prahalad and Ramaswamy  2000) 

By observing customer action (e.g. on a web site), tacit 

information  about  opportunities. 

User  Toolkits 

(von Hippel  2001) 

Firms should design techniques to facilitate  design  and 

experimentation by  customers/users. 

Ethnography 

(Flint  2002) 
(Cooper  1999) 

Deep understanding  of customers results in  improved 

products and speed of  development. 

E.  Customer Collaboration in Service Innovation 

A number of studies have found customer collaboration in new service development to be 

effective.  An  early  study  of  software  development  found  "extensive  user  involvement  in  the 

innovation  process  with  significant  participation  at  every  stage"  (Voss  1985,  p.  117). 

Experimentation, facilitated by tool kits and simulation tools, allows customers and producers to 

speed NSD  and increase iterations  in the development process  (Thomke  2003). A user's  direct 


28 

need  for  the  improvements,  enjoyment  of  the  work,  and  enhanced  reputation  from  making 

contributions  were  found  to  be  motivations  for  user  collaboration  in  even  mundane  tasks 

(Lakhani  and  von  Hippel  2002).  Two  experiments  on  telecommunications  services  found  an 

important  rationale  for encouraging user involvement:  service  innovations  from  users were  more 

creative and useful  (Kristensson et al. 2002; Magnusson 2003). 

A  review  of  the  new  service  development  literature  found  that  three  groups  "must  be 

managed in an effective  development project:  (1) the development staff;  (2) the customer-contact 

staff;  and (3) the customers" (Johne and Storey  1998, p. 203). The authors  took  it a step  further: 

"The  more  involvement  by  customers  the better"  (Johne  and Storey  1998, p. 204). Clearly  the 

joint  delivery  of most  services  and the  existing  literature  on new  service  development  suggest 

that there is reason to expect extensive customer involvement in new service  development. 

In "Co-Creating the Voice of the Customer" the act of co-producing  a service is extended 

to joint  learning  (Jaworski and Kohli 2006). The service-dominant  marketing  logic advocated by 

Vargo  and  Lusch  (2004)  leads  to  an  extension  of  Griffin  and  Hauser's  (1993)  "Voice  of the 

Customer"  so that  "(1) Both  the  firm  and the customer  are engaged  in the learning  effort...(2) 

The  needs, wants,  capabilities  and priorities  of the  customer as well  as those  of the  firm  are the 

subject  of learning... (3) The firm  and the customer jointly determine what part of the  production 

process each will participate  in..." (Jaworski and Kohli 2006, p. 111). An early study of  software 

development  found  "extensive  user  involvement  in  the  innovation  process  with  significant 

participation at every  stage" (Voss  1985, p. 117). 

The  experiential  learning  and discovery  category  of customer  collaboration  from  Table 

2.1  should  be  productive  in  new  service  development.  Customer  involvement  is  already 

inseparable  from  service  delivery; a trial and error approach  has traditionally  dominated  service 

development  efforts  (Shostack  1984). 


29 

F.  Innovation in Financial  Services 

Alam  (2002)  identified  six objectives  for  user  involvement  in new  service  development: 

(1)  a  better  new  service  that  matches  customer  needs;  (2)  reduced  development  time;  (3) 

facilitate  user  education  about  new  services;  (4)  rapid  diffusion  of  innovations;  (5)  good  public 

relations;  (6)  assist  a  long-term  relationship  with  clients  (p.257).  Collaboration  strengthens 

customer  relations  by  developing  customer-friendly  products  (Lilien  et  al.  2002;  von  Hippel 

1978); Alam's objectives  (5) & (6) suggest that the collaboration process  enhances relationships. 

There  have  been  multiple  studies  of  success  factors  in  bank  NSD.  New  service 

development  is  largely  informal  in  its  early  phases  (Kelly  and  Storey  2000).  Customer  support 

staff  should  play  a  significant  role  in  financial  services  innovation  (de  Brentani  1993).  Market 

research  is often  a missing  ingredient  in NSD  at financial  services  firms  (Cooper  et al.  1994). In 

a  follow-up  article  to  "Evolving  a  New  Dominant  Logic  for  Marketing"  (Vargo  and  Lusch 

2004),  the  authors  argue  that  large  established  service  firms  could  be  misled  by  traditional 

goods-dominant  marketing  logic.  Such  service  firms,  "such  as banks, hospitals  and  universities, 

are...likely  to  be  guided  by  [goods-dominant]  logic...(and)...are  just  as  likely  to  miss  the 

customer's  roles  in  value  creation...as  are  their  goods-producing  counterparts"  (Vargo  and 

Lusch 2006, p. 57). 

G.  NSD For Internet  Services 

The key role of a customer as co-producer  of a service  (Grove and Fisk  1983) affects  the 

success of the service event and can lead to a stronger producer-customer  relationship  (Rodie and 

Kleine 2000). A  study of technology  infusion  in service  encounters  indicated  that  change  can be 

positive  if  producers  "closely  involve  customers  in  the  design  process"  (Bitner  et  al.  2000). 

Growth  of  the  internet  has  accelerated  self-service  development  and  helped  firms  improve 

employee  communication,  forge  strategic  alliances  and  strengthen  relationships  with  customers 


30 

(Parasuraman  et  al.  2002). Enhanced  communication  facilitates  testing  prototypes  (Dahan  and 

Srinivasan  2000);  indeed  "past  research  has  already  shown  how  the  Internet  can  be  used  in 

earlier  and  later  stages  of  the  NPD  process"  (Ozer  2004,  p.  355).  "Co-opting  Customer 

Competence"  shows  that  the  internet  facilitates  tapping  customer  "knowledge  and  skills..., 

willingness to learn and experiment, and .. .active dialogue" (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 2000, p. 

80).  By  tapping  prospect/"virtual  advisor"  dialogues,  unmet  customer  needs  can  be  cheaply 

identified, tapping their competence without their awareness (Urban and Hauser 2004). 

The internet is a self service technology  ("SST"): its growth has accelerated  self-service 

development  and helped  firms  improve  employee  communication,  forge  strategic  alliances  and 

strengthen  relationships  with  customers  (Parasuraman  and  Zinkhan  2002).  Enhanced 

communication  facilitates  testing  prototypes  (Dahan  and  Srinivasan  2000).  Citing  Dahan  and 

Srinivasan  (2000)  and  six other articles,  a  study  asserts that "past research has already  shown 

how the Internet can be used in earlier and later stages of the NPD process" (Ozer 2004, p. 355). 

Edvardsson, et. al. (2000, p. 34) noted that when a customer  "interacts with a computer 

instead  of  a person...  (it)...makes  the  customer  the  sole  producer  of the  service."  "Co-opting 

Customer  Competence"  shows  that  the  internet  facilitates  tapping  customer  "knowledge  and 

skills..., willingness to learn and experiment, and ...active dialogue" (Prahalad and Ramaswamy 

2000, p.  80). By tapping  dialogues  between potential  customers  and  "virtual  advisors", unmet 

customer  needs  could  be  cheaply  identified,  tapping  their  competence  without their  awareness 

(Urban  and  Hauser  2004).  As  a  relatively  inexpensive,  ubiquitous,  and  flexible  platform  for 

service  delivery,  design  and  simulation,  the  internet  seems  likely  to  promote  the  use  of 

techniques  to  encourage  user  participation  such  as  toolkits,  experimentation,  and  rapid 

prototyping (Lynn and Morone 1996; Thomke 1998; von Hippel 2001). 


31 

H.  Antecedents and Models of NSD Success 

Any antecedents and/or models of new service success developed in this dissertation will 

be  based  on  grounded  study  of  service  organizations.  To  improve  new  service  development, 

practitioners and researchers often look to NPD practices in goods firms (Edvardsson et al. 1995; 

Johne and Storey  1998). A grounded new model will have the advantage of being designed  for 

service organizations instead of adapted from NPD-goods. 

Two recent attempts to model new service development  success have used three similar 

independent variables: (1) team, (2) integration of IT and (3) process (Froehle et al. 2000); and 

(1) organization, (2) tools (IT), and (3) process (Hull 2004). In the two models "organization" or 

"team"  indicates  pre-arranged  cross-functional  development  teams;  "tools"  are  the  use  of 

information  technology; and "process" is formalization  of the NSD process. Hull (2004) uses a 

strategy of rapid, repeat cycles as a moderator on the success path. Froehle (2000) uses speed as 

a  second  outcome  that  is  also  an  antecedent  of  success.  Both  models  had  favorable  tests, 

explaining about 25% of the variance in NSD outcomes. 


32 

I.  Summary of Literature  Review 

Services are a growing part of advanced economies. An award winning paper argues for a 

new  paradigm  of  all marketing  being  service  marketing  (Vargo  and  Lusch  2004). Many  articles 

on  innovation  and NPD  have  shown  the need  for  customer  information  and user  involvement  in 

the NPD project.  Yet as  shown in this review,  little is known about the unique NSD process,  the 

involvement  of  customers  in  new  service  development,  or  the  impact  of  the  web  as  a 

communications  medium  or  SST  on  customer  involvement.  Clear,  identified  gaps  in  the  NPD 

and NSD literature lead to the research questions for this  dissertation: 

How  are  new  services  developed?  What is  the  role  of customer  collaboration  in 

new  service  development?  How  does  the  migration  of  services  to  web-delivery 

affect  customer  collaboration  in new service  development? 

Insight  into  the  research  questions  of  this  dissertation  will  not  only  advance  theory  and 

understanding  of  new  service  development,  but  should  advance  theory  in  other  marketing 

research  streams  including  new  product  development,  user  involvement  in  innovation,  self-

service technologies, and communication and  innovation. 


III.  A GROUNDED STUDY OF NEW SERVICE  DEVELOPMENT 

Grounded analysis of discussions with executives driving NSD in diverse service organizations 

I.  Summary 

A grounded study of new service development was conducted by analyzing data collected 

in  discussions  with  executives  leading  innovation  in  service  organizations.  The  subjects 

represented twenty seven organizations in diverse service industries. From the data collected and 

analyzed a picture of new service development  emerged as an informal, highly iterative process 

that  draws  heavily  on  customer  input  and  feedback  and  the  experiences  of  users  testing  a 

prototype or employing the newly-launched service. 

The central theory or theme of the study is that new service development is all about the 

customers -  solving customer problems, individually engaging the customers in the NSD  effort, 

and  adapting  new  services  to  the  feedback  and  experience  of  the  users.  Since  service  is  co-

produced, process is an integral part of service. Some formal structure for service innovation and 

a planned  flexibility  to  produce  multiple  iterations  during  NSD  and  after  the  service's  launch 

may be helpful to the innovation  effort. 

33 


34 

B. 

Introduction 

"Although  there  has  been  a  resurgence  of  academic  and  practitioner 

interest  in  new 

service  development,  there  is  a  dearth  of  research  on  how  users  are  involved"  (Alam  2002,  p. 

250).  There  certainly  is  a  dearth  of  research  on  user  involvement,  but  any  "resurgence  of 

academic  interest"  in NSD  has not yet been  reflected  in leading  marketing,  management  or  new 

product  development  journals  (Page  and  Schirr  2008).  This  chapter  contributes 

toward 

understanding user involvement  in new service development  through an in-depth study of  service 

innovation  and  new  service  development  in  a  diverse  group  of  service  firms.  The  research  with 

executives  involved  in  innovation  in  leading  service  firms  focuses  first  on  how  new  services 

come into being and then on the involvement  of customers. 

The discussions  describe  extensive  customer  collaboration,  which  may  take many  forms, 

often  in  the  same  effort.  In  this  study  "collaboration"  indicates  active  customer  or  user 

participation  in  service  innovation.  Collaboration  can be  as  simple  as customers  suggesting  new 

services  to  their  suppliers  or  can  involve  customers:  working  with  a  supplier  to  access  and 

transfer  tacit  knowledge  or  sticky  information  about  using  the  service;  testing  prototypes,  beta 

versions or newly  launched  services; doing  some  of the development  themselves;  or actually  co-

developing new services. 

1.  The  Study 

As  noted  in the  literature  review  in  Chapter  Two, most  NSD  research  has  begun 

with  an examination  of models or processes  from NPD of goods. However,  services are  different 

than  goods,  so  it  is  possible  that  traditional  goods-derived  NPD  processes  or  models  fit  NSD 

poorly.  Services  are  important:  services  constitute  83% of  GDP  in  the  US  and  that  percentage 

continues to grow (Luther and Oh 2008); according to a United Nation's report,  services are now 

a majority  of the world GDP (UN  1998).  Pure "goods" are rare as most products have a growing 


35 

service  component  (Andersen  et  al.  1997).  An  award-winning  article  proposed  that  "all 

marketing  is  service  marketing"  (Vargo  and  Lusch  2004a).  It  may  not  be  fanciful,  though 

perhaps out of the scope of this dissertation, to suggest that "all NPD will soon be new service 

development." 

A fresh  look at NSD as a unique process is therefore timely. Executives actively involved in 

new  service  development  in  twenty  seven  selected  service  firms  engaged  in  a  open  ended 

discussion  of how new  services came about  in their organizations. Generally they needed little 

questioning  to begin  discussing  new  service development  and customer  collaboration  in detail. 

This open-ended study of diverse service firms is designed to focus on two key questions: 

/.  How are new services developed? 

2.  What is the role of customer collaboration in new service development? 

C.  Methods 

In  a  series  of  long  open-ended  interviews,  I  sought  an  understanding  of  new  service 

development.  I  employed  qualitative  tools  in  order  to  examine  the  process  anew  rather  than 

assuming  that  new  service  marketing  fits  into  one  or  more  of  the  models  of  new  goods 

development.  A  leading  marketing  researcher  has  called  for  "more  theory-building  research" 

using  "field  interviews  and  case  studies"  (Summers  2001).  This  study  advances  "theory-

building"  by  developing  inductive  propositions  from  open-ended  discussion  with  persons 

involved in new service development. 

1.  "Five Traditions" of Qualitative Inquiry 

There  are many  forms  of  qualitative  studies; typologies  have  listed  eighteen  to  twenty 

eight approaches to qualitative analysis (Creswell  1998; Miller and Crabtree  1992; Tesch 1990). 

Creswell  (1998)  describes  "five  traditions"  of  qualitative  inquiry:  biography,  phenomenology, 

grounded  theory,  ethnography,  and  case  study.  Most  qualitative  studies  in  management  and 


marketing  would  fall  into  the  final  three  categories  of  his  typology.  A  quick  comparison  of  the 

three  traditions  most  used  in  Creswell's  (1998)  typology  is  summarized  in  Table  3.1, which  is 

derived from  Table 4.1 and Table 4.2 and the commentary in chapter four  of his cited book. 

36 

Table 3.1: Comparing three traditions (Creswell  1998) 

Dimension 

Ethnography 

Purpose 

Discipline 
of origin 

Data 

collection 
Optimal 
sample 
Analysis 
techniques 

Output 

Describing  & interpreting 
a group or phenomenon 
Anthropology  and 
sociology 
Field  observations, 
interviews &  artifacts 
Single group, culture or 
phenomenon 
"Thick"  description, 
analysis,  interpretation 
Rich description of culture 
or set of behaviors 

Grounded  Theory 

New theory grounded in 
data 
Sociology 

Case  Study 

In depth analysis of a 
"bounded"  situation 
Social  sciences 

Often  primarily 
interviews 
20-30  interviews, 
Saturation  of concepts 
Coding, themes, theory 

Multiple - interviews, 
documents,  observation 
1 -4  cases, 
Depth  not width 
Description,  themes 

Theory or a model 

In depth description  & 
explanation of case(s) 

Ethnography  seeks  a  deep  understanding  of  a  culture  or  group  via  the  immersion  of  the 

researcher  in  that  culture  or  group.  Sources  of  information  are  multiple  including  detailed 

observation,  interviews,  artifacts,  and  secondary  sources.  The  result  will  be  a  rich,  thick 

description, deep understanding  and new theory about the group and culture. 

Grounded  theory  typically  focuses  on  a  process.  The  researcher  may  employ  multiple 

sources of information,  but usually 20-30  interviews provides the core data for the study. Data  is 

analyzed  through  a rigorous,  iterative  process  of  coding,  developing  themes,  testing  the  themes 

and  emerging  theory.  The objective  of the  analysis  is to  discover  several  major  themes  and  new 

theory  from  the  data.  The  theory  or  understanding  may  not  be  as  deep  as  the  output  from 

ethnographic research (Berg 2004; Creswell  1998; Richards 2005). 


37 

Case study focuses on a bounded situation, typically carefully  selected as a rich example 

of a phenomena or situation. The output is a story that provides a thorough understanding of the 

selected  case and may have  some themes or theory that can be  further  studied.  The case  study 

approach that  Creswell  (1998) describes, "the classic case", is a single case or a multiple  case 

study  of  up  to  four  cases  that  uses  some  ethnographic  techniques  to  get  the  story  right.  An 

example in marketing  literature of this type of study is Workman (1993), which provided keen 

insights  into  new  product  development  in  a  high  tech  firm,  through  the  efforts  of  a  single 

researcher observing new product development in a computer firm for a year. 

2.  A Grounded Study of Diverse Service Firms 

To address the broad questions — How are new services developed? What is the 

role of customer collaboration in new service development? — this chapter employs grounded 

theory  based  on the  analysis  of  interviews  with twenty  seven  executives  from  a diverse  set of 

service organizations. The goal of this study is to develop theory of both customer engagement in 

service innovation and new service development success. 

This study relies on the methods developed and advocated by Glaser and Strauss in their 

initial book on grounded theory study (Glaser and Strauss  1967). I also attempt to draw on their 

ideas and suggested methods as they developed different  and opposing approaches to, or schools 

of,  grounded  theory  (Glaser  1992;  Glaser  1998;  Strauss  and  Corbin  1998).  Glaser  stressed 

theoretical  sensitivity, which would allow a researcher to recognize patterns  and themes  in the 

data. He cautioned against "forcing" data to reveal or test theory, instead of sensitive discovery. 

He was  sensitive to manipulating  the data too much. He actually argued against tape recording 

and transcribing  interviews; the  field  notes  of  a  sensitive  observer  should  contain  more  useful 

information in his opinion (Glaser 1998). 


38 

Strauss  stressed  the  value  of  open  coding  and  constantly  looking  at  contrasts, 

comparisons  and  testing  each  coded  item.  As  will  be  discussed  in  a  later  section  about  the 

software  used in this study, qualitative software  facilitates  Straussian grounded analysis. Coding 

is  easier  and  comparisons  and  contrasts  of  codes  and  possible  combinations  are  facilitated.  I 

transcribed  the  interviews,  used  NVivo  software,  and  tested  emerging  ideas:  thus  I  used  a 

Straussian  approach.  However  I  did  make  a  deliberate  effort  to  maintain  some  balance  by 

keeping hard copies of the transcripts in a file and reading them without codes from time to time 

to  try  to  see  "big  picture"  themes.  I  also  did  an  early  big  picture  coding  of  the  first  five 

interviews  before  starting  the  line-by-line  open  coding.  Although  I  sometimes  employ  the 

mythically-sounding  wording  used  by  Glaser-devotees  -  theory  "emerges  from"  data  -  those 

themes and theories were generally the result of a significant  amount of comparing, contrasting, 

and trial combinations of open codes aided by the power of software. 

3.  Procedures of This Study 

Subjects were selected by purposeful  sampling (Spradley  1979). I sought  subjects 

who  had  been  involved  in  multiple  new  service  development  efforts  at  organizations  with  a 

reputation  for  being  innovative.  I  sought  a  broad  mix  of  service  subsectors  to  meet  the 

Eisenhardt  (1989)  objective  of  a  broadly  representative  qualitative  sample.  Firms  were 

identified by reputation, articles in the business press, or through networking. Individuals within 

the  firm  were  selected  by  the  same  techniques  as  well  as by  talking  to  a  number  of  people 

within the target organization. 

Subjects were asked to commit to two one-hour discussions, a week or so apart, in their 

offices,  and to be available to respond to possible  follow-up  questions. If the meeting  involved 

extensive  travel  or the  subject's  schedule  was  very  tight,  the  alternatives  were  either  a  single 

two-hour meeting or a one-hour onsite meeting followed by a one-hour phone meeting. I always 


39 

carried  a  meeting  outline  with  questions  that  had  been  reviewed  by  my  committee.  The 

questionnaire  outline was updated as the study proceeded. The outline is included as Appendix 

3-1.1 rarely used the outline extensively: the conversations were meant to be open ended; when I 

asked the subjects to describe how a recent new service had come to be offered  they were  often 

"off and running." IRB approval (#2006-011-Exception) was granted by the OPRS at UIC. 

All meetings  were taped  and the tapes were transcribed.  I used  an outside  transcription 

service,  www.escriptionist.com  that  had  been  recommended  for  accuracy  and  for  security  by 

several  qualitative  researchers  on  ELMAR,  the  AMA  marketing  research  site.  This  service 

enables files  to be fttp-ed  to and from their website instead of using email  for better security. I 

edited their transcriptions  while listening to the taped  discussions.  The edited  Word  files  were 

entered into the qualitative software NVivo and were also printed out as hard copies. 

In my meeting  notes I concentrated  on themes and context,  since the  conversation  was 

being recorded. When the meeting notes contained information  that supplemented the transcripts 

I typed them up and also entered them into NVivo. Within NVivo I also kept a log of thoughts 

both after  the interviews and as I coded and analyzed the data. When I had a significant  insight 

or felt  that I had uncovered  a theme or anything of importance I entered  it into the log or as a 

separate memo with a link to the analysis log. In "Straussian" fashion  I open-coded  eleven sets 

of  discussion  and  supporting  materials  before  performing  a  significant  reorganization  and 

focusing on axial coding and themes. The shift  from "in vivo" or narrow open coding to axial or 

theoretical  coding was gradual. By the fifth  or sixth subject  analyzed,  a majority  of new codes 

were  higher-level  axial  or  theoretical  codes  which  then  led  to  careful  re-examination  of  the 

previously coded transcripts. 

There was a clear slowing in new codes after ten transcripts. After the eleventh I grouped 

the  open  codes  into  classifications  or  "tree  nodes"  as  they  are  called  in  NVivo  and  made  a 


40 

determined effort  to consolidate codes and recode early subjects. Coding, both open coding and 

axial  coding  were  saturated  by the  eighteenth  subject.  The remaining  transcripts  were used  to 

look for counter examples and compare and contrast to the fully coded subjects. 

4.  Iterate Until You Saturate 

As a relatively new  student  of grounded  study I would  characterize the research 

method as "iterate until you  saturate": perform  open or in-vivo coding until new codes are not 

forthcoming;  do axial coding and concentrate on themes until new themes are not  forthcoming; 

keep  interviewing  until  coding  and  themes  are  saturated;  and  write  and  re-write  until  the 

presentation  stops  changing  significantly.  In  short  it  is  an  iterative  trial  and  test  process  that 

continues as long as the outcome continues to improve. One benefit  of the iterative approach is 

to force frequent rechecking and rethinking of past coding to maintain reliability. 

Figure 3.1: New Open Codes from coding successive subject  firms 


41 

Approaching  saturation  after  coding  eleven  subjects  is  illustrated  in  Figure  3.1.  This 

graph  shows  the  number  of  new  "in  vivo"  or  open  codes  from  successive  subjects  for  the  first 

eleven  subjects  coded.  The  "solid"  curve  in  Figure  3.1  is  the  number  of  new  open  or  in  vivo 

codes  created  while  analyzing  each  successive  case, while  the  smoothed  "dashed"  curve  simply 

uses the moving  average of the new codes  for the previous three  subjects  to reduce the  volatility 

of the trend. Both curves  show definite  flattening  of their slopes as more cases are coded.  By the 

eleventh firm the trend  toward saturation, that was achieved by the seventeenth case analyzed,  is 

clearly  evident. 

As noted  after  I completed  the open  coding  of the first  eleven  firms,  I created tree  nodes 

and  focused  more  and  more  on  general  themes  and  axial  coding.  I  continued  open  coding 

through seventeen subjects, at which time the saturation was clear -  no new codes. At that point I 

focused  on testing the emerging  themes  and theory  and looking  for  counter-examples  to  sharpen 

the themes. 

5.  Fine-tuning the Instrument — Me 

The  interviews  were  very  open-ended:  "tell  me  about  a recent  service  innovation 

or new product that you were heavily  involved  in. How did it come  into being?" In  some cases I 

hardly  needed  to  say  anything  more  as  the  respondent  instantly  warmed  to  the  topic,  for  the 

others  I  created  a  prompt  script  to  help  me  remember  key  points.  A  script  for  the  initial 

interviews  was  circulated  among  committee  members  for  comments  and  suggestions.  The  script 

I used is included as Appendix A. 

Three  researchers,  who  have  experience  in  qualitative  research,  read  transcripts  of  my 

early  interviews.  They  critiqued  my  style  and  the  content  of  my  questions.  They  made 

suggestions on how to improve the interview sessions. They indicated that they were  comfortable 

with the instrument  in this research and the data that had been collected to that  point. 


42 

Qualitative investigation is a very difficult  undertaking, in part because the "instrument" 

is  the  researcher.  As noted,  several  authors  have  indicated  that  a  single  researcher  is best  for 

immersion and analysis of the subjects but note that multiple researchers are often  used because 

of the amount of effort  involved in a qualitative study (Creswell  1998; Stake 2006). Glaser calls 

a first time qualitative research on his/her own "minus mentoring" and argues that a dissertation 

where  a  novice  grounded  researcher  is  forced  to  work  alone  can  actually  be  a  positive  by 

promoting  necessary  isolation  (Glaser  1998, p.6). Thus the requirement that  a dissertation be a 

solo effort  may have created an ideal research situation where the solo researcher took meeting 

notes, edited the transcript, coded the data, worked  in isolation,  and developed  the themes and 

theory. 

As a novice in qualitative research, I took steps to prepare myself  for this effort.  First I 

took  a  class  in  qualitative  market  research  at  Northwestern  University  taught  by  a  noted 

qualitative researcher in marketing, John Sherry. Next I read extensively on qualitative methods. 

I  read  so  extensively  about  qualitative  methods  that  not  all  background  sources  are  cited. 

Generally  there  were two  or three  sources I referred  to  repeatedly  in each  step  of the process. 

These steps and the texts included: 

•  An overview and comparison of qualitative techniques (Berg 2004; Creswell 1998); 

•  Interviewing techniques (Holstein and Gubrium 1995; McCracken 1988; Spradley 1979); 

•  Case study research (Dyer Jr. and Wilkins  1991; Eisenhardt  1989; Stake 1995; Yin 2003); 

•  Grounded research (Glaser 1998; Glaser and Strauss 1967; Strauss and Corbin 1998); 

•  Analyzing and coding data (Lofland and Lofland  1995; Richards 2005; Wolcott 1994); 
•  Writing qualitative studies (Holliday 2002; Wolcott 1990); and 

•  Using the software for my studies, NVivo (Bazeley 2007; Richards and Morse 2007). 


43 

6.  Using NVivo Software 

The  interviews  were  transcribed  and  entered  into  NVivo.  I  proceeded  to  open 

code  each  transcript  line  by  line.  Sometimes  I  coded  using  the  subject  words,  "in  vivo", but 

whenever I thought of another term that I believed was either shorter or more descriptive I used 

it instead. Several times during the process I listed the codes that had been created and circulated 

them to some members of my committee for their comments. 

NVivo is a wonderful  tool that allows for  codes to be easily combined, permanently  or 

temporarily to see if a broader categorization works. Searches can be conducted by codes or by 

key words or phrases in the text. As noted earlier, it is such a powerful  and easy-to-use tool that 

it likely biases a researcher to the Straussian school of grounded theory by facilitating  intensive 

testing  and  study  of  each  word,  phrase  and  code.  To  some  degree  I  consolidated  codes  as  I 

proceeded.  The  first  major  reorganization  of the  codes  was undertaken  after  data  from  eleven 

subjects was coded and the new codes produced by a new subject had noticeably diminished. 

NVivo also makes it easy for a researcher to record and save thoughts as an ongoing log 

or a series of memos. The log and linked memos  can easily be referred  to later in the process, 

allowing the researcher to re-examine and rethink the theory development. This ability to review 

earlier thoughts is invaluable to an iterative research  effort. 

D.  Subjects 

The original goal in selecting the subjects for this study was to purposefully  collect 20-30 

subjects  from  diverse service firms.  Since this was a qualitative study, the sample would not be 

representative  in  the  statistical  sense.  However  a  diverse  informant  pool,  from  most  of  the 

service industry subsectors was appropriate to a study focusing  on service innovation. Table 3.2 

shows that all but three of the service sectors defined by the Bureau of Economic Affair  and the 

Commerce  Department  that  could  realistically  be  included  were  included  in  our  subjects: 


"Management  of Companies" represents non-operating  holding  companies  and would  therefore 

consist  of unlikely  subjects.  Table  3.2  is  included:  (1) to  illustrate  how  diverse  the  sample  of 

service firms  of this  study is and (2) to show makeup  of the service economy that was  80% of 

US GDP in these 2005 Commerce Department figures. 

44 

Table 3.2: BEA service sectors and the subjects 

Service  Sector 

%2005  GDP 

Subjects 

Real Estate, Rental and Leasing 
Government 
Finance and  Insurance 
Healthcare and social assistance 
Professional  and Tech Services 
Retail Trade 
Wholesale Trade 
Information 
Administrative & waste services 
Transportation 
Accommodation & Food Services 
Other Services 
Utilities 
Management of Companies 
Arts, Entertainment,  Recreation 
Educational Services 

Total Services 

13% 
12% 
8% 
7% 
7% 
7% 
6% 
5% 
3% 
3% 
3% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
1% 
1% 
80% 

Healthcare innovation  agency 
8-Diverse including banks, exchanges,  invest. 
2-Hospitals 
3-Mgmt  consulting firms, 2-Industry  assoc. 
National  retailer 
Industrial  supply and  wholesale 
Urban newspaper, Credit  information 
Industrial and household  cleaning 

Restaurant  chain 
2-NGO providing  social  services 

Cable  company 
2-Universities 

Some of the subjects would be classified  as convenience subjects: people I knew or could 

easily reach through my network that I believed would be good contributors. To some degree all 

of  the  subjects  were  convenience  subjects  since  they  were  either  a  reasonable  drive  or  an 

inexpensive  direct  flight  from  the  Chicago  area:  subjects  were  located  in  greater  Chicago, 

Atlanta, New York, Pittsburgh or Dallas. Some were selected by the "snowball" technique, since 

they  were  suggested  by  other  participating  subjects.  However  the  majority  of  the  subjects 


45 

included  were  purposeful  (Spradley  1979),  selected  for  a  reputation  for  innovativeness  and 

involvement in an industry that I desired to include in the study. 

Given  the  difficulty  researchers  have  in  persuading  potential  subjects  to  take  10-15 

minutes to fill  out a survey, I was surprised that over 75% of the people I purposefully  targeted 

for  this  study  committed  to  the  effort.  The  commitment  included  two  one-hour  face-to-face 

meetings a week to ten days apart, and then  some follow-up  questions by phone and email. In 

cases  where  I  had  to  travel  or  the  subject's  schedule  was  unusually  tight  a  single  two-hour 

meeting could be substituted; on some occasions the second meeting was a taped phone call. On 

only two occasions did I need to conduct the entire interview by telephone. The subjects who did 

not follow the two in-person interview ideal are noted in Table 3.3. 

Table  3.3  is  a  summary  of the twenty  seven key  informants  and  firms  included  in this 

study. Twenty one of the subjects were recruited specifically  for this study. I chose to add six of 

the eight subjects from the internet migration study in Chapter Four to these data as well. The six 

subjects I chose had discussed their full NSD efforts  in sufficient  detail that they were as rich as 

most  of the  subjects  deliberately  targeted.  They  are marked  with  an  asterisk  in the  table. The 

remaining two subjects from the migration study had focused so completely on the migration that 

I judged that their discussions were not suitable for this study. 

The six additional  cases from the Internet migration  study were entered into NVivo un-

coded to be considered "fresh" and I scheduled them for the end of the analysis. As it turned out, 

I  judged  both  open  coding,  and  axial/thematic  coding  to  be  saturated  before  the  eighteenth 

subject,  so  none  of  the  six  was  fully  re-coded.  They  were  instead  part  of  the  remaining  ten 

subjects that were examined for inconsistencies or contrasts to the earlier results. 

Table 3.3 also shows the pseudonyms used for the names of the key informants and firms 

in the results sections of this chapter. A short description of the industry is also shown for each. 


46 

Table 3.3: The Subjects of the Grounded Study 

Key Informant ID, role 

Firm ID & products 

Industry 

Ed  ,  President 
Ashley, Mgr.  New  Services 
Bob, Product  Manager 
Jerry1, Product  Manager 
Stephanie1,  Partner 
James1,  Partner 
David3,  Partner 
Ralph,  Marketing 
Joseph, NPD  Manager 
Colin2,  Marketing 
Irv,  Marketing 
Josh  , Senior  Executive 
Jennifer, Product  Manager 
Adrian1, Senior  Manager 
Paul, Mgr.  New  Services 
Fred, Director  Service  Dev. 
Samuel2,  COO 
Larry, senior  executive 
Leo, Director-New  Products 
Rebecca  , New  Services 
Elizabeth,  CEO 
Beth, Director  -  NPD 
Duane  , Design  and  Innov. 
Tom  , Head  User  Group 
Alfred1, Marketing  Head 
Lynn, Dept.  Chair 
Lloyd, former  Dept.  Chair 

BankMg*, mortgage  wholesaler 
BankSm, mid-size commercial  bank 
BankTr*, corp. treasury  services 
CableC, cable and Internet  service 
ConsultantAss,  association  consult. 
ConsultantHC, NSD  consulting 
Consultant, Executive Comp. 
Credlnfo,  consumer credit  info 
ExchgA*, financial  derivatives 
ExchgF*, financial  derivatives 
ExchgS,  equity-based 
Exterm, pest  extermination 
Finserv*,  investment  products 
GovResHC, healthcare  research 
IassocHC, association  for HC ind. 
Hospl, large nonprofit  hospital 
HospSm, small nonprofit  hospital 
OTCDealer*, energy  derivatives 
NewsPa, major  metro  newspaper 
NGOMicroF, micro-lender  3rd Wrld 
NGOHomeL, homeless  solutions 
RetailTrade, drugstore  chain 
RestCh, fast  food  restaurant 
SoftAp, software  applications 
TradeW, wholesale trade 
Univerl,  large urban  university 
Univer2, midsize urban university 

Mortgage  banking 
Commercial  banking 
Commercial  banking 
Cable, telecom 
Consulting-associations 
Consulting-healthcare 
Consulting-management 
Consumer  information 
US derivatives  exchange 
Non-US derivatives  exch. 
US  securities  exchange 
Personal  services 
Wholesaler to ind. brokers 
US government  agency 
Industry association,  HC 
Hospital-major  metro  area 
Hospital-major  metro area 
Non-bank  dealer 
Daily  newspaper 
Non-government  social  s. 
Non-government  social s. 
Retailer 
Restaurant  chain 
Software 
Industrial  supplies-catalog 
Higher  education 
Higher  education 

*These subjects  were also  included  in the case  study  of  Chapter  Four 

Because  of logistics:  1- second  interview  by phone,  2 — one long  interview,  3 -  telephone  only 


A series of sections presenting the results of the analysis follows. The theory developed is 

presented as a group of propositions. Propositions about antecedents of new service development 

success that  could be used  in the quantitative tests  of NSD success  in Chapter  Five are shown 

with  the  proposition  number  in  bold.  The  propositions  are  included  within  the  discussion  of 

47 

results, in order to shown their origin. 

E.  Results: New Service Development is Different 

Traditional  new  product  development  ("NPD")  research  differentiates  NPD  from 

innovation  in  manufacturing  or  delivery  of  the  product  as  a  separate  topic  (Page  and  Schirr 

2008). This differentiation  might  or might  not make  sense  or be productive  in developing  new 

goods,  but  it  clearly  doesn't  fit  new  services  where  the  inseparability  of  production  and 

consumption  is one of the  four  defining  differences  between  services  and  goods  (Regan  1963; 

Zeithaml  et al.  1985). One  of the executives  interviewed  approvingly  cited  a comment  from  a 

retired banking consultant, Ed Furash, that "in financial services process is the product." 

Research in NPD, primarily focused on goods firms, has focused on the characteristics of 

the process of new product development,  such as clearly defined  phases, Stage-Gate® approval 

processes,  and  cross-functional  coordination  (Henard  and  Szymanski  2001; Page  and  Schirr 

2008).  As  will  be  discussed  later,  some  of  these  topics  were  discussed  in  conversations  with 

service firm executives, but generally in the context of trying to insert some structure in the new 

service development ("NSD")  effort.  Defined  phases and Stage-Gate approval processes are not 

part of their current NSD effort. NSD as they described it did not fit the most common models of 

NPD-goods. I was led to the conclusion that new service development is different. 

Josh is a senior executive for a firm that serves industrial and household needs for basic 

services such as cleaning, exterminating, and lawn care. Josh has had experience in a variety of 

firms  and notes that: 


48 

I've worked in a lot of different  categories, and I've seen, you know, how traditional 

consumer  companies,  as  well  as  a  lot  of  B2B  [goods]  companies,  constantly  are 

innovating, testing and rolling out new products... I know what those models look like, 

and / can assure you the service industry is nothing like any of those. 

Thus the initial proposition for this chapter is straightforward: 

P3.1:  New Service Development (NSD) differs from NPDfor goods. 

The degree to which new service development  differs  from NPD for goods may depend 

on the degree of "service-ness" for a product or the significance  of the tangible component of a 

service offering.  Again quoting Josh: 

...within the service industry our types of services - when all we're  really selling are 

what  our  people  bring  to  the  party  -  is  unique  compared  to,  say,...  a  fast  food 

restaurant;  yes, it  is service,  but  you  also  have  unique  discreet  products that  help 

differentiate you. 

In our case we're bringing people out to your property to take care of your lawn, or 

cure your weeds, or keep your house pest free, or to clean your house, it's a different 

model where -- when we're on our game -  we never stand still. 

Appropriately,  in keeping with the example used by Josh to emphasize the difference  in 

the tangibility  of the offering,  the head  of  service  design  at a  fast  food  chain,  agreed  with the 

analysis  of Josh about  service-ness  and a goods component.  He noted that his  firm  engages  in 

two different  types of innovation, "front" and "back" innovation: 

...fast  food  in  general  is  a  very  complex  business  because  it's  not  a  pure  service 

business, it's right in the middle of the service and product business. We basically run 

a small plant in the back of our restaurants and service in the front. 

From these insights emerges a sub-proposition about the uniqueness of NSD: 

P3.1a:  NSD is more unique (from goods NPD) the smaller the tangible component of the service. 


49 

As  already  mentioned  it  was  clear  that  new  service  development  was  an  unstructured 

activity  in  the  firms  interviewed.  When  structure  was  mentioned  — such  as  Stage-Gate® 

approvals  or  formal  new  service  or  product  departments  ~  the  context  generally  involved 

recurring  attempts  to  create  some  structure  to  an  informal,  ad-hoc  activity.  Since  the  subjects 

were  aware  of  formal  processes  used  in  other  industries  and  had  and  were  attempting  to  add 

structure  to  their NSD  efforts,  I believe  that  it  was  not  the  case  that  they  simply  lagged  behind 

consumer packaged  goods  or other goods  companies  in appreciating phased  structure; it  seemed 

that  such  structured  processes  were  difficult  to  apply  to  NSD.  One  executive  from  a  leading 

cable and high-speed internet firm indicated that the culture was averse to  structure: 

I  would  characterize  [our firm]  as  a  pretty process-averse company  although  we've 
grown so much in the last ten years that some structured  processes have  developed 
across areas. 

None  of  the  other  executives  described  their  firms  as  being  averse  to  formal  structure. 

However  virtually  by  consensus  the  discussions  with  executives  from  twenty  seven  diverse 

service  firms  led to  the  conclusion  that  a key  difference  between NSD  and NPD-goods  was  the 

lack of structure in service  innovation: 

P3.2:  NSD  is a less formal  or structured  process  than NPDfor  goods. 

A  mortgage  bank  executive  approvingly  quoted  a  consultant  who  said  that  in  financial 

services  "the  product  is  the  process."  The  marketing  director  for  a  trade  wholesale  firm 

distributing  supplies to industrial firms noted that: 

...in  a  service  business,  you're  doing  process  innovation  as  much  as  you're  doing 

anything else, which means that you have to have a thorough understanding of how 

your business processes work. 


The head  of innovation  and design  at a major  restaurant  chain noted that  design  had to 

involve the complete system: 

50 

[When you innovate you must do] ...a system ...you can't do component development. 

I think  that's  one of  the  key differences  [from]  product  development...it's  nowhere 

near as system driven as services. We spend a lot of time...Created a new dialogue in 

the system about path dependency, which is John Haskett's favorite term, of design. 

Process innovation is key to service innovation: 

P3.3:  In studying NPD researchers separate process innovation from  NPD; process innovation 

cannot be separated from NSD and may be the essence ofNSDfor  some organizations. 

F.  It is ALL ABOUT THE CUSTOMERS 

When the executives  discussed the development  of new  services they inevitably  started 

with a perceived  customer  or user need;  as the  discussion progressed  they  began to talk about 

how  they  discovered  the  customer  needs  and  then  how  they  involved  the  customers  in  the 

development process. The ideas for the most successful  new services originated with customers 

or observation  of customers; the most  successful  new  services  fit  customer needs. To generate 

new ideas for new service development,  for improved customer research, to improve their NSD 

efforts -  it is all about the customers. 

I used the word-count in the NVivo software  to tally the use of words in the discussions 

with  the  key  informants  in  all  twenty-seven  firms  included  in  this  study.  The  most  common 

words were not too interesting: "you", "I" and "we" lead the list with 3,000 -  4,000 uses each. 

The top six words that  seem to have relevance to new service development  are shown in Table 

3.4. The three most used words that seem meaningful  are product(s), customer(s) and service(s). 

The  subjects  generally  seemed to refer  to new service offerings  as "products;" I was  surprised 

that  "product(s)" was used  only 28% more than  service(s)." The more  interesting  point  is that 


"customer(s)"  was  sandwiched  between  them:  this  simple  count  affirms  my  sense  that  the 

subjects were continually talking about the customer or user in their NSD  effort. 

51 

Table 3.4: Selected words used in interviews 

Word or related words 

Number of Uses 

Product (s) 
Customer (s), user (s), client, consumer 
Service (s) 
Process (es) 
Innovation (s) 
Idea (s) 

735 
695 
576 
395 
379 
374 

Previous  studies  have  shown  that  word  or  phrase  counts  do  not  necessarily  track  to 

importance  of  concepts  (Griffin  and  Hauser  1993).  Simple  counts  of  words  or  codes  did  not 

result  in  theme  or  theory  development  but  are  shown  here  as  a  clear  indication  that  the 

conversations were dominated by discussions of customers and users. 

Another simple measure that showed the importance of the customer to these discussions 

occurred  after  I  had  coded  eleven  of  the  subject  firms  and  began  using  "tree  nodes"  or  a 

hierarchy  of  classifications  in NVivo  to  organize  the  open  coding.  The  first  five  tree  nodes  I 

created were all related to the need for, or pursuit of,  customer input, as shown in Table 3.5. This 

table shows that these five categories of customer input accounted for over 30% of the open code 

labels and 40% of all coding applied to the discussions with the subjects. The five tree nodes, or 

classification  of open codes, were a  starting point  for  deeper  analysis  of the  data. This  coding 

facilitated  comparisons  of  data  within  an  "in  vivo"  or  open  code  and  then  within  a  larger 


classification.  Ultimately  comparing  and contrasting  data across classification  further  helped to 

flesh out themes. 

52 

Table 3.5: Categories of Open Codes 

Category 

# codes 

•  Discover customer need or knowledge 
•  Experiential or customer  experiments 
•  Customer research -  active  engagement 
•  Customers -  in the field or boundary  spanning 
•  Customer research -  traditional  MR 

TOTAL  5 categories 
Total all open codes 
Percentage of total in these  5 categories 

15 
13 
8 
8 
10 
54 
169 
3 1% 

#uses 
307 
196 
155 
93 
89 
840 
2069 
40% 

These executives  involved in NSD were focused  on meeting  customer needs. Customer 

needs  might  be  known  or  hidden,  in  the  form  of  contextual  or  sticky  information  (Szulanski 

2003; von Hippel  1998). The primary mission of the NSD effort  is to identify  and meet customer 

needs  and  solve  customer  problems. They  described  their firms and NSD  efforts  as  customer-

centric and they seek to become closer and more knowledgeable about their customers. 

There  was  a  clear  consensus  in the  conversations  that  all  good  ideas  address  customer 

needs or problems. The head of the user group at a software application firm stated that: 

with  all  innovations, from  my  perspective  is, knowing a  problem  exists  is first  and 
foremost. 

Rebecca  at a microfinance  non-governmental  organization  described the genesis of new 

non-lending products at her organization as: 

it was pretty much customer demand... what we were hearing from our clients and... 

what we saw that they needed 

P3.4: 

Identifying customer needs or problems is the key to obtaining good NSD ideas. 


53 

The problem is that sometimes customers can tell you what their key needs or problems 

are,  but  other  times  they  may  not  communicate  their  needs  easily.  The  most  important 

knowledge is often difficult  to communicate. Multiple subjects, including executives from two of 

the  banks,  the  cable  company,  the  industrial  and  personal  cleaning  services  firm,  and  the 

microfinance  organization  stressed  how  important  it  is  to  be  in  the  field  and  actually  watch 

customers  use  their  services  to  solve  problems.  Good  information  doesn't  simply  flow  from 

conversation or customer surveys. Alfred, marketing director for a leading industrial supply firm, 

mentioned  how  difficult  it  is  to  find  "real  knowledge  of  their  customer  needs  from  under  the 

covers." He notes that early new product efforts  showed: 

... how hard it was to find real knowledge,- and codify that knowledge... you shouldn't 

just  assume.,  some  problems that  appear  to  be  ridiculously  simple  on the  surface, 

might actually turn out to be very complex under the covers. 

P3.5:  New ideas are more often discovered by observing clients working or solving problems 
rather  than  by  clients  explicitly articulating their  needs  or  directly providing  ideas. 
(Sticky or contextual information). 

The need for uncovering  deep, hidden, or contextual information  was a recurring theme 

but this theme occurred more often in discussions of service innovation for more innovative new 

services. This observed tendency leads to a related proposition: 

P3.6:  A focus  on sticky or contextual information  and future  needs will be more important the 

more innovative the new service. 

G.  Customer-based Antecedents of NSD Success 

In  the  previous  section  the  clear  consensus  on  the  centrality  of  the  customer  to  new 

service  development  was  discussed.  The  best  ideas  fulfill  customer  needs  or  solve  their 

problems. Because customer knowledge is contextual and often  "sticky" a firm must work hard 

to  really  understand  user's  and  customers'  needs.  The  executives  spent  much  of  our 


54 

conversations  discussing  how  they  have  worked  to  make  their  organizations  sensitive  to 

customers and how they continue to bring customers closer still. 

A  starting  point  for  more  effective  new  service  development  is  to  make  the  entire 

organization  customer-centric.  Jerry  at  the  cable  company  described  an  effort  to  make  every 

manager  involved  in  NSD  spend  at  least  a  couple  days  per  month  on  customer  sites.  The 

manager  of  new  products  at  a  small  bank  spends  a  major  portion  of  her  time  training  and 

networking with all employees who have contact with customers -  sales persons, lending  officers 

and customer reps -  to discuss how to identify  and communicate customer problems and needs. 

Another bank executive  described the benefit  of granting  expense accounts to customer  service 

representatives  to take clients to  lunch, to help  them get to know  customers  personally.  These 

executives are working to change the culture of their firms and how they interact with customers. 

Josh,  a  senior  executive  at  an  industrial  and  personal  cleaning  service,  describes  a 

paradigm  shift  from  running  innovation  (and  the  focus  of  the  firm)  to  increase  provider's 

efficiency  or profitability to a focus on serving the customers: 

...on  the  provider's  terms  all  the  innovations  tend  to  be  what  makes  me  more 

efficient,  what  makes  me  more  money.  And  eventually  those  categories  do  get 

awakened  and... the  customer  will  win.  I  mean, the  banking category  did  it  on the 

provider terms for a hundred-plus years then all of a sudden in the 70s that started 

changing and now... banking is done on the consumer's terms... the paradigm shifted. 

...we just want to make sure that  [our firm] is leading that shift because if we're not, 

we've abused the leadership positions that we earned. 

P3.7:  Customer Orientation is an antecedent of NSD success. 

As noted  in P3.6 the  importance  of understanding  deep  contextual  information  is more 

important  for  more  innovative  new  services.  The  discussion  of  changing  organization  culture 

was more common in discussions of more innovative new services and was tied to being alert to 


55 

sticky  information  and  knowledge.  This  suggests  to  me  a  modification  of  P3.7  for  more 

innovative new services: 

P3.8:  Customer  Orientation  with  a focus  on  sticky  or  contextual  information  and future  needs 

of users  is an antecedent  ofNSD  success for  more  innovative  services. 

A  marketing  scholar  might  question  the  use  of  customer  orientation  rather  than  market 

orientation  in  these  last  two  propositions.  Customer  orientation  is  one  of  the  three  major 

components  of market  orientation, along with competitor orientation  and functional  coordination 

(Kohli  and Jaworski  1990; Narver  and  Slater  1990). In addition, market  orientation  is a  standard 

construct  far  more  widely  used than  its  component,  customer  orientation.  However  in  grounded 

theory  the  theory  comes  out  of  the  data.  These  executives  did  not  emphasize  functional 

coordination  or even competitor orientation:  it is all about  the customers.  Interestingly  this  focus 

of the  subjects  of this study is consistent  with two recent empirical  articles that also indicate that 

customer  orientation  may be  a better  antecedent  of new product  success  than  market  orientation 

(Lukas and Ferrell 2000b; Narver et al. 2004). 

What about  an entrepreneurial  or innovative culture?  Do the executives  involved  in NSD 

need  to  steer  their  organization  to  a  culture  open  to  innovation  as  well  as  to  a  customer 

orientation?  I was  surprised  that  this  issue  did not  come up  often  in early  interviews,  so I  asked 

about  it late in some of the  later  conversations.  Several executives  did talk  about the  importance 

of  an  organization,  especially  top  management,  being  open  to  change.  However  I  gained  the 

implicit insight that a customer orientation directly led to a firm being open to  innovation. 

The  chief  operations  officer  of  a  community  hospital  discussed  the  importance  of  his 

CEO's  interest  in  innovation.  Unlike  local  competitors  who  were  complacent  and  allowed  the 

growth of the county to grow their organizations, she insisted that the hospital must also  innovate 

to better serve the  community: 


56 

You will hear on the marketplace competitors say that anyone can grow in this kind of 

community... I would say that's absolutely true. You can... sit here and do nothing, and 

you'll  probably  be  successful for  most  of  your  career...  we  consider  ourselves very 

innovative...  we  could  have  done  nothing  and  by  virtue  of  our  location  been 

successful... but that's not what we chose to do. We're led by a very entrepreneurial 

CEO. She is very visionary. 

An innovative  culture seemed to be a positive for NSD. However,  it didn't merit an  effort 

by  the  executives  involved  in  NSD  to  change  the  organization  in  the  same  way  that  it  drove 

many  of  them  to  attempt  to  remake  their  organizations  to  be  customer  oriented.  Perhaps  a 

customer  orientation  in  an  organization  naturally  leads  an  innovative  orientation  or  perhaps  an 

innovative culture is a secondary factor,  not as important  as customer orientation.  Two  additional 

propositions  about corporate culture are  therefore: 

P3.9:  An  innovative  culture  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

P3.10:  Customer  orientation  will  be  more  important  than  an  innovative  culture  in  predicting 

NSD  success. 

1.  Hearing the Customers: Market Research to Collect Customer  Needs 

Successful  new service offerings  meet key needs or solve key customer problems. 

Often  the customer themselves  cannot articulate those needs because they only recognize them in 

context  or aren't  aware  of  the potential  to  improve  the  situation.  The NSD  managers  were  very 

concerned  with  using  techniques  to uncover  customer  needs  and  collect  deep  information  about 

the clients. An antecedent of NSD  success from the discussions is: 

P3.ll:  Use  of  market  research  methods  to  understand  customer  needs  is  an  antecedent  of  NSD 

success. 

Three  of  the  bank  executives  discussed  watching  customers  use  their  services  and 

employing  rapid  prototyping  to  promote  co-development.  The  executive  of  the  cleaning  and 

extermination  firm  talked  of  constant  field  trials  during  every  phase  of  development,  even  pre-


57 

concept  before  discussing  the  ideas  with  other  senior  executives.  The  cable  company  product 

manager forced  the NSD team to go out in the field  and watch customers; multiple other  subjects 

had similar programs. A universal concern was to become more directly engaged with the users. 

As noted earlier Alfred,  marketing  director at a leading  industrial  supply  firm,  mentioned 

how  difficult  it  is to  find  "real  knowledge  of  their  customer  needs  from  "under  the  covers".  He 

went  on to indicate  that  engaging  the clients through  experiments  and prototyping  helped  gather 

the needed  information: 

[early  new  product  efforts  showed]., how  hard  it  was to  find  real  knowledge,- and 

codify that knowledge... you shouldn't just assume., some problems that appear to be 

ridiculously simple on the surface, might actually turn out to be very complex under 

the covers... you kind of snap out of it and figure out that, "Hey, you know what?  I 

just need to get this out there. It's something that we're actually getting a lot better at 

just in the last couple years -  is the notion of -  we used say we were experimenting, 

but what we were really doing, in my mind, in retrospect, was really prototyping... 

Customer  research  methods  to uncover  hidden  and tacit  information  are useful  for  NSD. 

As mentioned  in the  discussion  of propositions  P3.5  and P3.8, accessing  this  sticky  information 

seems  especially  important  in  service  innovation  for  more  innovation  new  services.  Therefore  a 

variant of P3.11 should address more innovative new  services: 

P3.12: Market  research  methods  that  engage  a  customer  with  the  service  or  in  one-on-one 
discussions  and facilitate  open-ended  discussion  will  have  more  effect  than  other  market 
research  methods for  more  innovative  or radical  new  services. 

The COO of a community hospital noted that: 

We're  known  for  ready, fire,  aim,  and  so we  pulled  -  everyone  was  amazed  how 

quickly we pulled this together and... it's a beautiful program. 

Get  it out there and  learn  from  customer  experience,  or "ready,  fire,  aim" is a strategy  to 

benefit  from  user experience mentioned by subjects  in several  discussions. 


58 

P3.13: Experiential learning through prototyping, beta-testing,  experimenting,  and after-launch 

changes are antecedents ofNSD success. 

2.  Planning for Customer Collaboration 

Customers  are involved throughout  the  development  of  a new  service. With the 

help  of  market  research  techniques  to  engage  customers  individually  firms  uncover  customer 

needs  and  problems.  Customer  input  is  further  elicited  by  Beta  tests,  experiments,  and  early 

prototyping that make NSD an experiential process. So it is important to build flexibility  into the 

service and into the NSD effort  to be able to take advantage of this ongoing collection of input 

and information. 

Development  continues  after  a product  launch.  Several  of the executives  indicated  that 

the first three or six months after  the launch were perhaps the richest time to take advantage of 

customer  input  and planned  on rapid  changes  in the product/service  during that period.  Others 

talk about an even more extended period: a newspaper executive talked of the dramatic evolution 

of a new product over a four year period; as already noted a senior executive at an industrial and 

personal cleaning services company said that for them innovation is "a different  model where — 

when we're on our game —  we never  stand  still." Therefore  another way in which NSD is less 

formal  and  structured  than  NPD-for-goods  is  that  it  is  difficult  to  define  the  end  of  the 

development period on a new service] 

There were multiple examples of NSD efforts that involved continual changes throughout 

development.  Often  frequent  and  significant  changes  continued  through  the  service  launch. 

These  organizations  employed  multiple  techniques  to  facilitate  the  customer  input  and  the 

flexibility  to  change  the  services  frequently.  A  cable  company  executive  describes  their  favored 

approach to NSD as an: 

iterative approach where we can get customer input early and use that to shape how 

we bring products to market. 


59 

[In  a  recent  innovation]  there  were  some  definite  iterations...  One  of  the  major 

updates  was  to  make  sure that  the  product  could  do an  incremental  update... the 

most recent improvement  I think was to make it more modular so customers... could 

just  install  the  piece  parts that  they  wanted.  [We  felt  that  it]  was good enough  to 

launch... we really needed to quickly make a handful of changes and kind of relaunch 

the product... what we're doing now on product launches is... making sure that we get 

some direct customer feedback.... 

By planning  in advance  for  flexibility  and for  customer  feedback,  a service  firm  can plan 

for  innovation  in the  first  few  months  after  the  launch  of  a new product.  A newspaper  executive 

nicely  summarized the effect  for  a totally  new newspaper  we will  refer  to  as  OVERNITE  that  he 

launched  in the firm's  existing geographical market that was aimed at new customers: 

[We]  ...were  able to  launch it and then, significantly, change it considerably, almost 

immediately,  through  soliciting  reader  feedback  and  keep changing rt...you could 

barely  recognize the  OVERNITE of 2002  if you laid  it  next to the  OVERNITE of  2006 

because of all of the reader-driven innovations that have come along 

P3.14:  Customer  collaboration  in  all  phases  of  new  service  development,  including 

ideation, 
concept  testing,  alpha-  and  beta-  testing,  development,  prototyping  and  launch  is  an 
antecedent  ofNSD  success. 

P3.15:  NSD  is  often  evolutionary;  when  NSD  is  evolutionary  a  series  of  small  steps  will 

aggregate  into a significant  innovation. 

The newspaper  executive  went  on the note that they  had planned  for  customer  input  and 

change in the marketing plan for the new product: 

[We  got  feedback]  ...through  e-mail,  but  also  we  did  extensive  sampling.  We had 

reader feedback mechanisms  built into  the marketing plan.  We plan for  iteration, 

customer input, and rapid change. We will test and change... Built in flexibility. 

The community banker notes that: 


As we  install  more  and more  customers on the  service... the  questions change. We 

have to  keep incorporating them... That's an open dynamic. You never stop with the 

troubleshooting and questions. 

60 

A  service and marketing plan designed to elicit continuing  customer input and adapt to it, 

will be an asset to a new service: 

P3.16: New  services  should  be  designed  and planned  to  be flexible  and  to  adapt  to  experience 

and customer feedback;  such planned  flexibility  is an antecedent  ofNSD  success. 

H.  Other Antecedents  of NSD  Success 

The  core message, the primary theme  and  central theory  about  new  service  development 

that  emerged  from  the  analysis  of the  discussion  with  executives  of  twenty  seven  service  firms 

was  conveyed  in  the  last  two  sections:  NSD  is  all  about  the  customers.  The  remaining  results 

sections  contain  some  interesting  themes,  but  in  the  analysis  of  the  data  and  in  the  original 

discussions  with  the  executives,  those  themes  are  secondary  in  importance  to  the  primacy  of 

uncovering  customer  needs  and problems  using  effective  methods,  soliciting  user  feedback,  and 

adapting the service to customer  experience. 

1.  NSD is Iterative, But Some Structure may be  Useful 

New  service  development  was  described  repeatedly  as  an  iterative, trial  and  error  effort. 

"Probe and learn," a strategy  suggested  for high tech NPD  (Lynn  and Morone  1996), seems well 

suited to service  innovation.  Flexibility  and receptiveness  to user  feedback  is vital to the  success 

of the effort.  As the senior executive for a cleaning, exterminating  and lawn care firm  states: 

innovation and improvement and expanding or enhancing your service line or service 

offering  is just  a continual  part  of the  business... we're  gonna  add to  our  menu of 

services to test that, to pilot it and extend it... just trial and error... we get out and play 

with it in a few markets, give it to a few branches, here's the idea, here's a couple of 

flavors of it that we see, but work with it. 


61 

An  executive  in  an  organization  providing  services  to  brokerage  firms  notes  that  an 

advantage of improved communication to NSD efforts  is: 

much more flexibility... you're able to tweak and enhance on the fly... a faster process. 

The  COO  of  a  community  hospital  adds  that  incremental  iterative  changes  are  even 

important  for the development  of really innovative or novel new services: 

very seldom do you wake up one day and say, "Oh my God, I've got an idea and we 

are gonna just  knock the  socks off  the  market." 

It...  is a  lot  of trial  and error  and 

experiment and small gains and incremental gains... you work at it and in the end... I 

can't even think of an innovation that we had that was novel that didn't go working, 

working, working towards a goal. 

P3.17: An  iterative process—breaking  NSD  into  small pieces,  making  swift  changes  to  respond 

to test results  and prototyping—is  an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

Finally  the  marketing  head  of  an  industrial  wholesaler  put  a  flexible  iterative  NSD 

process in almost mythical terms: 

you're  headed off  to go and slay that  dragon only to  find out that  there's  a much, 

much bigger dragon sitting out... as you as you further develop that  idea, it actually 

really takes on a life of its own... and then everybody stands around and says, "Well, 

of course you should be doing that. Of course that was a problem that every customer 

had. Of course it needs to be solved in this way."  There was no "of course" about it 

until two minutes before that point when it kind of springs into being obvious. 

None of the subjects  in this study described a new service development  process that  came 

at  all  close  to the  definition  of  a  formal  process  used  in the  2003  CPAS  survey  by  the  Product 

Development  and  Management  Association:  "a  formally  documented  process  where  a  cross-

functional  team completes  a set of tasks, management  reviews the results and gives the  go-ahead 

for  the  team  to  complete  the  next  set  of  cross-functional  tasks."  There  were  no  Stage-Gate® 

processes  in  the  NSD  efforts  of  any  of  these  firms.  Many  of  the  subjects  were  aware  of  the 

Stage-Gate®  model; a few  actually used  a list of activities  similar to the stages in such a process 


62 

as a checklist  for their internal use. Generally,  senior management  review  of the NSD  projects 

was limited to the beginning of the effort  (prioritization) and pre-launch (funding). 

To support the difference  of NSD, I already cited the product manager of a major  cable 

company  who  stated  that  his  organization  was  "averse" to  process. No  one  else  stated  it  that 

succinctly,  although  several  indicated  that  formality  or  structure  seemed  incompatible  with 

service  innovation.  However,  most  of  the  executives  indicated  that  they  were  working  to  add 

some structure to NSD and make it a more managed process. One of many examples of "we are 

in the process of setting up some structure" came from the director of new service development 

at a large urban hospital: 

we're trying to roll it out so we're trying to kind of do the upfront planning in terms of 

how  we  want  to  organize,  how  we  want  to  approach this, and then  wait  to  cycle 

through actual deals... we're just sort of on the cusp of that... a basic process in place 

for the organization... getting ready to present it at a broader executive level. 

Several executives said that they had a formal process in place and two actually showed 

me documents with a formal  structure outlined, but neither was able to cite a project where the 

process  was  actually  followed!  Nevertheless, most  of the  executives  genuinely  believed  that  a 

formal  managed  process  would  be  useful  and  were  working  to  make  the  NSD  process  more 

formal  while retaining the necessary flexibility and iterativeness. Therefore  I advance two more 

antecedents of NSD success: 

P3.18: A formal process is an antecedent of NSD success for  new services. 

P3.19: A formal NPD process will be a stronger antecedent of NSD success if the process is also 

iterative. 


63 

I.  A Proposed Model  of NSD  Success 

Throughout  the  analysis  of  the  grounded  data  I  sought  to  maintain  a  balance  between 

Glazer's  concept  of  theoretical  sensitivity  and  Strauss's  teasing  the  data  or  what  Glaser  would 

call  "forcing"  (Glaser  1992; Strauss  and Corbin  1998). The process  of  developing  a model  from 

these data may be more similar to what Glaser describes as "forcing" than emerging  insight  from 

sensitivity.  As  noted  the  data points to a  central  theme  —  it  is all  about  the  customers,  but  there 

was  little discussion  of relative  importance  of individual  factors  or tradeoffs  between  techniques. 

The only real discussion of interactivity  was the idea that a formal  structure  for NSD is good, but 

only if flexibility  and the iterativeness of the effort  is maintained. 

A  basic  model  of NSD  success  should  include  a customer  orientation,  the use  of  market 

research  tools  to  understand  customer  needs  and  problems,  and  an NSD  process  that  has  some 

structure but facilitates  iterative changes: 

P3.20: A  phased  model  of  NSD  success  antecedents  beginning  with  (1)  customer  orientation, 
proceeding  through  a process  that  (2) balances formal  structure  and  iterativeness  and  (3) 
using  market  research  tools,  especially  one-on-one  engaging  tools,  will  predict  NSD 
success. 

From the discussions with the executives it appears that more innovative NSD is  different 

from  incremental  NSD.  When  developing  more  innovative  services  the  importance  of  deep  and 

forward-looking  customer  information  increases,  while  the  importance  of  formal  NSD  structure 

is  likely  less  important.  Therefore  there  are  subtle  tweaks  of  the  model  suggested  by  P3.20: 

customer  orientation  should  stress  forward-looking  engagement  of  the  customer,  individual 

customer  engagement marketing research  should be more useful  than traditional methods, and  an 

NSD  process  should  stress  iterative  capability  over  formal  structure.  An NSD  process  for  more 

innovative process  should therefore  be  modified: 


64 

P3.21:  The model from  P3.20  will change  as NSD projects  become  more  innovative:  specifically 
(1) customer  orientation  must  be more forward-looking  and  engaging;  (2) the process  of 
NSD  must  be  iterative  --  formal  structure  less  important;  and  (3)  market  research 
methods  should  be more  one-on-one  and  engaging. 

Together propositions  P3.20 and P3.21  suggest  a model of NSD  success predicted by  (1) 

the  organizational  culture,  (2)  the  use  of  customer  research  methods  and  (3)  the  nature  of  the 

NSD  process.  A  possible  structure  for  the  three-term  model  suggested  by  these  propositions  is 

shown  in Figure  3.2. A customer-centric, proactive, innovative organization may be motivated  to 

use  customer  research  methods  in NSD,  especially  customer  engagement  methods  (ICE).  Both 

the  culture  and  the  use  of  methods  should  be  antecedents  of  success.  The  nature  of  the  NSD 

process  should  also  matter  -  a  formal  structure  and  iterative  process  should  both  be  positive 

antecedents  and may interact as antecedents. 

Figure 3.2: A grounded model of NSD  success 

More  Innovative \ 

NSD 
Success 

.. 

Process 

C Formal Qterativet* 

individual customer engagement  methods 

ICE: 
GCR:  grounded or constrained methods -  traditional market  research 


65 

The  nature  of  the  inputs  should  vary  with  the  innovativeness  of  the  NSD  project.  As 

illustrated  in Figure  3.2  as NSD  becomes  more  innovative,  customer  orientation  should  become 

the  most  important  cultural  measure,  the  use  of  customer  engagement  methods  should  be  more 

important  than the use of traditional market research techniques, and the iterativeness  of an NSD 

process will be more important than the degree of formal  structure in the process. 

This  effort  to  propose  an  integrated  model  for  NSD  success  is  the  climax  of  the  theory 

building for NSD  success from the grounded data. It is the logical conclusion to the discussion of 

antecedents  of success. If this chapter were a journal  article this would be a likely  stopping  point 

for  the  results,  but  some  other  interesting  themes  did  emerge  from  the  analysis  of  these  data. 

These  themes  are  collected  in three  sections,  (1) non-customer  origin  of NSD  innovation  ideas, 

(2)  non-customer  collaborators  in  NSD,  and  (3)  NSD  in  organizations  that  are  not  customer-

centric. 

J.  Other sources of NSD Ideas 

Training boundary  spanners to recognize what information  is important  and how to detect 

customer  needs  and  problems  when  interacting  with  users  was  a  part  of NSD  in  several  of  the 

organizations.  A  community  bank  made  training  and  communicating  with  salespersons  and 

customer  service  representatives  a  central  part  of  their  NSD  effort,  as  did  an  international 

microfinance  organization.  Another  bank  granted  customer  service  representatives  travel  and 

entertainment  funds  to  get  to  know  customers  better.  Customer  service  representatives  and  the 

sales  force  meet  with the  clients and may  see them using  services  at their  sites. In addition  they 

can gather important information  about the market and competitor promises. 

P3.22:  Participation  of  boundary  spanners,  especially  customer  service  representatives  and 

salespersons,  are key  to obtaining  user,  market,  and  competitor  information. 


66 

The  executive  of  the  cleaning  services  firm  noted  that  providing  "pure"  service  in  the 

field  means  that  the  service  provided  is  heterogeneous  and  likely  changing  each  time:  "...when 

we're  on  our  game  —  we  never  stand  still."  He  took  advantage  of  this  to  run  field  tests  and 

experiments  in  every  step  of  NSD,  ideation  and  pre-concept  through  launch.  But  he  was  also 

careful  to  make  sure  innovations  and  discoveries  from  his  sales  staff  and  customer  service 

persons  could  percolate  up  to  management.  This  same  principle  is  a  factor  in  the  already  noted 

efforts  by  the  microfinance  organization  and  community  bank  to  assure  communication  with 

boundary  spanners. 

P3.23:  Effective  communication  with  boundary  spanners,  especially  customer  service  reps  and 

salespersons  is key to recognizing  innovation  occurring  in the field. 

Several  subjects  pointed  to  the  importance  of  keeping  track  of  rejected  and  failed 

innovations.  Some  good  ideas may have been  considered before  their time. An  example  was  the 

newspaper  executive  who  had  launched  online  suburban  sites  to  complement  their  daily 

newspaper.  When  they  launched  the  service,  household  penetration  by  internet  providers  was 

low in most  of the  suburbs  and high  speed connections  were not even available. Not  surprisingly 

the recent re-launch of this failure  has been successful,  now that these conditions have  changed. 

P3.24:  Old,  or  formerly  rejected,  NSD  ideas  can  become  timely  because  of  a  change  in 

technology,  adoption  of complementary  services  or goods,  or firm  expertise. 

In  heavily  regulated  industries,  such  as  banking  or  investments,  regulatory  or  legal 

change  is  often  a  source  of  innovation.  A  community  banker  mentioned  remote  deposit  by 

commercial  clients  as  a  major  new  product  that  was  enabled  and  actually  encouraged  by 

regulator  actions.  A  vendor  to  investment  firms  indicated  that  constant  changes  in  regulatory 

requirements  and new paperwork  drove her  firm to move more of its activities  online, which  led 

to another burst of innovation. 

P3.25:  In  highly  regulated  industries,  legal  or  regulatory  action  is  often  a  source  of  ideas  for 

NSD. 


67 

K.  Vendor  Alliances 

The  manager  for  service  design  in  a  restaurant  chain  argued  that  R&D  spending  in 

services  is  systematically  understated  in  economic  statistics  because  much  of  the  expensive 

technology  innovation is done by vendors.  Specialized  software  and IT vendors develop  products 

for  service  industries and customize them when necessary. He believes that if this  spending  were 

accounted  for properly,  R&D  spending  in service  organizations  would be  closer to that  in  goods 

firms.  He believes that the explosion in IT innovation  forced  many  service  firms  to merely try to 

keep  up  with  technology  during  the  last  decade,  but  now  they  are  focusing  again  on  innovating 

and differentiating  their services: 

...innovations in service businesses have been outsourced to the vendors... They would 

put in a new IT system... that was innovation and it was done by the vendor,... it just 

gets charged to  the  supplier  at the  end of the  market  chain. I think  it's...  an unfair 

comparison... if you looked at the total R&D spending on a system basis... I'm not sure 

it's that much smaller... 

service innovation... [is] only starting]  ... most innovation  has been driven  by goods 

innovation and through vendors. It was outsourced. 

A  number  of  subjects  indicated  the  importance  of  vendors  to  their  NSD  efforts.  The 

Product  Manager  at the cable company noted that technology  advancement  and even  technology 

alliances were handled by an industry association.  The association  set standards  and offered  new 

technology.  The  members  of the  association  or  consortium  -  hated  competitors  all -  accept  the 

new  standards,  but  choose  what  technology  to  use  and  when  to  employ  it.  He  said  that  his 

company worked hard to differentiate  services derived from the new technologies. 

P3.26:  When  the  cost  of  technological  development 

is  high,  vendor  and  even  conipetitor 

alliances  are  important  in new service  development. 


68 

If a key component of innovation is being outsourced, the vendor effectively  becomes a 

partner  in NSD. For  example,  a  community  bank  described  itself  as  "dependent"  on vendors. 

Therefore the choice of vendor by this bank is vital to successful  innovation: 

We're a follower.  So while we're rolling out... new services all the time, we're being 

vendor-dependent...we  went  through  then  a series  of  interviews  with  providers  to 

select the  provider that we thought would best suit what  our customer  needs are... 

the vendor played a key role... 

P3.27:  Effectively selecting and managing vendors are key to a successful NSD effort. 

The  cable  company  notes that  industry  standards  are  essential  in a networked  business 

but yet seeks to differentiate  their offering  of a standard service: 

Now the question is... how do we work closely with customers to find out what's going 

to differentiate our broadband service from everyone else's service? 

The  community  bank  stressed  that  even  though  their  technology  is  all  outsourced,  the 

success of the new service will depend on how they differentiate  themselves in their delivery to 

the customers. They seek to: 

...differentiate ourselves in what we surround the product with, how we service it 

P3.28:  The  "service wrapper"  around a  new  generic service product  or  technology from  a 

vendor is the differentiator for  the new service and key to its success. 

L.  Doctor-centric, not User-centric 

Governmental,  quasi-governmental,  and  not-for-profit  organizations  are  important 

components  of the  service  sector.  Social  scientists  have noted  that  a unique  feature  of the US 

economy and US capitalism is the size and vitality of its non-governmental, not-for-profit  sector 


69 

(Drucker  1992; Putnam 2003).  Government  services  are the  second  largest  single  subsector  in 

the BEA-Commerce Department classification of services shown in Table 3.2. 

Included  among  the  twenty  seven  organizations  represented  in  this  study  were  two 

universities,  two  not-for-profit  hospitals,  a  not-for-profit  industry  association,  a  government 

agency  involved  in  medical  research,  and  two  social  service  non-government  organizations 

("NGOs").  Before  the  interviews  and  the  subsequent  analysis,  I  wondered  if  these  eight 

organizations  -  or  perhaps  seven,  excluding  the  industry  association  -  would  form  an  outlier 

subset for NSD efforts. 

However, the two  social  service NGOs had NSD efforts  and priorities  indistinguishable 

from their for-profit  counterparts. This is consistent with a recent  study of six NGOs that  found 

their NSD  efforts  to be  similar to the process  in for-profit  organizations  (Barczak  et al. 2006). 

Both of the NGOs in this study were very user-centric and worked hard to understand their users' 

needs  and  problems  so  they  can  create  new  services  to  fit  their  needs.  Both  had  recently 

introduced really new or radical new services to serve user needs: the micro-finance  organization 

had developed new classes of financial  services for third world entrepreneurs; and the new social 

service NGO  had  developed  a  "tough  love" program  with  the  potential  to  house  a  significant 

number of the US homeless. In Rebecca's words, the idea for non-lending banking services came 

from customer observation: 

...it was pretty much customer demand. I mean what we were hearing from our clients 

and then  what  we  saw was that  they  needed... it  was very  much from  our clients, 

listening to our clients and seeing this kind of thing that told  us that  we  needed to 

figure out a way to offer this service because otherwise all the profits that they make 

from the businesses they were starting were  minimized because they had to pay for 

these services or their profits aren't safe. 


70 

In developing the innovative new services both NGOs had tested the services  extensively, 

used  prototypes  and pilot  tests,  and  made  major  changes  to  the  service  as  a result  of  user  input 

and  experience.  The  international  micro-finance  NGO  has  instituted  formal  ongoing  methods  to 

actively  gather  customer  ideas  through  surveys,  by  training  their  loan  officers  to  recognize 

problems  and  needs,  and  through  one-on-one  interviews  with  users  and  executives  involved  in 

the organization's NSD  effort. 

The  industry  association  was  customer-centric  with  an  NSD  process  that  closely 

resembled  the  for-profit  service  firms  in  the  study.  Like  many  of  those  organizations  in  this 

study,  the  association  was  trying  to  formalize  its  NSD  program  to  some  extent.  The  only 

governmental  agency  among  the  subjects  also  fit  in with  the  service  firms,  likely  because  of  its 

mission -  to enhance the innovativeness in the health care industry. 

However,  the  two  universities  were  outliers  from  the  other  organizations  in  the  study. 

Both  subjects  I  interviewed  had  succeeded  in  launching  new  innovative  programs  at  their 

universities,  but  both  had  done  so  as  outside  "product  champions,"  brought  into  the  university 

after  a  career  in  business,  who  could  be  indifferent  to  the  politics  of  their  organizations.  They 

described  eerily  similar  organizational  cultures  that  were  conservative  and  generally  hostile  to 

innovation.  Both  university  innovators  raised  governance  issues,  claiming  that  at  their  schools 

either  the  professors  themselves  or  a  super-group  of  their  peers,  such  as  accreditors,  journal 

editors  and  professional  organizations,  were  effectively 

the  real  powers  in  charge  of  the 

universities.  Professors  eagerly  defended  the  turf  that  they  had  struggled  through  the  tenure 

process  to  own,  so  change  was  difficult.  When  innovation  occurred  it  might  be  portrayed  as  a 

gain  for  students,  but  in  order  to  get  traction  an  innovation  must  have  clear  benefits  for  the 

faculty,  such  as  allowing  them  to  teach  in  the  area  they  research  or  attracting  funds  to  support 


71 

them or their research. There was no NSD process; any innovation was ad-hoc. The universities 

were not user-centric, the kindest description would be  end-user-indifferent. 

One of the university innovators I interviewed described the very difficult  effort  to start a 

new specialized Masters of Finance degree within a university that already offered  an MBA. He 

was a well known executive from the securities business. As an advisor to the business school he 

had  come  to  the  university  with  the  suggestion  for  a  type  of  training  and  master's  degree 

program  focusing  on mathematical  finance  and practical real world applications that he felt  his 

former industry would appreciate and value: 

[We]... did this market research and demonstrated that there was quite a big market... 

we  demonstrated  the  need  so then  I  talked  to  C-  who  was  sort  of  running  [the 

effort]...he  never got along very well with...[the faculty]...that was a recurring theme. 

Conflict  between this program  & the  business school faculty got to  be exacerbated. 

So school got started...the  idea was mine, C-  was the implementer...l  enrolled in the 

first set of classes; I was going to take calculus...lt was a good idea and there was a 

need. And initially...there  weren't  many entrance  requirements.  Some  people could 

flunk out because they couldn't do the math. It was a Master's program; you'd get a 

Master's in Applied Finance. [One day the Dean said]... why don't you come over and 

run the school personally and maybe you could [also] teach... I got really interested in 

teaching; it turned out I liked to teach. I never taught before. I became a teacher and I 

became a pretty good teacher. 

[The interaction with the  business faculty] got worse and worse... They became...very 

jealous of the school because the [new] program got bigger and more successful and it 

got more successful financially... we had increasing enrollments and we started having 

entrance requirements. People had to take tests to get in. [An] economic driver of the 

school was the professors... I could get people from businesses who had PhD's or law 

degrees...  and...teaching  experience...  Adjuncts.  And  they  were  good  and  if  they 

weren't good we got rid of them. And the school has to pay a professor $25,000 [per 

class]; I was paying $5,000 to get the same thing done, arguably much better. 


72 

[So]... the  problem  was  we  were  producing  a  lot  more  profits  for  the  school... the 

traditional  business  school  [faculty]  became  very  jealous  and  resentful...  they  said 

'we're going to have trouble getting accredited'... when the accreditors came the best 

thing about the school from their standpoint was [our program  which]...  was new and 

innovative, different and growing... So the school did get accredited. That [praise from 

the accreditors]... really exacerbated the conflicts... that got to be in a pain in the ass... 

... the way that the accreditors looked at it proved the value of what we were doing... 

So then  there  got  to  be  a  point  where  the  faculty  voted  that  they  wouldn't  give 

[business school] degrees to our students. They could control who got a degree and 

they  said  [no  degree]  unless you  let  us decide  to  pick  the  faculty  and  design  the 

courses and basically run the school... And this is why I left because I kind of won the 

battle; and lost the war. It got to be too unpleasant... 

This program (1) had the support of the president of the university, (2) was valued in the 

business community, (3) was highly profitable, (4) was cited as a reason for the MBA program at 

the business school achieving accreditation by the AASCB, and (5) enjoyed growing enrollment, 

but was cut loose  from  the business  school. The university president  arranged  for  graduates to 

receive a degree from the university but not the business school. According to the subject  ~  and 

several other persons involved with whom I conducted short interviews — the separation from the 

business  school caused confusion  that was made worse by (1) no further  involvement  from  the 

business  school  faculty  and  (2)  the  MBA  program  introducing  a  specialization  that  sounded 

similar to the applied finance masters. In addition there was a consensus among the persons that I 

talked  with  that  the  new  program  head,  promoted  from  within,  was  not  as  enthusiastic  and 

devoted to the program as the subject. The program was discontinued several years later. 

From  the  faculty's  point  of  view  there  were  several  major  problems  with  this  applied 

finance  degree: the program was run by a business person recruited by the president  and dean, 


73 

half  of  the  courses  were  taught  by  adjuncts,  nearly  half  of  the  permanent  faculty  were  from 

outside  the  business  school,  and to  some  extent  it potentially  competed  with  and  overshadowed 

their  traditional  MBA  program.  These  bureaucratic  issues  were  more  important  to  the  faculty 

than the success of the program as measured by profitability,  growth  in enrollment,  "halo  effect" 

benefit  to  the  business  school,  and  business  community  hiring  of  graduates.  Several  of  the 

interviewees  mentioned that the MBA program  is having  enrollment  and  funding  difficulties  and 

speculated  that  the  next  AASCB  review  may  not  be  as  favorable,  now  that  the  innovative 

program that they highlighted was gone. 

The  other university  innovator  interviewed was  also an outsider brought  in to  start  a new 

program that  cut across  departmental  lines. He  faced  the  same  sorts  of conflicts  with  established 

departments  with his  "Advertizing  Media" program  faced  by the head  of the  "Applied  Finance" 

effort.  In this  case the program  survived,  likely  because  his university  is less traditional:  it  is  an 

"open"  urban  university  that  has  traditionally  used  more  than  50% adjunct  professors  and has  a 

tradition  of industry-focused  programs  founded  by experienced  outsiders. In this more  favorable 

environment  he  described  bureaucratic  warfare  similar  but  less  toxic  than  the  warfare  that  shut 

down the applied finance  program. 

Some  of  these  same  bureaucratic  barriers  to  service  innovation  were  apparent  in 

discussions  of  innovation  in hospitals. According  to Adrian,  a  senior  executive  of  a  government 

agency  to  encourage  healthcare  innovation,  when  discussing  innovation  at  hospitals  it  is 

important to differentiate  types of  innovation: 

you  want  to  make  a  distinction  between  [1]  clinical  innovation...,  [2]  general 

management innovation, and [3] service innovation... there's a huge amount of clinical 

innovation  going on all the  time... Second  one...  management  innovation  has been 

responsive  to  external  pressures,  like  changes  in  -  that  are  payment  regulations, 

changes in the competitive environment, there's a lot of shifting around of that sort. 


74 

You're interested in stuff that improves the service to the client... one would have to 

say that one of the main reasons that there hasn't been a lot of service innovation-

has been that hospitals are very,  very provider-centered...their assumption  has been 

that the public will beat a path to excellent clinical work. 

The  two  not-for-profit  hospitals  in  the  study  were  carefully  chosen.  They  were  both 

nationally-recognized  as innovators in the industry. Both fit reasonably  well into the user-centric, 

iterative  model  of  the  service  firms  of  this  study;  but  from  their  discussions  this  user-centric 

culture make  them outliers  in their industry.  The executives  of both hospitals that  participated,  a 

not-for-profit  community  hospital  and  a  nationally-known  large  urban  not-for-profit,  relayed 

stories of how easy it was to be considered  an innovative hospital  since most of their  competitors 

were  far  from  innovative.  Their  criticism  of  NSD  at  typical  not-for-profit  hospitals  was 

consistent  with the analysis  from  a management  consultant  who  specialized  in healthcare  as well 

as  some  reflections  from  the  executive  of  the  government  agency  attempting  to  encourage 

healthcare  innovation. Interestingly  the criticism was also consistent  with the analysis of the  data 

about NSD at universities  from the university change  champions: 

•  The management  of NSD and all other management  is  "doctor-centric", 

• 

• 

Innovation is not focused  on the needs of end-users, 

"Technology innovation" is high within domains, but "service innovation" is not. 

These  conversations  indicated  that hospitals  and universities  are centers  of research  and  employ 

the  newest  technology  and  thought.  But  since  they  are both  "doctor-centric"  in their  innovation 

priorities,  innovation  to  make  end-users  more  comfortable,  satisfied  or  better  educated  are 

neglected  relative  to  innovations  that  meet  the  doctors'  needs.  This  is  especially  true  for 

innovations that cut across traditional domains or silos. 


75 

Adrian,  from  the  government  agency,  recommended  that  I  read  what  Mintzberg  had  to 

say  about  "professional  organizations."  Mintzberg  defines  a  professional  bureaucracy  that  is 

most  common  in  universities,  hospitals,  school  systems,  social  work  agencies,  as  well  as  some 

specialized  private partnerships  such  as accounting  firms  (Mintzberg  1989; Mintzberg  1979). In 

such organizations  the  administrators  are  often  weak  and the  collective  will  of the  professionals 

is  the  dominant  force.  Technology  is  sophisticated  but  management  and  strategy  are  not 

(Mintzberg  1979,  p.  367).  A  professional  bureaucracy  is  inflexible,  ill-suited  to  innovations, 

especially  innovations  that  cut  across  boundaries  in the  organization  (Mintzberg  1979, p.  375). 

"...The  reluctance  of  the  professionals  to  cooperate  with  each  other  and  the  complexity  of  the 

collective  [management]  processes  can  produce  resistance  to  innovation"  (Mintzberg  1989,  p. 

190). Innovations  most  useful  to  users  cut  across bureaucratic  barriers  or  areas  of  expertise  and 

are  therefore  fought  by  the  bureaucracy.  Again,  the  focus  on  the  professional  rather  than  the 

user/client  leads to specialized technological  advances but other user-oriented  innovations  suffer. 

Two  final  propositions  that deserve  further  study,  given the  importance  of education  and 

healthcare to the US and world economies are: 

P3.29:  Major  segments  of  the  service  economy—healthcare,  higher  education,  and  perhaps 
other  governmental,  social  service  or  "professional  organizations  "—may  be  resistant  to 
innovation  that  is focused  on the client  and/or  cuts across  bureaucratic  barriers. 

P3.30:  Healthcare  and  higher  education  organizations  often  treat  their  "doctors"  as  customers 
"technologically 

and  therefore  are  not  "end-user-centric."  As  a  result  they  may  be 
innovative  " but not  "service  innovative. " 

In the following  section all of the propositions that emerged  in this study are  summarized 

in Table 3.6. 


M.  Summary  of  Propositions 

Table  3.6: A  Summary  of  Propositions 

76 

P3.1:  New  Service  Development  (NSD)  differs from  NPD for  goods. 

NSD  versus  NPD  for  goods 

P3.1a:  NSD  is more  unique  (from goods  NPD)  the smaller  the tangible  component  of the  service. 

P3.2:  NSD  is a less formal  or structured  process  than NPD for  goods. 

P3.3: 

In studying  NPD  researchers  separate  process  innovation from  NPD; process 
cannot  be separated from  NSD  and  may  be the essence  of NSD for  some  organizations. 

innovation 

NSD  is  customer-centric 

P3.4: 

Identifying  customer  needs  or problems  is the key  to obtaining  good  NSD  ideas. 

P3.5:  New  ideas  are  more  often  discovered  by  observing  clients  working  or  solving  problems 

rather  than  by clients  explicitly  articulating  their  needs  or directly  providing  ideas. 

P3.6:  A focus  on sticky  or  contextual  information  and future  needs  will  be  more  important  the 

more  innovative  the new  service. 

P3.7:  Customer  Orientation  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

P3.8:  Customer  Orientation  with  a focus  on  sticky  or  contextual 

information  and 

future 

needs  of  users  is  an  antecedent  of  NSD  success  for  more  innovative 

services. 

P3.9:  An  innovative  culture  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

P3.10:  Customer  orientation  will  be  more  important  than  an  innovative  culture  in  predicting 

NSD  success. 

The  tools  to  reach  customers 

P3.ll:  Use of  market  research  methods  to  understand  customer  needs  is an  antecedent  of  NSD 

success. 

P3.12:  Market  research  methods  that  engage  a  customer  with  the  service  or  in  one-on-one 
discussions  and facilitate  open-ended  discussion  will  have  more  effect  than  other  market 
research  methods for  more  innovative  or radical  new  services. 

P3.13:  Experiential  learning  through  prototyping,  Beta-testing,  experimenting,  and  after-launch 

changes  are  antecedents  of NSD  success. 

P3.14:  Customer  collaboration 

ideation, 
concept  testing,  alpha-  and  beta-  testing,  development,  prototyping  and  launch  is  an 
antecedent  of NSD  success. 

in  all  phases  of  new  service  development, 

including 


77 

Additional antecedents of success: NSD Process 

P3.15:  NSD  is  often  evolutionary;  when  NSD  is  evolutionary  a  series  of  small  steps  will 

aggregate  into a significant 

innovation. 

P3.16:  New  services  should  be  designed  and planned  to  be flexible  and  to  adapt  to  experience 

and  customer feedback;  such planned  flexibility  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

P3.17:  An  iterative  process—breaking  NSD  into  small  pieces,  making  swift  changes  to  respond 

to test results  and prototyping—is  an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

P3.18:  A formal  process  is an antecedent  of NSD  success for  new  services. 

P3.19:  A formal  NPD process  will  be a stronger  antecedent  of NSD  success  if the process  is  also 

iterative. 

Modeling NSD Success 

P3.20:  A  phased  model  of  NSD  success  antecedents  beginning  with  (1)  customer  orientation, 
proceeding  through  a process  that  (2) balances formal  structure  and  iterativeness  and  (3) 
using MR  tools,  especially  one-on-one  engaging  tools,  will predict  NSD  success. 

P3.21:  The  model from  P20  will  change  as  NSD  projects  become  more  innovative:  specifically 
(1) customer  orientation  must  be  more forward-looking  and  engaging,  (2)  the process  of 
NSD  must  be iterative  —formal  structure  less  important  and  (3) market  research  methods 
more  one-on-one  and  engaging. 

NSD Ideas 

P3.22: 

P3.23: 

Boundary  spanners,  especially  (a) customer  service  reps  and  (b) salespersons,  are  key  to 
obtaining  user,  market,  and  competitor 

information. 

Effective  communication  with  boundary  spanners,  especially  customer  service  reps  and 
salespersons  is key  to recognizing  innovation  occurring  in the  field. 

P3.24: 

Old, or formerly  rejected,  NSD  ideas  can become  timely  because  of a change  in 
technology,  adoption  of complementary  services  or goods,  or  firm  expertise. 

P3.25: 

In highly  regulated  industries,  legal  or regulatory  action  is often  a source  of NSD  ideas,  f 

Process  Propositions 

P3.26: 

P3.27: 
P3.28: 

When  the  cost  of  technological  development 
alliances  are  important 

in  new  service 

development. 

is high,  vendor  and  even 

competitor 

Effectively  selecting  and  managing  vendors  are  key  to  a successful  NSD  effort. 

The  "service  wrapper"  around  a  new  generic  service  product  or  technology  from  a 
vendor  is the differentiator  for  the new service  and  key to its  success. 

NSD  for Healthcare,  Government,  and  Education 

P3.29:  Major  segments  of  the  service  economy—healthcare,  higher  education,  and  perhaps 
other  "professional  organizations  "—may be resistant  to innovation  that  is focused  on  the 
client  and/or  cuts across  bureaucratic  barriers.. 

P3.30:  Healthcare  and  higher  education  organizations  often  treat  their  "doctors"  as  customers 
"technologically 

and  therefore  are  not  "end-user-centric."  As  a  result  they  may  be 
innovative  " but not  "service  innovative.  " 


78 

N.  Conclusion 

After  a  year  of  carefully  selecting,  scheduling  and  interviewing  executives  of  twenty 

seven  diverse  service  organizations,  followed  by  months  of  transcribing  and  coding  sixty  hours 

of  discussions,  and  seeking  themes  and theory  by  studying  the words  with  sensitivity  and  using 

software  to compare, contrast, and combine codes, this study has produced  Table 3.6, a two-page 

summary  of  propositions  about  the  process  of  new  service  development.  Some  of  these 

propositions,  like  the  final  two  on  healthcare,  government,  and  education  are  effectively  a  call 

for  further  research in a specialized area of new service development. Other propositions, like the 

antecedents  of  NSD  success  whose  numbers  are  shown  in  bold,  are  ready  to  be  formulated  as 

hypotheses  and  tested  with  data  collected  on  service  innovation.  Individually,  and  as  a  group, 

these propositions  contribute to knowledge of new service  development. 

New  service  development  is  different  than  NPD  for  goods.  This  was  evident  from  the 

descriptions  of how  new  services  came  into being.  The  iterative, experimental,  customer-centric 

efforts  described by the executives involved in new service development  did not fit the models of 

NPD that were primary  derived from  goods firms  (Henard  and Szymanski 2001; Page and  Schirr 

2008). Executives who had had previous  experience  confirmed  the difference.  In the words  of an 

senior  executive  of  a  cleaning,  exterminating,  and  lawn  care  firm,  "I've  seen...  how  traditional 

consumer  companies,  as  well  as  a  lot  of  B2B  [goods]  companies,  constantly  are  innovating...  I 

know  what those  models  look  like, and  I can assure you the  service  industry  is nothing  like  any 

of those." 

The  central  idea  about  new  service  development  that  emerged  from  the  data  is that  it  is 

all  about  the  customers.  Certainly  customer  input,  understanding  the  voice  of  the  customer, 

marketing  research,  and  testing  have  been  shown  to  be  important  to  successful  NPD  (Cooper 

1999;  Cooper  2001; Griffin  and  Hauser  1993). But  for  the  executives  interviewed  in this  study 


79 

the  customer  is  THE  issue  for  NSD:  customer  knowledge  and  involvement  in  NSD  is  a  near-

obsession.  These  executives  work  to  change  corporate  culture,  to  make  their  firms  more 

customer-oriented.  They train  salespersons  and customer representatives to recognize  and  collect 

customer  information  and then work to  foster  communication  with the boundary  spanners.  They 

conduct  field  studies  before  a  concept  is  fleshed  out  and  then  conduct  extensive  alpha  and  beta 

testing  of 

the  developing  new  product/service.  Managers 

involved 

in  NSD  plan 

for 

communication  with  users  during  the  early  launch  period  and  build  flexibility 

into  the 

product/service  so that the offering  can be adapted to the information  collected. 

The  central  theory  that  NSD  is  all  about  the  customers  and  some  insights  into  tradeoffs 

between  iterativeness  and  structure  in  the  NSD  process  led  to  a  culture-tools-process  model 

predicting  NSD  success.  This  model  differs  from  the  organization-tools-process  models  that 

were  discussed  in  the  literature  review  (Froehle  et  al.  2000;  Hull  2004).  The  culture-tools-

process  model  is grounded  from  the  study of  service  firms,  not borrowed  from  NPD-goods.  It  is 

also more customer-centric:  a formal  process  should also be iterative to allow user feedback;  the 

tools  used  are  customer  engagement  tools, not  internal  IT;  and  customer  orientation  substitutes 

for  multi-functional  teams.  The  culture-tools-process  model  of  NSD  success,  as  well  as  the 

individual  antecedents  of NSD  success, is tested in the quantitative  studies  of Chapter Five,  later 

in this  dissertation. 

Other  themes  that  emerged  from  the  data  of  this  study  merit  further  examination.  Study 

of  the  effectiveness  of  boundary  spanning  employees  on  the  success  of  the  NSD  effort  could 

have important  management  implications. The role of vendors  and open  innovation  (Chesbrough 

2003)  in  services  will  likely  prove  to  be  a  fruitful  area  of  study.  Given  the  importance  of 

healthcare  and  higher  education  a  more  complete  understanding  of  their  problems  in  service 

innovation and potential solutions would have important public policy  implications. 


IV.  User Collaboration in New Service Development 

in  Web-based B2B  Financial  Services  Before  and After  Migration  to the  Internet 

A.  Summary 

A case study of new  service development  of B2B  financial  services that have migrated  to 

the  Internet  shows  evidence  of  extensive  customer  collaboration  in  new  service  development. 

Customer  collaboration  in  development  increased  as  the  services  migrated  to  the  Internet.  The 

subjects  indicate that the increased customer collaboration has been vital to the NSD  effort. 

The  case  studies  provide  insight  into:  customer  collaboration  for  NSD,  how  such 

collaboration  is facilitated  by service providers, and a streamlined process  of NSD  for  web-based 

B2B  services.  The  central  themes  of the  study  are  (1)  customer  involvement  in NSD,  (2)  a  new 

iterative  process  for  development,  and  (3) using  the  iterative process  to  further  involve  users  in 

new service  development. 

Benefits  to producers  and  customers  from  collaboration  in the  development  of new  B2B 

services,  evident  in  the  earlier  Alam  (2002)  study,  are  replicated.  There  is  also  support  for 

Alam's  proposal  that  the  process  of  collaboration  in NSD  can  increase  the  customer's  positive 

affect  for  the  service  and  the  provider  firm.  A  series  of  propositions  about  NSD  and  the 

migration of B2B  services online emerged in the  study. 

After  an  introduction  and  discussion  of  subjects  and  methods,  cases  are  presented  in 

serial fashion to provide insight into each case. 

80 


81 

B.  Opening Vignette 

A senior marketing  executive  for  a global  financial  derivatives  exchange  headquartered 

outside the U.S. informed  me that:  (1) customer  collaboration  is vital to effective  new product 

development  in  his  industry  and  that  (2)  the  migration  of  trading  online  has  made  such 

collaboration both more common and more effective  in his exchange. He described how even an 

unsuccessful  new product launch advanced customer collaboration among long term members of 

the exchange.  This is  significant:  the  long-time  members he was referring  to were actually co-

owners of the exchange before  it went public and began trading its product or contracts online. 

As co-owners they should have had a strong incentive to help the exchange innovate and grow, 

but only after the products began trading online, have they become involved in collaboration  for 

the development of new services. Since the migration of trading online, collaboration with users 

is: 

"much better. You knew your customers better, even... members, because you were 

productively  interacting...  on  issues  related  to  their  business...  their  back  office 

systems, into the front end trading.., certain members had different  requirements in 

terms of immediacy... What can we do to service them? So if suddenly you... interact 

with your members on a basis of something that is commercially important to them. 

So...  whether  you  define  your  customers  as your  members  or  as your  end users... 

[there is more collaboration]... Much more... I cannot tell you the new lines [services] 

we've generated just from IT relationships now. 

You know, we haven't spoken about  [product x]...  -  which failed... the single biggest 

benefit  of  [product  x], and / knew it  before we launched it,  is that  it  allowed  us to 

interact  with  a whole  group  of traders  in the  US that  we  hadn't  in the  past -on a 

productive commercial basis. And the minute you establish that relationship, you can 

maintain  it. And it's helped  us immensely  in terms of growing  [and developing new 

products  such  as  product  y].  You  know,  sometimes,  the  dividends  don't  pay  off 

immediately, but they do pay off." 


82 

The migration of the derivative contracts to the Internet has not only helped involve the 

traditional membership, it has also involved a new set of users in NSD at the exchange. Even an 

unsuccessful  new service effort  can be beneficial if it introduces new users into the NSD process. 

This  is  representative  of  the  discussions  with  the  people  from  the  eight  organizations  that 

participated in this case study. The migration of a service to the internet changed the new service 

development process: users and customers became even more involved in NSD  efforts. 

The migration of a service to the Internet changed the new service development process 

of the eight  firms  involved  in the  study. This conclusion was obvious in the early part of each 

interview  when  I  first  asked  a  subject  to  describe  in  detail  a recent  new  service  development 

effort  and then  followed  by asking them to  describe  a specific  project  before  the  services  had 

become  web-based.  The  key  informants  themselves  clearly  believed  that  the  process  had 

changed from the migration of the services to the Internet. When I asked them later in the  first 

interview to describe how the new  service  development process had changed  for  their  services 

after  they become web-based,  seven of the eight were quick to cite differences.  They had each 

thought about the differences  beforehand  and believed that the process had indeed been  affected 

by the migration. As will be discussed, even the lone dissenter provided evidence of change. 

The third  research  question  of this  dissertation  is the key  question  of this  study: How 

does the migration of services to web-delivery affect customer collaboration in new service 

development? To  not  bias  the  discussions,  I  initially  focused  on  how  NSD  in  general  had 

changed.  A  major  theme  was  that  the  process  has  become  less  structured  or  formal.  This  is 

interesting  because  in the grounded research  from  Chapter  Three, replicated  in these  cases, all 

services  — even  non-Internet  services  — have  less  formal  structure  in  the  new  service 

development  process  than  is portrayed  in the  literature  studying NPD  for  goods  development. 

Yet a further decrease in the structure and formality of the process was a universal theme. 


83 

C.  Introduction 

At the  opening  of the  grounded  study  of NSD  in Chapter  Three, I cited Alam's  (2002, p. 

250)  comment  "Although  there  has  been  a  resurgence  of  academic  and practitioner  interest  in 

new  service  development,  there  is a dearth  of  research  on  how  users  are  involved.  " This  article 

contributes to our understanding  of user involvement  in new service  development  through  an in-

depth  study  of  collaboration  in  the  development  of  new  web-based  B2B  financial  services.  In 

this  article  "collaboration"  indicates  active  customer  or  user  participation,  ranging  from 

suggesting  new  services  to  working  with  suppliers  to  access  tacit  knowledge  or  sticky 

information  about using the service to actual co-development  of new  services. 

Alam (2002) used case studies to examine "user involvement  in new  business-to-business 

service  development  in  the  financial  services  industry"  (p.251).  The  data  in  his  study  were 

collected  a  year  or  two  before  institutional  banking  services  began  to  be  converted  to  web-

delivered  services.  This  study  builds  on  Alam's  earlier  study  by  examining  eight  B2B  financial 

service  firms  that  have  moved  key  services  to  the  Internet,  focusing  on user  involvement  in  the 

ongoing development  of the web-based  services. 

1. 

Structure of this  Chapter 

Unlike  quantitative  or  grounded  studies,  which 

typically  begin  with  an 

introduction  to  the  research  question,  research  methods,  and  data,  a  case  study  will  often  start 

with  an  "entry  vignette"  to  ease  readers  into  the  environment  being  described  (Creswell  1998; 

Stake  1995). This chapter proceeds with a literature review, methods  discussion,  and a review  of 

the  subjects  and  data. Finally  eight  cases  are presented  in five  sections  -  combining  appropriate 

subjects — with relevant propositions. 


84 

D.  Literature  Review 

Three  groups  "must  be  managed  in  an  effective  [service]  development  project:  (1) the 

development  staff;  (2)  the  customer-contact  staff;  and  (3)  the  customers"  (Johne  and  Storey 

1998, p. 203) and "The more  involvement  by customers  the better"  (Johne  and  Storey  1998,  p. 

204). A number  of studies have  found  customer  collaboration  in new service  development  to be 

effective.  An  early  study  of  software  development  found  "extensive  user  involvement  in  the 

innovation  process  with  significant  participation  at  every  stage"  (Voss  1985,  p.  117). 

Experimentation,  facilitated  by tool kits and simulation  tools, allows  customers  and producers to 

speed NPD and increase  iterations  in the development  process  (Thomke  2003).  A user's  direct 

need  for  the  improvements,  enjoyment  of  the  work,  and  enhanced  reputation  from  making 

contributions  were  found  to  be  motivations  for  user  collaboration  in  even  mundane  tasks 

(Lakhani  and  von  Hippel  2002).  Two  experiments  found  that  service  innovations  from  users 

were more creative and useful  (Kristensson et al. 2002; Magnusson 2003). 

1.  NSD in Financial  Services 

Several  factors  not  cited  as  leading  factors  in  the  traditional  NPD  literature, 

including  a  "customer-focused"  development  process  and  excellent  customer  communications 

during  launch,  clearly  differentiated  successful  new  retail  and  institutional  financial  services 

(Cooper et al. 1994). Another  factor rarely mentioned in new product  development  literature, the 

role of service  delivery people or customer  service  reps, was key to new service  success  (Storey 

and  Easingwood  1996).  Two  studies  of  success  factors  in  institutional  financial  services 

supported these results (de Brentani  1995; de Brentani and Cooper  1992). 

Alam  (2002)  identified  six objectives  for user  involvement  in new service  development: 

(1)  a  better  new  service  that  matches  customer  needs;  (2)  reduced  development  time;  (3) 

facilitate  user  education  about  new services;  (4) rapid  diffusion  of innovations;  (5) good  public 


85 

relations; and  (6) assist a long-term relationship  with  clients  (p.257). The key role  of a  customer 

as  co-producer  of  a  service  (Grove  and  Fisk  1983)  affects  the  success  of  the  service  event  and 

can  lead  to  a  stronger  producer-customer  relationship  (Rodie  and  Kleine  2000).  Collaboration 

strengthens  customer relations by developing  customer-friendly  products  (Lilien et al. 2002; von 

Hippel  1978).  Alam's  objectives  (5)  &  (6)  suggest  that  the process  of  user  involvement  may 

enhance relationships. 

A  surprising  finding  of  Alam  (2002)  is  that  despite  the  noted  differences  between 

services  and  goods  and  the  importance  of  customer  collaboration  observed  in  NSD  in  the 

subjects, the process tracked very well to phased processes, such as Stage-Gate®  (Cooper  1990), 

which  have  been  developed  primarily  from  goods  producers.  In  fact  he  identified  ten  stages  of 

NSD  in  the  banks  he  studied.  Alam  (2002)  called  for  further  study  to  generalize  his  findings 

globally,  noting  that  12 Australian  banks may  not be  representative  of NSD  in banks. In  private 

correspondence  with  me  Alam  indicated  that  he  believed  from  his  observations  that  the 

Australian  banks  he  interviewed  are  likely  to  be  more  bureaucratic  and  enthusiastic  about 

process  controls  than  their  American  counterparts.  As  noted,  Alam  collected  his  data  before 

1999, before  B2B banking  services were generally  web-based. 

2.  Self-Service  Technology  ("SST") 

A  study of technology  infusion  in service encounters  indicated  that change  can be 

positive  if producers  "closely  involve  customers  in the design process" (Bitner  et al. 2000).  The 

internet  is  a  self-service  technology  ("SST"),  it  enables  users  to  use  a  service  without  direct 

interaction  with  another person:  its growth  has  accelerated  self-service  development  and  helped 

firms  improve  employee  communication,  forge  strategic  alliances  and  strengthen  relationships 

with  customers  (Parasuraman  and  Zinkhan  2002).  Enhanced  communication  facilitates  testing 

prototypes  (Dahan  and  Srinivasan  2000).  Citing  this  article—and  six  others—a  study  asserts  that 


86 

"past research has already  shown how the Internet can be used in earlier and later stages of the 

NPD process" (Ozer 2004, p. 355). 

"Co-opting  Customer  Competence"  shows  that  the  internet  facilitates  tapping  customer 

"knowledge and skills..., willingness to learn and experiment, and  ...active dialogue" (Prahalad 

and Ramaswamy  2000, p.  80). By  observing the  "dialogues" between  potential  customers  and 

"virtual advisors," unmet customer needs could be cheaply identified,  tapping their competence 

without their awareness (Urban and Hauser 2004). I was sensitive to indications whether these 

financial  service firms employed these "co-opting" methods. 

In summary, little is known about how NSD practices change after  a service migrates to 

the  Internet.  Because  the  Internet  facilitates  communication  as  well  as  simulation  and 

prototyping,  it  seems  likely  that  customer  involvement  may  be  enhanced  after  the  migration 

and/or that the process may become more experimental or experiential. Certainly stories from the 

popular press about innovation activities for Internet firms suggest that an iterative, experimental 

approach to  innovation  dominates: "many  crummy  trials beat  deep thinking" (Fogg  2008) and 

"the cost of trying is lower than the cost of analyzing" (Shirky 2008). Both Fogg and Shirky are 

referencing  networking businesses on the Internet, a new business  category  created by the new 

medium. The change in NSD practices in conservative, established B2B financial  services should 

provide additional insight into the effect  of migration to the Internet on service innovation. 

E.  The Study 

A  review  of  the  literature  suggests  that  web-based  institutional  financial  service 

development  should  foster  collaboration  in NSD. This  study  examines  service  development  of 

institutional  web-based  financial  services, focusing  on changes in the new service  development 

process  after  the  B2B  service  becomes  web-delivered.  Following  the  case  study  methodology 


87 

suggested  by  Eisenhardt  (1989),  theories  from  the  literature  review  will  not  frame  the  analysis, 

but  key  variables  and  constructs  from  the  literature  will  be  observed  or  sought.  Such  constructs 

include:  Web-based  communication  and  "sticky  information";  Iterative  processes;  new  service 

development  phases  or  stages,  customer  collaboration  and  service  provider-customer 

relationships; Lead Users, and User Toolkits. 

To explore  the new  service  development  process  in institutional  online  financial  services 

this  study  examines  case  studies  of  leading  providers  of  five  B2B  financial  services  offered  by 

eight  different  firms.  This  study  focused  on (1) NSD  during the initial  launch  of the  service  web 

sites  through  the  present  and  (2)  the  contrast  to  previous  NSD  practices.  The  firms  chosen  for 

these  cases  launched  web  services  early  and  have  continued  to  be  leaders  in  online  services.  I 

identified  firms  by  research  in  industry  publications  and  discussions  with  financial  industry 

executives.  One  of  the  subjects  is  a  startup  in  a  new  industry  category;  the  rest  would  be 

classified  among  the  leading  firms  offering  their  B2B  financial  services.  Some  of  the  key  sub-

questions of this study are: 

1.  How  does NSD  user collaboration  occur  in web-based  services  & how  is it  facilitated? 

2.  What are  the benefits  to user collaboration  in new service  development? 

3.  How  did user collaboration  in NSD  change  as B2B services  migrated  to the  web? 

4.  Does  NSD follow  formal  stages for  B2B  web-based  service?  How  has NSD  changed  since 

the migration  to the  Internet? 

These  questions  will  advance  understanding  of  NSD  for  B2B  web-based  services  and 

may  provide  insight  into  new  service  development  generally.  Services  have  grown  to  be  a 

majority  of  GDP  in  developed  countries;  service  has  become  a  larger  component  of  most 

products; and an award-winning marketing article  states that "all marketing  is service  marketing" 

(Vargo  and  Lusch  2004a). It  seems  likely  to  me  that  soon  a  study  will  be  able  to  state  that  "all 


88 

product development is new service development." (Unfortunately  that is well beyond the scope 

of this dissertation.) 

Eisenhardt  (1989)  suggests  that  a  case  study  begin  with  at  least  tentative  research 

questions, some constructs and perhaps some partially considered theory. Based on the Literature 

Review in this Chapter and in Chapter One and on the research questions I started the interviews 

with the constructs shown in Table 4.1, which were derived from the Literature Review. Some of 

the themes from Chapter Three, such as difficulty  in applying a formal  structure, may have been 

considered  initial  constructs, but the  studies were  conducted  in parallel  and those themes were 

generally quickly apparent in this multiple case study. 

Table 4.1: Initial Constructs for the case study 

Construct 
User collaboration 
Use of collaboration methods 

Innovativeness of NSD 
Innovativeness of NSD 
Formal structure of NSD 
Customer  affect 

Variation or modifier 
(1) extent, (2) increased since migration? 
(1) lead user, (2) VOC -1:1  interviews, (3) user toolkits, 
(4) experimentation, (5) others from Lit Rev, (6) new ones 
(1) incremental, (2) more innovative, (3) radical, (4)  differences 
Change in mix since migration—more incremental or radical? 
(1) existent, (2) change since migration to web-based 
(1) from the new services, (2) from collaboration 

Table  4.1  includes  a  set  of  constructs  that  started  the  study.  They  were  entered  into 

NVivo  as "nodes" for  initial coding  of the transcripts  of the discussions  and field  notes. In the 

spirit of grounded study it is not surprising that other codes emerged from the analysis of the data 

collected,  although  all  of  these  originals  survived  the  iterative  process  and  consolidation  of 

categories. 


89 

F.  Subjects 

For this study I decided to focus on a narrow industry, providing B2B financial  services. 

Many B2B financial  services had recently migrated to the internet, making that industry both a 

purposeful  and convenient choice for study (Richards 2005). In addition there had been a recent 

multiple case study of NSD in B2B banking in Australia to provide some guidance (Alam 2002). 

Finally,  the  author  had  enjoyed  a twenty  year  career  in  B2B  financial  services  which  proved 

helpful in understanding context in the discussions and in securing subjects for the study. 

Finding subjects for this study was more difficult  than for the grounded study of Chapter 

Three. The qualification requirements -  (1) that the financial  service be B2B and web-based, (2) 

that the migration of the service to the Internet had occurred within the past five years, and (3) 

that the key informant  has an active role in new  service development  for that  service  currently 

AND had  such a role before  the migration of the  service to the Internet- reduced the potential 

sample  size. I used research  in industry  publications  as well as my personal  network  from  my 

former  career  in  financial  services  to  identify  interviewees.  A  study  of mail  surveys  indicated 

that  personal  connections  (direct  or via  a personal  network)  to  the  party  conducting  a  survey 

biased the participation rate in the survey but did not induce bias in the responses of participants 

(Hyman  2000).  I located  some  of the  subjects  by  direct  search  for  this  study  and  others  from 

subjects  that  I  had  initially  approached  for  the  grounded  study  of  Chapter  Three,  but  in 

discussions proved to meet the requirement for this case study. 

Creswell (1998) notes that case study is often the method of choice when there is a clear 

constraint,  such  as  a  time  period,  on  the  phenomena  being  studied.  This  study  itself  was 

bounded: the  study was performed  near the  end of the time window  to  study the migration  of 

B2B financial  services with  subjects  who could compare NSD processes before  and after  web-


90 

migration. The final line of the third column in Table 4.2  shows in italics the length of time  since 

the service migrated to the  Internet. 

At  the  time  I  interviewed  the  subjects,  the  migration  of  the  service  discussed  to  the 

Internet had occurred  within the past two years  for the majority  of the cases; it was  actually  still 

ongoing  in five of the cases. Most of these  interviews were conducted two years ago; today  none 

of  the  migrations  would  still  be  ongoing  and  most  would  now  be  approaching  the  five-year 

limitation.  If I were  trying to do the  same research now  I would  find  that their memories  would 

be  tested  and  some  of the  subjects  are  likely  no  longer  working  in NSD  at the  same  institution. 

To  replicate  this  study  today  with  subjects  with  fresh  memories  would  necessarily  focus  the 

study on late-adapting  firms.  The timing of this case study was  fortuitous. 

All  participants  were  assured  of  confidentiality.  The  firm  ID  and  key  informant  ID  are 

deliberately  generic to honor this assurance.  Six B2B  financial  services were offered  by the  eight 

subjects: 

1.  Clearing and settlement of exchange-traded  securities and derivatives; 

2.  Corporate  treasury  services,  which  includes  real  time  bill  paying,  account  balances, 

withdrawals, and sweeping of excess funds  for  short term  investment; 

3.  Mortgage banking, buying mortgages  from  a mortgage  originator; 

4.  Dealing  in  over-the-counter  ("OTC")  derivatives,  offering  swaps,  options  and  forward 

arrangements  on  financial  instruments or energy to help corporations manage risk; 

5.  Securities  and  investments  wholesaling,  offering  securities  services  to  independent 

investment managers; and 

6.  Financial  derivatives  exchanges,  offering  exchange-traded  and  -cleared  options  and/or 

futures  for risk management  and  investment. 

Six of the organizations  are paired with another to be discussed  in a section -  resulting  in 

five  sections  from  the  eight  subjects.  In  Table  4.2  the  shaded  rows  separate  the  groupings  that 

form  the  five  sections.  Combining  two  regulated  derivatives  exchanges  and  two  unregulated 


91 

derivatives  dealers  are  obvious  combinations.  The  mortgage  banker  and  securities  wholesaler 

were combined not because they are competitors but because of their common business model, 

to  act  as  wholesalers  to  businesses  or  financial  planners  servicing  the  financial  needs  of 

individuals. 

Table 4.2 provides (1) a brief description of the key informant and the pseudonym used in 

the text, (2) a brief  description  of the business of the organization, and (3) information  about a 

second informant,  if any, as well as other sources of information  and the length of time between 

the migration  of the service to the Internet and our discussions. I found  a demonstration  of the 

service to be very helpful to better understand the innovations we were discussing. In some cases 

the demonstration was  so extensive that I felt  that I actually used the service, and noted that in 

column  3. All  of the  organizations  are  involved  in  B2B  financial  services.  The  eight  subjects 

were assigned to five groups by combining two pairs of competitors and a pair of wholesalers of 

individual services who are combined due their common business model. 


Table 4.2: Subjects in the Case Study 

Key Informant  ID 

Role  in  Firm 

Firm  ID 

Services that  migrated 

Helen 
Operations  & Customer  Service 
Most  of her career has been in  customer 
service for  clearing and daily  settlement 
of trades.  She was part of a small  "skunk 
works" development team for new  online 
products and has retained a key role in 
innovation of the web-based  products. 
Joe 
Mgr.,  Corp.  Products 
Responsible  for  new  products  in  treasury 
services.  Customers  are  small  and  mid 
size  companies  in  the  Midwest  and  large 
firms throughout the US. 
Hans 
(Customer-SMEBank) 
Treasurer  of  a private  bank  serving  mid 
size  German  firms.  Provides  customers 
FX  and  interest  rate  management  tools. 
He is a customer  of  BankDealerFX. 
Larry 
Senior  executive  -  NPD 
Larry  reports  directly  to  the  CEO.  His 
focus  is  new  product  opportunities  and 
problems/needs  of major  clients. 
Ed 
President 
Ed  is  very  well  known  in  the  industry. 
He  worked  at  several  large  mortgage 
originators  before  he became  involved  in 
this new online venture. 
Jennifer 
Product  Manager 
Former  operations  manager.  Is  in  charge 
of  services provided to financial  planners 
and small brokerage  operations. 

Jerry 
NPD  Manager 
Helps  develop  new  instruments  to  trade. 
Networks with  large end-user  customers. 
Colin 
Marketing 
Markets  to  major  end-users.  Involved  in 
NPD  efforts  of the exchange. 

BankClearing 
Subsidiary  of a major  global  bank. 
Specializes in trading  and clearing 
of exchange-traded  stocks, options 
and futures.  Customers  include 
banks, mutual funds  and hedge 
funds.  Clearing includes  financing 
tracking & settlement  of positions. 
BankTreasury 
corporate  treasury  services 
Cash management  services  include 
tracking daily balances,  converting 
to currencies, investing  overnight 
funds  are key services. 
BankDealerFX 
dealer  in FXand  derivatives 
A major  global bank.  This 
department provides FX and 
interest rate derivatives to banks 
and corporate  clients. 
DealerFDEnergy 
Non-bank  dealer-energy  &  deriv. 
Unregulated, non-bank dealer in 
energy derivatives. Clients are 
energy-users and  speculators. 
BankMortgage 
wholesale  mortgage  banking 
Provides  tools and infrastructure  to 
enable  accountants  and  personal 
financial 
to  originate 
mortgages. 
SecuritiesIB 
IB/wholesaler  for  Brokers 
Provides  security trading, analysis, 
and clearing services to enable an 
individual planner or small firm  to 
compete with Merrill  Lynch. 
ExchangeFDl 
US  financial  derivatives  exch. 
Trades  futures  and  options 
speculation and risk  management. 
ExchangeFD2 
Non-US  financial  derivatives  ex. 
Trades  futures  and  options 
speculation and risk  management. 

advisors 

for 

for 

92 

Secondary  informant 
Other Data  sources 
Used?  Migration? 
Richard 
Marketing 

Accessed  Documents 
I used the  service 
Migrated  4  years 

Judy 
Product  development 
Some access to Docs 
I tested the  service 
Ongoing 
begun  3 yrs.  earlier 
Sean 
BankDealerFX,  dealer 

migration, 

News  articles 
Product  demo 
2-3  years 

Service  demo 
Ongoing  -  2  years 

Demo of online  tools 
Ongoing  — 1 year 

Service  demo 
Ongoing  -  2  years 

Industry  knowledge 
Demo and use 
Ongoing  — 2  years 

Industry  knowledge 
Demo and user 
6  years 


93 

G.  Methods: Case  Study 

A  leading  marketing  researcher  called  for  "more  theory-building  research...  [using]... 

field  interviews  and  case  studies"  (Summers  2001,  p.  405).  Customer  collaboration  in  the 

development  of new web-based  financial  services  is  an  important  area that  merits  both  a  deeper 

understanding  and  theory-building  research.  This  study  tries  to  combine  elements  of  the  deep 

understanding  sought by  classic  case analysis  (Creswell  1998; Dyer Jr.  and Wilkins  1991; Stake 

1995)  and  the  theory  building  and  testing  suggested  for  case  study  in  management  research 

(Eisenhardt  1989; Yin 2003). 

1.  Classic Case  Study 

The  case  description  of  Table  3.1,  is  a  description  of  a  classic  case  study.  A 

classic  case  study,  as described  by  Creswell  (1998),  Stake  (1995)  and Dyer  and Wilkins  (1991), 

focuses  on  description  and  understanding  of  the  cases.  The  case(s)  is  a  bounded  situation 

purposefully  selected  to  illuminate  the  question,  situation,  or  phenomenon  of  interest.  The 

primary  goal  of  the  study  is  to  obtain  and  communicate  a  deep  understanding  of  the  case(s). 

Theory  development  is optional: a good  case  study may or may not  include theory  development, 

but  it will provide a deep description  and "get the story right" (Dyer Jr. and Wilkins  1991; Stake 

1995). 

To  achieve  a deep understanding  it  is necessary  to limit the number  of cases  in a  classic 

case study. The optimal study may have a single case; both Creswell  (1998) and  Stake (1995)  set 

an  upper  limit  of four  cases  in  a  study.  Creswell  (1998,  63)  reiterates  that  generalizability  is  a 

term  that  has  little  meaning  to  a  qualitative  researcher  (Glense  and  Peshkin  1992).  An  ideal 

classic  case would have  a single  observer/interpreter  immersed  in a single rich, purposeful  case, 

with  access  to  multiple  key  informants  and  other  sources  of  information.  The  product  of  the 

effort  would  be  a  detailed  study  that  was  rich  in description  and  understanding  that  would  give 


94 

readers a distinct sense of being there and a keen understanding of the situation (Creswell 1998; 

Wolcott 1990). 

2.  Theory-building and Construct- & Theory-testing through Case Study 

Eisenhardt  (1989) advocates a very different  style of case study  for  management 

research, one that I will call "theory-building case study" to contrast to a classic case study. This 

name  catches  the  key  difference  in  the  approach;  her  focus  is  on  a  theory-building,  not 

description. Theory-building  case study uses the techniques  of Glaser and  Strauss  (1967), so it 

actually is a hybrid of traditional case study and grounded theory. This hybrid approach includes 

problem  definition  and  construct  validation,  which  she  acknowledges  to  be  "similar  to 

hypothesis testing research" (p. 532). 

Iteration and testing are key parts of the process in theory-building case study. Testing is 

facilitated  by  having  multiple  sources  of  information  within  a  case,  multiple  cases,  and  even 

multiple  researchers 

involved  (Eisenhardt  1989).  Eisenhardt  advocates  purposeful  but 

representative  sampling  of  cases.  The  researcher  should  start  the  research  with  an  identified 

problem  and tentative  constructs. Because  of the iterative testing within  a theory-building  case 

study, "emergent theory is likely to be testable with constructs that can be readily measured and 

hypotheses that can be proven false" (p. 547). 

Eisenhardt  (1989)  suggested  a range  of 4-10  cases  as being  ideal  for  such  studies. The 

upper bound was not necessarily  a radical departure  from  some previous writing  on case study 

methods;  several  authors  have  allowed  for  a  possible  maximum  of  8  cases  under  certain 

circumstances  (McCracken  1988; Yin  2003).  However,  setting  a  minimum  of  four  cases  is a 

clear departure from,  and rejection  of,  classic case study. Advocates of classic case study argue 

that a high number of cases necessarily  leads to shallow instead of deep analysis (Dyer Jr. and 

Wilkins  1991). Multiple  researchers  may  lead  to  problems  with  group  idea  generation,  which 


95 

works  to  exclude  more  novel  ideas  (Armstrong  2006;  Diehl  and  Stroebe  1987;  Griffin  and 

Hauser 1993; Thompson 2003). 

A rejoinder  to the theory  building  case  study  approach  was  entitled  "Better  stories  not 

better  constructs  to  generate  better  theory"  (Dyer  Jr.  and  Wilkins  1991).  The  authors  of  the 

rejoinder  argue that the essence of case study research is the "careful  study of a single case that 

leads researchers to seeing new theoretic relationships" (p. 614), and that within case contrasts 

and  iteration  are often  more valuable that the external  comparisons that  Eisenhardt  seeks with 

multiple  cases  and  multiple  researchers.  The  focus  on  constructs  is  higher-level  and  therefore 

excludes context, which is often the richest part of a case study (p. 614). They argue that theory-

based  case  study  will  produce  more  testable  propositions,  but  at  the  cost  of  discovering  new 

questions and novel new theory from a deep understanding of a case. 

3.  Understanding and Theory-development 

The form of qualitative analysis used should be based on the question, the objectives, and 

the subjects available for the research. While I personally find the arguments of the advocates of 

the classic case approach compelling, I seek testable hypotheses in this study. In addition, I am 

generally  limited to a single key informant  in the cases: it was hard enough to find  eight  firms 

with a single individual who had done NSD before  and after  web-migration and was willing to 

invest the time to work with me. Multiple sources would have been an unreasonable hurdle. Thus 

both my subject limitations and my objectives favor the theory-building case study approach. 

Even  though  I  will  follow  the  theory-building  case  study  approach,  I  will  present  the 

information  as  a  series  of  individual  or  paired  cases.  As  a  single  observer/interpreter  with 

significant  prior experience in the financial  industry, I will attempt to convey some of the deep 

description of a classic case study. 


96 

4.  Data Collection 

Most of the  interviews  and discussions  were taped  and transcribed.  Early  in the 

study  I  experimented  with  taping  versus  relying  solely  on  notes  and  writing  up  the  results. 

Several qualitative methods experts have argued that taping is intrusive, affects  the openness of 

the  conversation  and  hinders  early  analysis  of  what  is  important  (Morse  and  Richards  2002; 

Strauss  and  Corbin  1998).  I  collected  rich  data  from  BankDealerFX,  which  I  deliberately 

collected  without  recording,  and  from  BankTreasury,  where  the  recording  failed,  but  in  each 

instance I found that the second meeting was dominated by the review of the earlier discussion, 

leaving  less time  for  expanding  on ideas or testing hidden  meanings. Therefore,  the  remaining 

interviews  and  discussion  of this  study,  and all of the  interviews  used  in Chapter  Three, were 

recorded. 

Participants committed in advance to an initial 90-minute discussion, a 45-minute follow-

up  session  a  week  or  two  later,  and  then  clarifying  questions  by  phone  or  email.  Generally, 

interaction with the key informants  followed  this plan. In the case of key informants  who were 

outside the Chicago area, the follow-up  discussion was a taped phone conference.  Some of the 

subjects spent considerably more time with me. For example with Jerry at ExchangeFDl, I spent 

a couple hours in his office reviewing documentation of their current NSD process in detail. 

Before the second session with a key informant  I transcribed the initial interview, coded 

it and the field notes or any other documents, and if it was one of the "paired" cases I compared 

the data to the other case. The second session would begin with more detail on the NSD  efforts 

and clarification  of issues from the first  conversation but would conclude with some discussion 

of key  ideas  from  the first meeting. Further follow-up  was by phone  or email. In the  instances 

where I did not have a taped copy of our discussions I gave the subjects a copy of my first draft 

of our case and asked for their thoughts. I found that the review of the draft,  even though it had 


97 

been emailed to the subjects  in advance, was time consuming and focused  on unimportant  details 

and therefore  did not make it a part of a standard second  session. 

On average I spent three hours with the primary  informant  of each case and  an hour  with 

secondary  informants;  in  addition,  there  was  an  average  of  another  half-hour  of  follow-up  and 

clarification  time.  Thus  this  study  included  thirty-one  hours  of  interview  time  with  the  selected 

B2B  financial  service  providers.  Arranging,  scheduling  and  researching  in  preparation  for  each 

of the eight cases took nearly a week of  effort. 

5.  Supplementary  Materials 

One  of  the  cases  had  been  examined  in  several  industry  publications.  I read  that 

material  and included  it in the analysis. In each case I asked to  see  any  documentation  I could.  I 

spent  several  hours  looking  through  materials  at  ExchangeFDl,  but  in  the  other  cases  it  was 

generally  a short review of a memo or two and a review of current -  and in a couple cases, past  -

marketing  literature. 

The central question of the study naturally led to another source of context  for the cases: 

since  the  services  were  web-based  it  was  natural  to  ask  for  a  demonstration  and  to  get  some 

hands-on  usage  of  the  service.  This  was  very  helpful  in  understanding  the  service  and  the 

changes  and  enriched  conversation.  Helen  from  BankClearing  talked  about  how  conversation  is 

enhanced  for collaboration when a customer is sitting in his/her workspace  and using the  service: 

your  questions  are  more  insightful;  the  client  remembers  key  details;  context  works  for  you. 

Being able to test the services and have them demonstrated to me provided  similar benefits  to my 

research  quest. 

6.  Reflexivitv  and Me: the  Instrument 

In survey research the "instrument" of the research, the tool that a researcher uses to elicit 

information  from  subjects  is the survey itself. A survey researcher,  as I describe in Chapter  Five, 


98 

rigorously  checks the survey  instrument before  using it to make  sure that constructs are valid  and 

reliable  and  that  subjects  understand  the  questions.  In  case  study  research  the  instrument  of  the 

research  is  the  investigator.  There  are  no  easy  tests  for  the  reliability  or  validity  of  an 

investigator. 

Qualitative  research  is  meant  to  be  iterative:  a  common  suggestion  is  that  a  research 

paper be written  and re-written while  data collection  is still ongoing  (Berg  2004; Holliday  2002; 

Richards  2005)  or  even  that  the  researcher  should  write  an  initial  draft  before  beginning  data 

collection  (Wolcott  1990). I produced  an early draft  of this chapter  after  I had  collected  less than 

30%  of  the  data.  I  was  able  to  obtain  feedback  on  my  performance  as  an  instrument  from 

circulating  that  early version  to  a variety  of  active researchers  including  Dr. Albert  L.  Page,  my 

dissertation  chair;  Dr.  John  F.  Sherry,  Jr.,  who  taught  me  an  introduction  to  methods;  and  Dr. 

Joby  John  and  two  anonymous  reviewers  for  the  summer  AMA  Conference.  Their  comments 

assured me that I was focusing  on an interesting issue with appropriate methods and  subjects. 

Another  issue  in  qualitative  research  is reflexivity:  to  some  extent  the  investigator  must 

be  a part  of what is being observed; the investigator  and the persons being observed will both  be 

effected  by  the  interaction.  I  chose  the  topic  of  this  dissertation  because  it  interests  me.  I  have 

read  extensively  on  user  collaboration,  have  some  experience  in  user  collaboration,  and  had 

some  opinions  before  beginning  any  of  this  research.  I  was  aware  of  the  potential  for  bias  and 

took  steps,  including  summarizing  my  initial  thoughts,  to  lower  its  impact.  I  knew  that  any 

evidence  counter  to  standard  theory  about  user  collaboration  would  actually  make  this  more 

compelling  research. 

I  had  a  twenty-year  career  in  financial  services,  including  the  development  of  new 

services. I had been involved in new product development  at two derivatives  exchanges, and as a 

broker  and  sales  manager  had  had  many  bank  clients.  It  was  a  convenient  market  segment 


99 

because of my experience: I had a deep understanding of context for the cases; and I could also 

benefit  from using my personal network to uncover potential subjects. 

I believe my previous work experience was a definite advantage to conducting this study. 

My prior knowledge helped me communicate  effectively  with subjects. My network helped me 

line  up  qualified  subjects.  The  risk  of  bias  from  my  experience  was  substantially  reduced 

because  I  had  not  been  involved  in  new  service  development  of  financial  services  after  the 

services moved online. [The excitement of the "dot.com" era drew me to start-up firms in related 

but non-financial  firms.]  So I did not have an "axe to grind" about how the services had migrated 

or should migrate to the Internet. I was fascinated to immerse myself in new service development 

for these web-based services and was able to do so with fresh eyes. 

7.  Data Analysis 

Case  study  research  can  be  quantitative  or  qualitative  and  can  be  employed  to  build 

theory,  to test  theory,  or to  provide  description  of  a process  (Eisenhardt  1989; Yin  1981; Yin 

2003).  This  research  is  a  qualitative  multiple  case  study,  employing  the  hybrid  techniques  of 

theory-building  case  study.  As  Eisenhardt  (1989)  suggests, the  study  is  framed  by  a  research 

question  and  explanatory  variables  derived  from  a  literature  review,  builds  theory  using 

grounded theory techniques and tests the constructs and evolving theory through iterative  study 

of the multiple cases. 

Transcripts of the discussions and field notes were entered into NVivo, the same software 

employed  in the grounded theory  study, Chapter Three. The initial construct  codes from  Table 

4.1 were entered before  the data analysis began. During initial coding new  codes  or categories 

emerged.  After  the  initial  coding, the  codes  were reviewed  to  see  if  any  categories  should  be 

combined  or  more  clearly  defined.  The  process  was  iterative  and  cumulative,  much  like  the 

procedure described in Chapter Three. 


100 

However  since  this  was  a  bounded  hybrid  case  study  with  pre-existing  constructs  and 

some  theory  using  techniques  borrowed  from  grounded  theory  and  hypothesis  testing  (Dyer  Jr. 

and Wilkins  1991; Eisenhardt  1989) and using  eight  cases  instead  of the twenty  seven used  in a 

grounded  study,  the  coding  process  was  simpler  than  in  Chapter  Three.  Initial  codes  were 

continually  studied  and  categories  were  regularly  combined  or  re-defined.  Comparisons  were 

made  first  within discussion, then within case, then if-paired  - within pair; and finally  against  the 

cumulative  group.  "Tree  nodes"  or  grouping  categories  of  the  open  codes  within  NVivo  were 

used to combine categories and emerging themes were  tested. 

8.  "Getting it Right" and  Triangulation 

As  noted  earlier,  in  our  discussions  I  attempted  to  ground  the  subjects  by  focusing 

discussion  on  specific  examples  of  new  products  and  services  well  before  beginning  any 

discussions  of  general  new  service  development  processes  or changes  in those  processes.  Some 

of the discussion  took place with us both  on the  service website, examining  and using the  online 

service.  I used  the  second  interview  with  the primary  informant  to  approach  some  of  the  issues 

from the initial discussion from  a different  perspective. 

I  sent  a  draft  of  my  case  summary  from  the  first  meeting  to  some  of the  subjects  before 

our  second  meeting  and  discussed  issues  and thoughts  about  the  draft.  I  sent  each  a  draft  of  the 

final  case write ups that are presented  in this chapter to each subject  to see if I "got  it right"  from 

their  point  of  view.  I  solicited  feedback  from  each  of  the  primary  informants  and  got  their 

approval  of the story. 

The  primary  effort  towards  triangulation  was  embedded  within  the  grounded  research 

techniques  of  finding  codes  and  themes  first  within  a  case, then  versus  a  similar  case,  and  then 

against  the  group. Comparisons  were  made  (1)  within  a discussion,  (2) within  both  discussions, 


101 

(3) within all materials  for the case, (4) against a "paired" case when I had matched cases, and 

then (5) against the cumulative data of all cases. 

In  three  of  the  cases,  I  identified  a  secondary  informant  to  compare  categories  and 

themes. For most of the cases I had discussions with industry veterans about their perceptions of 

the  firms  in  the  case.  When  possible  I  checked  information  against  industry  articles,  internal 

documents  and  marketing  materials.  The  majority  of  the  triangulation  effort  was  the  use  of 

grounded  theory  study techniques to  compare  the multiple  cases  (Eisenhardt  1989; Glaser  and 

Strauss 1967). 

9.  Unit of Analysis: Program and Project 

The unit of analysis in the cases  is generally the program or platform  level of a 

defined  set  of  web-based  financial  services,  currently  or  historically—before  they  were  web-

based.  However,  a significant  part  of the discussions  focused  on individual projects,  to ground 

the discussion. New services include incremental changes, new features, really new services, and 

radical new services (Garcia and Calantone 2002), and are viewed as a part of the evolution of 

the platform of services. 


102 

H.  Stories of New Service  Development 

In  an  effort  to  combine  some  of  the  benefits  of  the  classic  case  study  and  Eisenhardt's 

(1989)  theory  generating  and  testing  the  cases  are  presented  serially  with  a  detailed  description 

of  their NSD  process.  Propositions  were  generated  from  a  comparison  of  all  of  all  of  the  data, 

through  coding,  replication  and  thematic  development.  However  to  maintain  a  narrative, 

propositions  will be presented  at the end of a case that illustrates the theory. Evidence  from  other 

cases  may  be  inserted  into  the  discussion  when  presenting  the  propositions.  I  believe  that 

because  of  the  fortunate  timing  of  this  research,  it  is  worthwhile  to  present  both  theory  in 

proposition  form  and  the  story  of  the  impact  of  the  migration  to  the  Internet  on  NSD  for  each 

case. 

As  is  usual  in  qualitative  research,  all  subjects  were  assured  confidentiality  (Creswell 

1998).  For  the  purposes  of  improving  the  narrative  subjects  and  their  firms  were  assigned  the 

pseudonyms  shown in Table 4.2. 

In a  sense this presentation  is another test  of the propositions.  The propositions  emerged 

from  a  process  of  (1)  original  questions,  constructs  and  tentative  theory,  (2)  themes  emerging 

from  coding,  re-coding,  theoretical  coding,  iteratively  studying  and  grouping  of  the  data 

collected in the eight cases, and finally  (3) placement into the discussion of one of the five  stories 

of the presentation. 

As  noted,  the  final  six  cases  as  shown  in  Table  4.2  are  three  pairs  of  very  similar 

businesses  that  were  useful  to match-up  for  analysis.  In presenting  the  cases  I  combine  the  two 

derivatives  exchanges,  the  two  financial  services  wholesalers,  and  the  two  OTC  derivatives 

dealers.  Therefore  there  will  be  eight  individual  cases  discussed  in  the  five  "stories"  of  the 

following  sections. I believe  that  this  structure  supports  the rich  detail  of the  classical  approach 

and also showcases the theory development promoted by Eisenhardt  (1989). 


103 

Quotes from the  subjects  are  included  within  the  text  of  the  case.  Extended  quotes  or 

paraphrased  stories  are  highlighted  with  a  small  font  and  indentation;  quotations  are  noted. 

Quotes are edited to make them more readable: three periods indicates  some text was removed. 

Comments inside a square bracket are either phrases inserted by me to make edited quotes more 

readable  or  inserted  explanation.  Care  was  taken  not to  change  the  meaning  of  a  quote  when 

editing. 

The  stories  are  presented  in  no  particular  order,  except  that  I  placed  a  couple  of  the 

"richer" cases -  cases where the subjects had been especially forthcoming  or had been willing to 

spend extra time with me -  near the front  of the series. In similar fashion,  in the three instances 

that cases are paired, I led with the case I felt was richer in detail. 


104 

I.  BankClearing;  Going online to  Compete 

The  subject,  called  BankClearing,  is  a  subsidiary  of  a  large  global  bank.  BankClearing 

provides  a  full  range  of  execution,  clearing  and  settlement,  and  information  services  to 

businesses  that  trade  exchange-traded  securities  and  derivatives.  Execution  is  the  actual  buying 

or  selling  of the exchange-traded  stocks, options  or  futures.  To perform  execution  BankClearing 

must  have  memberships  at  the  exchange  that  trades  the  security  (e.g.  stocks  or  bonds)  or 

derivative  (e.g.  futures  or  options)  or  must  have  access  to  that  exchange  through  another  firm. 

BankClearing  has  trained  personnel  to  execute  the  trades.  The  firm  has  access  to  a  score  of 

exchanges  worldwide.  Clearing  and  settlement  involves  holding  the  exchange  position  for  a 

client,  posting  a  cash  margin  for  the  position,  collecting  or  dispersing  gains  and  losses  from 

positions, and tracking the up to date positions of the client. Finally,  information  services  include 

evaluating the risk of a portfolio  of trades and monitoring performance  over time. 

BankClearing  often  performs  all three  functions  for a client but they are separable: at  one 

time  most  of  BankClearing's  business  was  executing  trades  for  clients  who  would  clear  and 

settle  at  other  firms.  The  service  that  this  case  focuses  on  is  clearing  and  settlement.  The 

migration  of  clearing  and  settlement  functions  online  freed  customers  from  dependence  on 

inflexible  daily  reports,  which  they  would  read  and  key  into  their  own  accounting  or  risk 

management  programs.  Online  settlement  and  clearing  enabled  straight  through  processing 

("STP")  of data  into  customer programs, reducing  time  and keypunch  errors  and also  permitting 

some custom analysis of the data on the clearing online site. 

1.  The  Case 

Helen, head  of customer  service  for  BankClearing,  was  a member  of a three-person  team 

involved  in  a crash program  to  develop  web-based  clearing  services. In the  late  1990s  less  than 

10% of the  futures  income  of BankClearing  was  from  cleared trades. The CEO  of  BankClearing 


105 

became  concerned  that  electronic  trading  would  reduce  the  importance  of  execution  business, 

their  traditional  business.  That  would  pose  a  major  strategic  risk  to  BankClearing,  since  two 

rivals  with  online  clearing  services  had  a  clear  product  advantage  in  the  clearing  business. 

Therefore the CEO ordered the crash program to develop web-based clearing services. 

One of the members of the small development team, the marketing head, remembers the 

development of the Internet service as an exhilarating period: 

Our CEO was desperate. We were losing clearing business... to very impressive online 

clearing services on private networks. He put together a group of three of us... 

The two leaders in online clearing had each had a product out there for three to five 

years, [on private  networks; the  Internet was new] And each spent millions of dollars 

developing the services... one of them was rumored to have spent an eight digit sum... 

But our timing was absolutely  perfect!  I don't  know  if our  CEO had had a flash of 

inspiration about the potential of the Internet or if he had gotten desperate... and was 

just lucky on timing. I would guess some of both... the Web gave us the opportunity to 

play fast catch-up on the cheap. 

Three of  us., went  on the  road to visit our customers and talk to them  about what 

they needed. If they had one of the competing services, we would watch them use it... 

We quickly learned that this was the way to do it-go to their site and watch them in 

the process of doing their  work. We could see what features they were  using, what 

they  seemed to  like, and were  able to  ask some  intelligent  questions.  ...we  got so 

much more from them when we visited their shop than when they came in and talked 

to us or when we talked on the phone... 

It was so cool... They [rivals] had a three to five year head start and spent millions of 

dollars and had dozens of people... Three of us in six months, with an outside budget 

of $100,000, created a service that was competitive. We figured out what features the 

customers liked, what features they didn't have that they would benefit from, and set 

priorities for our online product... cheap and fast went to the top of the list. 


106 

In some ways our new service was rudimentary... some of the features didn't really fit 

together,  and  there  were  some features  missing...  but  our  customers  loved  it.  We 

started winning business... We  had the stuff that the  users wanted. It was cool and 

cutting edge because it was web-based. And it was really flexible. Time and time again 

when a customer told us they really needed something we were able to get it to them 

in 24 or 48 hours- that's service. 

Today,  BankClearing  has  a growing  electronic trading business  and  collects  the  majority 

of  its revenue  from  cleared  accounts. The web  service  has  changed  dramatically,  but  it is  harder 

to point to new service launches. Helen states that because the services are web-based, 

"a new function or feature can be added overnight, they don't have to be packaged as 

new releases." [Fast incremental improvements] "add up to major change over time." 

Helen believes  that  "at  least  90%" of the new  functions  since the  initial  launch were  co-

developed  with  customers.  Before  the  service  became  web-based  only  half  the  ideas  were 

generated  by  customers  and  their  involvement  had  been  "pretty  much  limited  to  beta  testing." 

This  change  —  more  frequent  and  more  extensive  customer  collaboration  ~  is  observed  in  all 

eight cases of this  study. 

The  initial  development  trio  at  BankClearing  was  able  to  get  a  competitive  product  to 

market  in less than  six months  using  a combination  of customer  input  and  competitive  analysis. 

Customers  provided  user  manuals  of  the  competitor's  products  and  even  granted  access  to  the 

leading competitor's  online products. According to Helen, the most useful  input was from  simply 

sitting and "watching customers actually use the competitor's  products." 

I  asked  Helen  to  list  the  five  most  important  new  features  or  services  added  to  the  web 

clearing  services  since the initial  six-month  launch period  of the web-site. During  our  discussion 

she observed that  all  five  of  the  ideas  originated  with  clients:  two were  developed  first  by users; 

one was  co-developed. 


107 

Helen states that BankClearing does not have a formal  development process for its web-

based  services.  The  process  was  more  formal  before  the  clearing  services  were  web-based. 

Today in order to get approval and priority a project manager simply makes a presentation to the 

services committee, which includes the head of operations and clearing, several sales managers, 

and  two  customer  service  managers.  Helen  noted  that  during  the  initial  development  the  best 

customer ideas came from sitting and "watching customers actually use" similar sites. 

Web-based  clearing  services  pushed  the  customer-customer  service  representative 

discussion towards how the customer was using the data. BankClearing: 

"noted  the  changing  roles  of  customer  service  reps  and  gave  them  extensive 

computer training. For the first time we set up travel and entertainment  budgets for 

customer service representatives." [The representatives are part of the web service and 

help  to  uncover  development  and  customization  ideas  by  visiting  the  clients  and 

observing their  use of the  BankClearing site. Helen  notes  however  that  the  training of 

both  the  salesmen  and  customer  service  reps  is  uneven  and]  "the  best  results occur 

when  I  [Helen] or a developer  do an onsite or "virtual  onsite" client  discussion and 

demonstration." 

Helen had been involved in new service development for these services before they were 

web-based.  She noted that the development process had changed significantly:  most of the new 

ideas now originated with one-to-one customer contacts. Due to their customer access, customer 

service  representatives  were  now  an  important  part  of the  idea  generation  process.  [This  case 

thus provides support for P22, the importance of boundary spanners—salespersons and customer 

service  reps  to  NSD,  from  Chapter  Three.]  The  evaluation  and  analysis  process  had  been 

shortened. Changes are increasingly  made in small increments  and internal testing was reduced 

as new services rolled out to trial use quickly. 

Helen  notes  another  advantage  to  web  services  is  that  client  actions  can  be  observed 

remotely or even after  the fact  by studying user logs. Several months earlier she and a group at 


108 

BankClearing  combed  through records to  determine  which users were  logging  in daily to  access 

the  same  files.  Service  representatives  were  dispatched  to work with  the  clients  to  automate  the 

file  download,  the  transfer  of the  file  to  a third  party  program,  and  even  to  start  the  third  party 

program.  Results  went  beyond  delighting  customers:  clients  were  amazed  that  an  unarticulated 

need  was  being  solved. 

This  use  of  log  data  echoed  the  ideas  of  "Co-opting  Customer  Competence"  (Prahalad 

and Ramaswamy  2000, p. 80). It is expensive and time consuming to have engineers or  customer 

service  reps  at client  sites  for  extended periods. Remote,  stored,  "sticky  information"  could be  a 

huge  benefit  of  web-based  services  to  new  service  development.  The  use  of  the  log  data  by 

BankClearing  also  is  a  field  replication  of  an  experiment  that  used  click  information  on  auto 

websites to generate product ideas (Urban and Hauser 2004). 

When the author informed  Helen that her use of click data was not replicated  in the  other 

cases  studied,  Helen  was  very  surprised  and  noted  that  while  the  volume  of  information  was 

huge, it was valuable.  She was aghast when told that one bank  [BankTreasury]  was using a room 

with  cameras  and  two-way  mirrors.  Using  the  log  data,  Helen  can  do  a web  conference  with  a 

client  and  "in  an  hour  or  so"  gather  the  information  that  would  have  taken  several  days  onsite 

formerly. 

Helen  states that the kind of customer that is driving change has shifted  over the past  four 

years.  In  the  early  development,  BankClearing  deliberately  focused  on  typical  customers  or 

prospects  but  today  "sophisticated  clients  that  rarely  talk  to  us  will  send  a  request  out  of  the 

blue."  At  the  end  of  the  interview  the  author  explained  von  Hippel's  concept  of  a  "lead  user" 

(von  Hippel  1986)  to  Helen  who  then  stated  that  customer  collaboration  was  originally 

undertaken  with  average  customers  but  was now  driven by  lead users. Helen  does note that  lead 

users  are  very  demanding  and  often  want  excessive  customization.  While  they  now  seem  to 


109 

provide  leading  edge  ideas,  the  ideas  generated  must  be  screened  to  see  whether  they  could 

appeal to other users. 

The  customizable  raw  data  files  and the  ability  to track user  activity  act  as  a  crude  form 

of "toolkit" (von Hippel 2001)  for BankClearing's  customers. Customers  feed  the data into  other 

programs  or  to  produce  custom  reports.  Many  new  services  have  resulted  from  aiding  the 

customer in linking the data to other programs and in observing how the data were  used. 

Helen  indicated that the web-based  clearing  service  strengthens  customer relationships  in 

several  ways.  Customers  like  the  service  and  the  customization  available,  but—even  more— 

appreciate  "being  part  of  the  development."  This  observation  coincides  with  the new  objectives 

for  user collaboration  (5)  and  (6), strengthening  the relationship  with  customers,  of the  previous 

Alam (2002) study of B2B financial  firms  in Australia. 

Before  the  clearing  services  were  available  online,  any  changes  in  the  standard  reports 

generated  or  to  the  information  available  to  the  clients  of  BankClearing  required  major 

programming  changes, coordination with  suppliers, and clearance though an executive-level  new 

clearing products  committee. In practice there was one new release  a year and  change was  slow. 

Clients didn't expect a lot of change and few  good suggestions came through the user groups that 

had been formed  to solicit ideas. 

Today Helen is overrun with client demands. She also understands  their needs in  advance 

by  watching  them  onsite,  monitoring  their  activity,  and  mining  the  log  data.  She  had  formally 

been  frustrated  by  the bureaucracy  hindering  innovation,  but  now  it was  she who  advocated  the 

formation  of an informal  group to authorize changes in order to prioritize and slow  down  changes 

in the  system.  She  always has  a long  list  of potential  improvements.  Customers  love the  service 

and  she  has  been  able  to  surprise  and  delight  them  by  anticipating  needs.  The  services  are 


changing  incrementally  but  over  the  course  of  six  months  the  services  will  change  more 

significantly than in any three or five year period in the pre-web era. 

110 

2.  Propositions about NSD Process Changes and Sticky Information 

Helen observed a new focus once the clearing services moved online: 

"getting the product out... right away. Once we knew it was a good product; ... once 

the client sunk their teeth into it, that was pretty much it. You pretty much looked the 

other way... fine, let's go with it and then correct as we go along, which really pushed 

the product to a whole new realm of enhancements that went from Version 1 to 2,000 

in a matter of months, simply by clients... using and saying hey, this is nice but... can 

you do this?  And it just created a life of its own." 

A  similar  change  in  NSD  process  will  be  noted  by  Joe  at  BankTreasury  in  the  next 

section.  Joe  noted  that  the process  moves  much  faster  than previously,  especially  incremental 

enhancements: 

"a brand-new service that would have taken 18 months to two years before we were 

on the web, now can reach the market in a year; an improvement or new feature that 

once would have been lumped into twice-a-year releases can often be done on the fly 

and  put  into  the  two-week  new  release  schedule..."  [There  is] "much  less  rigor"  ... 

[changes are made and TreasuryBank]  "watches to see if customers are happy"...[The 

process is] "more interactive and iterative" 

Observations about the reduced NSD structure can be cited from each of the eight cases. 

P4.1:  The NSD process for  web-based services is less formal  or structured than for  similar 

non-web-based services. 

Another common element of the discussions was that customer  involvement  in the new 

service  development  effort  has expanded  since the  service has migrated to the  Internet.  In the 

opening vignette  of this  chapter the  senior marketing  executive  discussed  how Internet  trading 

had improved customer collaboration  for new product development,  even for  long term owner-

members of the exchange. Another illustration comes from Helen at BankClearing: 


I ll 

"Client involvement has increased exponentially. Now that our clients are becoming IT 

literate... they're coming out of their shells...  And they are getting a lot more involved 

than they  used to."  ... "at  least 90%" of the  new functions and features... since the 

initial launch were co-developed with customers." 

Again,  such observations were universal in the set of interviewed  executives. Even  before 

coding and analysis of theme were complete an obvious proposition was: 

P4.2:  Customer  involvement  in NSD  is more frequent  and more  extensive  in web-based  services 

than other  services. 

Helen  noted  that  valuable  information  is collected  when  she  or  a  developer  do an  onsite 

or "virtual  onsite" client  discussion  and demonstration  of the  online  service.  This  observation  is 

replicated in the following  case and several others. Accordingly  a new proposition is: 

P4.3:  Web-based  services  help  uncover  client  "sticky  information"  by focusing  discussions  on 

details  of customer  usage. 

Clients were amazed  that unrecognized needs were being solved. This echoed the ideas of 

"Co-opting  Customer  Competence"  (Prahalad  and  Ramaswamy  2000,  p.  80)  and  tapping  into 

user  competence  without  their  awareness  (Urban  and  Hauser  2004). None  of  the  other  subjects 

made  as much  use  of monitoring  online  activity  or web  logs, although the  securities  wholesaler 

noted that they monitor usage of certain sections of their site. 

The  experience  of BankClearing  and the  efforts  at  SecuritiesIB  support  the two  research 

articles cited and indicate that: 

P4.4:  Web-based  services  can  uncover  "sticky  information  "from  users  remotely. 


112 

J.  OTC Derivatives -  Now Online 

Over the counter ("OTC")  derivatives are offered  by bank and nonbank dealers to  firms 

that  need to  manage  some kind  of  financial  risk.  Derivatives  are highly-leveraged  instruments 

that allow a firm to quickly take a large position with a low "down payment." The simplest  forms 

of OTC derivatives are forward purchases or forward sales, or options, either calls or puts. 

If a firm  were due to receive a large payment  from  a Mexican client  in six months and 

worried about the risk of a currency  devaluation before  then, the  firm  could go to a dealer and 

sell pesos forward,  specifying  the exact payment day in the future.  Alternatively the firm could 

buy a put on the peso, effectively  securing insurance against Mexican currency depreciation. An 

electric company that had an oil burning  generator  and feared  higher oil prices could go to the 

derivatives market and buy oil for a future delivery date. Alternatively the utility could buy a call 

on the price of oil, again effectively  providing insurance, in this instance against a price rise. 

In both of these examples the firm  seeking protection could also use an exchange-traded 

derivative—Mexican  Peso futures  and options and a variety of oil futures  and options trade on 

major  futures  exchanges.  The  OTC  market  provides  customization.  Exchange-traded  products 

are  standardized  into  specific  sizes, dates  and grades  of product  (e.g. "sweet"  crude not sour). 

Customization  can result  in very  complex  instruments. For example  the utility  might  want  the 

option to settle the call at the price of two different  types of oil. The exporter to Mexico might 

want a "look-back" option that allows the firm to sell the pesos at the best price available over 

the six-month period. 

A dealer in OTC derivatives provides customization and credit for its contracts as well as 

pricing information for complex structures. 


113 

1.  BankDealerFX 

In  a  departure  from  the  other  eight  cases  discussed  in  this  chapter,  the  key 

informant  for  this  analysis  was  actually  a  customer  of  BankDealerFX,  not  an  executive  of  the 

firm  involved  in new  service  development.  I had  targeted  BankDealerFX  because  of what  I  had 

read  about  their  online  trading  and  their  success  in  a  difficult  market  through  their  online 

strategy.  I tried to arrange  a meeting with  someone  in their New York branch, but was unable  to 

find  someone willing to work with me by calling the company directly. I found  a customer of the 

bank in Europe  who was very  enthusiastic  about the project  and would make  an ideal  secondary 

informant.  He  tried  to  find  someone  to  work  with  me  through  his  contracts  with  the  firm  in 

London, but that also didn't  work. I found  an ex-trader  from the bank who was willing to  answer 

some  questions  and  could  serve  as  a  secondary  source. I  decided  that  (1)  BankDealerFX  was  a 

rich  case  and  (2)  since  my  research  question  focuses  on  customer  collaboration,  it  would  be 

interesting to have a customer involved in one of the cases as a primary source. The final piece to 

fall  into  place  was  a  conference  presentation  in  Europe  that  made  it  convenient  to  meet  with 

Hans, the customer  informant. 

The  leading  industry  publication  for  institutional  financial  services  cited  BankDealerFX 

as having one of the best web-based  services for derivatives among global banks in the two years 

prior to my research  for this  case. The  same  finance  publication,  in an article that year,  revealed 

that  BankDealerFX  had  considered  exiting  a  portion  of  the  derivatives  market,  the  foreign 

exchange  trading  market,  in 2000 because  of their  also-ran  status  in a concentrated  market.  The 

leading  firms  at  the  time  were  assumed  to  have  an  unassailable  pre-eminence  in  the  market. 

Instead,  the  bank  decided  to  attack  the  market  through  web-based  services.  By  2003 

BankDealerFX  was  a  top-three  FX  firm  in  a  still  very  concentrated  market.  "Unassailable  pre 

eminence" can be overcome with new technology and a smart  strategy. 


114 

Interviews  were  conducted  with  a  customer  of BankDealerFX  and  checked  against  the 

industry  articles  and  a  short  interview  with  a  former  derivatives  trader  at BankDealerFX.  The 

customer, a private German bank which will be referred to as SMEBank, serves the trading and 

risk  management  needs  of  mid-size  corporations  and  family  firms.  The  German  economy  is 

dominated  by  "Mittelstand,"  small  and  medium-sized  firms  serving  global  markets  (Kotler 

2000). A private bank servicing these firms, with foreign exchange and financing risks from their 

global  operations,  provides  a unique  view  of  how  the  services  reach  a  variety  of  smaller  but 

active  institutional  clients.  Hans,  Treasurer  of  SMEBank,  oversees  all  FX  activities  and 

derivatives for the bank and its clients. 

Hans notes that his bank is now essentially doing all of their FX and derivatives business 

with BankDealerFX. Three or four years ago, BankDealerFX would have been one of the main 

providers for custom derivatives, but not for foreign exchange ("FX"). Hans is very relationship-

oriented in his business dealings: he noted that it was "painful" to stop dealing with old friends at 

other  banks, but  the  BankDealerFX  services  were  unmatched.  SMEBank  had  two  FX  screens 

from  BankDealerFX. One screen displays live two-way markets, generally only one tick (a tick 

is the smallest  standard increment for pricing a given currency or derivative) apart for all major 

currencies. He spent some time showing the screens and discussing them with me. The prices are 

good for any size trade from  $500,000 to $50,000,000. The second screen shows prices that are 

held for up to  10 seconds with slightly higher bid-ask spreads. Formerly  small orders, less than 

$2,000,000, had to go through a special "odd-lot" desk with wide spreads—often  7 or 8 ticks. 

Hans  brags  that  he  can  now  offer  his  small  clients  the  same  service  and  pricing  that 

BMW  or  Siemens  receives.  This  is  a  significant  benefit  of  lower  transaction  costs  and 

disintermediation—access  directly  to the trader—from  web-based  services. "Benefits  to  smaller 

customers" is an unanticipated  theme emerging  in this case  study. A similar benefit  was noted 


115 

earlier  in both  BankClearing  and  BankTreasury,  where  the  new  service  manager  noted  that  the 

web-based  services  first  allowed  SMEs to engage in real-time treasury management. Hans  claims 

that  in  turn  the  FX  traders  of  BankDealerFX  benefit  from  seeing  the  extra  flow  of  all  size 

transactions  without  the  brokers'  fees.  [A  former  dealer  at  BankDealerFX  confirmed  that  the 

"large and steady" flow  of SME orders was a key benefit  of the  service.] 

Hans notes that the change in the custom derivatives  from  the web-based  services  is even 

more  dramatic.  Five  years  earlier,  a  custom  structured  product  would  have  taken  days  to 

negotiate,  analyze  and price. To cover costs, deal  size had to be  $25-$50 million.  BankDealerFX 

now  lists  the  possible  structural  components,  including  underlying  indices,  permitted  forward 

time  periods,  and  types  of  options  (e.g.  European,  caps,  knock-outs,  etc.)  and  spreads.  The  site 

provides  live pricing  of all underlying  indices and estimates  of volatility that  feeds  into a pricing 

tool  to  estimate  the  cost  of  the  custom  derivative.  The  pricing  tool  can  also  be  used  as  a 

simulation  tool  for  different  scenarios  with the passing  of time. BankDealerFX  markets  its web-

based  custom  derivatives  and  structured  products  service  to  smaller  banks  seeking  to  offer 

custom  derivatives.  Their  marketing  literature  states  that  users  "avoid  the  time-to-market  risk" 

and  "costs  of  building  new  services."  An  earlier  study  of  new  financial  derivatives  showed 

development  costs with little extra margin to the innovators (Johne and Pavlidis  1996). 

The  derivatives  web  service  meets  criteria  of  a  "user  toolkit"  (von  Hippel  2001;  von 

Hippel  and  Katz  2002); the  client  can  create  a new  structure  by  choosing  a unique  combination 

of  index,  option  type,  exercise,  and  valuation  date.  The  service  incorporates  the  allied  idea  of 

experimentation  through  advanced  simulation  tools  (Thomke  2003;  Thomke  and  von  Hippel 

2002). 

Hans  also  noted  that  BankDealerFX  has  their  customers  designing  and  testing  new 

structures  for  them.  When  they  see  a  structure  that  might  appeal  to  another  customer 


116 

BankDealerFX offers  it through their site to all of their customers. Hans noted with pride that "a 

couple times my little bank came up with a new derivative or gave BankDealerFX an idea they 

could show to the major firms of the world." Hans noted that his traders spent much of their day 

in front of the BankDealerFX screen. "We think of the site as a 'good friend'." 

2.  DealerFDEnergy 

DealerFDEnergy  is a nonbank  dealer of  financial  and energy  derivatives. Larry, 

the head of new product development is less focused on customization and interested in a "sweet 

spot"  of  instruments  that  are  less  standard  than  exchange  products  but  are  still  high  volume, 

actively  traded  instruments.  He  is  focused  on  large  innovative  new  products  and  argues  that 

online collaboration does not necessarily help him in that quest. Larry made a very provocative 

statement midway through our meeting: 

"I don't think in terms of electronic versus non-electronic  in terms of innovation. I 

think it had zero impact on... the process of innovation." 

This was a statement of keen interest to me, as it seemingly contradicted the account of 

Hans, the two  exchanges  that traded  derivatives  (presented  later), and,  in fact,  all  of the  other 

seven  cases.  I  directed  the  conversation  to  better  understand  this  comment.  Larry  quickly 

allowed that electronic trading facilitated  making more frequent small or incremental changes in 

services, what  might  be  called  improvements  and  line  extensions,  to  different  products.  Later, 

however, he described a new set of instruments different  from their standard products that trade 

irregularly and noted that would never have been launched in the pre-online era. 

Since much of the trading has migrated  online, enhanced  customer  communication  and 

collaboration has resulted in more and faster  incremental changes. However unlike the situation 

at BankClearing  where the  incremental  changes are cumulative  and result  in major  changes to 

the  overall  service  offering,  the  DealerFDEnergy  products  are  a  portfolio  of  independent 


117 

products, so small changes  are not cumulative. Larry questions how innovative the resulting  new 

delivery  dates  or  a  few  new  grades  of  delivery  really  are.  He  expects  eventually  that  he  will  be 

able  to  point  to  a  success.  He  believes  that  all  the  good  problems  and  needs  come  from  clients 

but notes that it is hard to figure  out what works  for  them: 

"The problems come from the customer and then it's just, 'What do you mean? What 

do  you  mean?'  Or,  'What's  the  issue?  What's  the  issue?'  People  say,  'I'm  just 

uncomfortable,  let's  just  say.  Well,  alright,  are  you  too  warm?'  You  know  what  I 

mean? You got to drill down to the very specific. 'What do you mean?' Isolate what 

the real issue is... I think that's a lot of it." 

The  flexibility  of  the  Internet  should  thus  enable  hands-on  exploration  to  better  discern 

the  needs  and  solutions. He  notes that  online  trading  has  allowed  for  more  experimentation  and 

more  patience  to  wait  for  success  on  a  new  instrument.  And  as  already  noted  he  can  point  to  a 

whole  set of products that would not have been launched without the online environment.  But  he 

notes that this potential  has not yet resulted  in a big  new  instrument.  Yet he  is  focused  on  novel 

new products with big potential. 

I  considered  many  possible  propositions  that  might  emerge  from  the  juxtaposition  of 

Larry's  argument  versus the  evidence  of the  other  cases. The  other  OTC  dealer  had  emphasized 

customizable  products.  Joe  at  BankTreasury  had  observed  that  smaller  changes  occurred  faster 

without  slowing  major  innovations.  These  brought  to  mind  a  couple  potentially  interesting 

propositions: 

•  The Internet  facilitates  incremental  changes  in new  services but has  little impact on  more 

innovative or radical NSD, or 

•  NSD  for  radical  or more  innovative products will not be greatly  impacted by  a  migration 
to the  Internet unless  either  (1) cumulative  incremental  changes  can be  significant  to  the 
service or (2) customization  is a part of the service. 


118 

BankClearing  and  BankTreasury  had  both  indicated  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  a  series  of 

incremental  changes  was  a  major  innovation,  arguing  against  the  first  idea.  The  second  was 

harder to rule out -  possibly  in part because of its complexity -  but after  considerable  analysis, I 

had to conclude that there really was no basis for either potential  proposition. 

It seems to me that the biggest problem with Larry's  lament about true innovation was his 

insistence that  it be "big." By  standard  definitions  in NPD, more  innovative  and radical  products 

are  not  necessarily  major  successes  (Garcia  and  Calantone  2002).  The  array  of  products  that 

Larry  pointed  that  wouldn't  have  been  listed  in  a  pre-online  era  are,  in  my  opinion,  more 

innovative  than  some  of  the  examples  he  gave  of  major  innovations.  The  lack  of  a  major 

innovation  that made  it big  could relate to the competition  for new benchmarks  that  is  discussed 

in  the  ExchangeFDl  case.  So  in  the  end,  his  provocative  statement  primarily  served  as  a 

motivation to re-examine themes in detail. 

3.  A  Proposition 

The  adaptable  files  provided  by  BankClearing  were  a  form  of  customer  toolkit 

empowering  customers  to  use  data  as  they  wish.  The  concept  is  much  more  developed  at 

BankDealerFX.  On  that  site  customers  can  design  a  financial  derivative,  produce  an  indicative 

price  for  it and  simulate  the returns  under  different  market  scenarios. These  simulation  tools  are 

consistent  with the approaches advocated in articles on user toolkits (Thomke 2003; Thomke  and 

von Hippel 2002). 

BankTreasury, the subject  of the next  case, plans to incorporate  analysis tools to  measure 

the effects  of planned transactions in its corporate  service soon. These cases suggest that: 

P4.5:  Web-based  services  are  more  likely  to  incorporate  "customer  toolkits" 

to  facilitate 

collaboration  in design  and  customization. 


119 

K.  BankTreasury: Meeting Corporate Client Needs 

BankTreasury  is  a  department  of  major  national/regional  bank  which  serves  both 

corporate  and  retail  customers  in  the  Midwest,  U.S.  and  a  few  international  markets. 

BankTreasury  serves the treasury needs of banks including collections, disbursements  of  funds, 

tracking  cash  balances,  "sweeping"  excess  funds  into  short  term  investments,  and  tracking 

banking  balances,  loan,  and  risk  management  positions  with  the  bank.  The  services  are  very 

information-intensive:  corporate treasurers and cash managers put a high value on being able to 

track cash positions and risk exposures live during the day ("real time"). 

1.  The Case 

Joe is VP New Product Development for commercial banking at a major bank that 

will be called "BankTreasury." An informal  survey of several commercial bankers confirms that 

BankTreasury  is  one  of  the  leaders  in  web-based  treasury  management  services  and  has  an 

unusual concentration of medium-sized corporate clients. Treasury Management services, which 

account  for  most  of the  services of daily commercial  banking,  include: tracking  and  collecting 

receivables, disbursements and payments, lock box services, receivables financing, and currency 

translation. Bank loans are the responsibility of another department but balances will be tracked 

by the BankTreasury group. 

A  major  factor  in  these  services  is  up-to-date  "real-time"  information.  Joe  says  that 

Treasury  Management  services  are  clearly  "an  information  business."  Phase  I  of  web-based 

services  for  Treasury  Management  was  making  real  time  information  on  all  of  a  customer's 

accounts  accessible  in  one  place.  Phase  II,  enabling  transactions  online—including  payment, 

account transfers, currency conversions, and drawing on credit lines, is nearly complete. 

These  services  have  empowered  small  or  midsize  enterprise  ("SME")  treasurers  to 

manage daily and intraday cash positions and treasury exposure. The remaining phases of web-


120 

based  treasury  services  are  to  integrate  the  data  for  custom  reporting  and  make  the  data 

accessible for risk and accounting analysis. BankTreasury has made an effort  to visit clients and 

observe how the treasury management services are used. Most Treasurers or cash managers have 

three  online  solutions  that  they  use  throughout  the  day:  online  bank  services,  a  treasury 

workstation,  and  a  daily  accounting  package.  Often  all  three  programs  are  open  on  different 

screens  on  the  Treasurer's  desk.  Observing  customers  using  their  web-based  services, 

BankTreasury  developed  a  data  download  that  linked  to  the  leading  treasury  workstation  and 

daily accounting packages. 

Although the clients like the data link to the other programs, Joe is not pleased with the 

strategic  implications  of  downloading  BankTreasury  data  for  other  programs.  Half  of  its 

customers consider the bank screen to be the lead screen, while the other half considers the daily 

accounting package to be the key screen for treasury management. Joe notes that: 

For the people who consider the accounting package the most important service, our 

link  to  the  leading  account  system—simply  downloading  our  data  to  its  screen 

strengthens the hold of the package and marginalizes our web-based products. We are 

determined to fight for desk space and customer eyeballs. 

Joe acknowledges that the next step will be to deliver flexible  data files that can be used 

in a variety of applications and spread sheets. He expects to learn more about useful processes by 

watching how the customers use the data. The ultimate objective will be live two-way interactive 

links with the other key treasury tools. The workstation  functionality  could be brought into the 

bank website, allowing simulation of the effects  of a transaction on the risk or liquidity measures 

of the corporation.  Joe noted that the customer  collaboration  to date had  focused  on observing 

the  use  of  information  by  typical  clients,  this  next  step  may  depend  on  the  more  demanding 

clients or "lead users." 


121 

Joe  ran  product  development  for  treasury  management  services  before  the  services 

migrated  to the Internet,  so he has a good perspective  on development  of  business-to-business 

financial  services  before  and  after  the  shift  to  the  new  self-service  technology.  BankTreasury 

has a formal  eight-step process for new service development that is consistent with the ten-step 

process described by Alam (2002) and the Stage-Gate processes from the NPD literature (Cooper 

1990). The eight steps of the process are: (0) Idea generation, (1) frame  idea, (2) access idea, (3) 

validate scope, (4) analyze potential, (5) build, (6) test, and (7) launch. 

This is the same process that was in place before the treasury markets services were web-

based.  Joe  noted  that  the process  moves much faster  than  previously,  especially  incremental 

enhancements: 

"a brand-new service that would have taken 18 months to two years before we were 

on the web, now can reach the market in a year; an improvement or new feature that 

once would have been lumped into twice-a-year releases can often be done on the fly 

and  put  into the  two-week  new  release  schedule."  [Joe  notes that  there  is much]... 
"less rigor":  [changes  are  made and  BankTreasury]... "watches customer  usage." [The 

process is]... "more interactive and iterative." 

This  conversation  with  Joe  illustrated  the  strength  of  qualitative  analysis  and  open 

discussion. I was surprised when Joe initially told me that he was following the same process as 

before the migration of the services and brought out a diagram of an eight-step process -  it didn't 

seem  to  fit  the  discussion  we  had  had.  When  I  asked  him  if  the  implementation  of  the  step 

process had changed he  spoke of "releases  on the fly",  "less rigor",  "watches customer usage" 

and  "more  interactive  and  iterative."  What  had  once  been  a  fairly  rigorous  eight  step  Stage-

Gate®  process  with  independent  go/no-go  decisions  at  the  gates  was  now  a  loose  guide  or 

checklist for the development team to consult if there was time. Despite this dramatic change in 

the NSD process at BankTreasury, if the instrument of research for this study had been a short-

answer  survey  instead  of  a  qualitative  researcher,  Joe  would  likely  have  indicated  that 


122 

BankTreasury  was  still  following  the  eight  step  Stage-Gate®  process  that  the  department  had 

used before  offering  the services on the Internet. The short answer would have been wrong. 

Joe has  even more  disdain  for  focus  groups than Helen  at BankClearing:  he believes  that 

groups  suppress new ideas and the very important  "details." The best  ideas come from  observing 

the  clients,  from  the  salesman  and  customer  service  representatives  who  are  in  regular  contact 

with  the  customers,  and  from  pilot  programs  as  customers  iteratively  test  solutions  to  the 

customer  ideas. He  wasn't  familiar  with von  Hippel's  term  "sticky  information"  but the  concept 

resonated with him when I explained it (von Hippel  1994). 

Joe  does  not  currently  make  use  of  log  information  on  the  website.  The  BankTreasury 

website  is "so  complex  that  customer  logs are hard to mine  for  information."  He has  considered 

the  option  and  will  use  such  data  when  it becomes  feasible.  BankTreasury  relies  on  discussions 

and  observations  of  client  use.  They  have  a  dedicated  testing  room  with  cameras  and  one-way 

mirrors  where  customers  test  new  services  for  usability  and  can be  observed  or recorded  by  Joe 

or his group. The migration  of the services to web-delivery has increased  customer  collaboration 

in  the  new  service  development  process  beyond  the  collaboration  that  had  previously  occurred 

before  the migration. 

Alam  (2002),  as  noted  previously,  had  found  in  his  earlier  case  study  of  customer 

collaboration  in  the  development  of  business-to-business  financial  services  that  strengthening 

customer  relationships  was  a  new  objective  for  the  banks  utilizing  customer  collaboration  in 

developing  new  financial  services. This idea was observed  in four  of the cases and emerged  as a 

theme  in this  study:  customer  collaboration  in web-based  financial  services  has  strengthened  the 

relationship  between  the  financial  firm  providing  the  services  and  the  participating  customers. 

Previous  studies  had  indicated  that  this  effect  was  derived  from  faster  development  and  more 


123 

innovative,  more  customer-oriented  products  and  services  resulting  from 

the  customer 

collaboration. 

As noted  in the  literature review there  is previous  evidence that  self-service  technologies 

themselves,  by  involving  the  customer  more  in  the  service  process,  strengthened  customer 

relationships  (Rodie  and  Kleine  2000).  Converting  business-to-business  financial  services  to  a 

web-based  self-service  model  should  therefore  be  expected  to  strengthen  customer  relationships 

among active users who are now more involved in the service  delivery. 

Joe  and  BankTreasury  were  able  to  provide  additional  evidence  to  suggest  a  new 

proposition. BankTreasury  had run collaborative  development  and alpha testing of a new  version 

of  the  web-based  service  incorporating  some  really  new  services,  with  customer  collaborators. 

Collaboration,  development,  and testing  ran  for  nine  months.  The  customers  were unanimous  in 

their  support  for  the new  service. Unfortunately,  because  of a major  change  at the bank,  Joe  was 

forced  to cancel the project.  Joe was surprised by the friendly  reception. He was surprised to  find 

that  even  involvement  in  a  cancelled  project  strengthened  customer  ties.  One  of  the  customers 

seemed to sum up the general attitude among the participants: 

"It's  a shame; it  is a good service. But  I'm  OK to  go back to  the  old version.  I was 

honored to be part of the development." Joe said that his observation was backed by 

the  customer  service  representatives  and  salespeople,  one  of  whom  urged  him  to 

involve more of his customers in collaboration. 

Joe  noted  that  the  relationships  differed  from  the  intensely  personal  ones  that  bankers 

have  traditionally  developed  with  clients. Emotions  are  involved:  the  clients take pride  in  being 

involved in development and take "ownership" of the evolving  services. Much of the relationship 

is person-to-website:  "some  of the  customers  get  to  know  the  details  of  the  site  better than  me; 


124 

they  spend  so much time  becoming  expert that  our relationship  has a  software-like  legacy  effect 

keeping them with us." 

BankTreasury  relies  very  little  on  competitor  analysis.  The  bank  has  a  backlog  of 

customer  ideas;  competitors  only  come  up  when  a  customer  mentions  a  specific  feature. 

BankTreasury  is  studying  whether  to  segment  the  services.  To  date  the  same  sites  and  services 

have  been  made  available  to  multinational  corporations,  middle-market  firms,  and  small 

businesses.  The biggest  beneficiaries  have been  SME's  who  can now  manage treasury  functions 

real-time,  a privilege  formerly  available  only  to  multi-nationals.  Aggressive  multinationals  that 

use the  system  24/7  are making  most  of the  suggestions  for  new  services—acting  as  lead  users. 

Joe  says  that  the  one  downside  to  the  web-based  services  is  that  customer  expectations  of  new 

service  development  have  dramatically  increased:  "our  customers  expect  to  see  something  new, 

exciting, self-explanatory,  and fully  consistent with everything  else, every  month." 

Joe  was  the  only  participant  in  the  case  to  claim  (initially)  that  his  firm  maintained  a 

highly  structured  Stage-Gate®  type  process  for  new  service  development.  Joe  notes  that  "in 

theory"  the  bank  has  maintained  an  8-step process  for  NPD,  as  it  had  prior  to  the  migration  to 

web-based  services. But  as noted, the process  is much  faster,  there  is much less rigor as  changes 

are  made  and  BankTreasury  watches  customer  usage.  The  new  "more  interactive  and  iterative" 

process is significantly  different  than the old staged process. 

Joe,  like  all  of  the  other  participants  in  this  study,  noted  that  many  more  "incremental" 

changes  were  taking  place  than  before  their  services  migrated  to  the  Web.  Joe,  like  Helen  at 

BankClearing  noted  that  the  effects  were  cumulative  and  the  changes  are  significant  over  the 

course  of  six  months  or  a  year.  Changes  are  not  only  more  frequent  but  are  also  put  into  use 

much  more  quickly.  What formerly  would  have  been  a big project  is more  often  split  into  small 

incremental  steps  to be tested quickly  by  clients. 


125 

2.  A Set of Propositions 

This  was  a case rich  in detail  and  follows  other  rich  cases.  As  a result,  this  is  an 

opportunity to discuss a large set of propositions. 

Joe  noted  that  the  customer  collaboration  to  date  had  focused  on  observing  the  use  of 

their information  by typical  clients. He believed that  further  innovation  may  depend  on the  more 

demanding  clients  or  "lead  users."  This  comment  from  Joe  mirrors  observations  from  the 

BankClearing  case.  At  first  this  seems  like  a  counter-intuitive  idea;  migrating  these  services  to 

the  Internet  is  a  major  innovation  and  generally  lead  users  are  more  supportive  of  significant 

innovation than typical customers (Christensen and Bower  1996; von Hippel  1986). 

However, remembering  the bounded  situation of this study, this  study focuses  on  services 

that  have  migrated  existing  business  to  the  Internet.  It  makes  sense  that  a  firm  with  an 

established  business  would  first  want  to  move  and  preserve  its  existing  business,  before  taking 

full  advantage of the innovative capabilities of the new  platform. 

P4.6:  Early 

collaboration 

in  web-based 

financial 

services 

involves 

typical 

users; 

collaboration  after  migration  to the web may  involve  lead  users. 

Alam  (2002)  found  that  innovation  collaboration  strengthened  customer  relationships  by 

producing products that better fit their needs and theorized that the process of collaboration  could 

strengthen  customer relationships. But in the current  study the theme emerges that the process  of 

customer collaboration  in new service development  strengthens the customer  relationship. 

Joe has provided  a decisive bit of evidence—strengthened  relationships  from  a failed  and 

discontinued NSD  effort: 

"clients  take  pride  in  being  involved  in  development  and  take  "ownership"  of  the 

evolving services." 


126 

Joe said that his observation was backed by the customer service representatives and salespeople, 

one of whom urged him to involve more of his customers in collaboration. This was supported in 

other cases. BankClearing says that this is a common phenomenon: 

"if  we  begin  sharing  evolution  then  we  become  a family...  before  we  were  just a 

vendor. We're actually evolving technology with their benefit & letting them know it." 

A quote  from  the only customer that participated  in this case  study illustrates the  effect 

created by being involved in the NSD process. 

"a couple times my little bank came up with a new derivative or gave BankDealerFX an 

idea they could show to the major firms of the world." 

P4.7:  Customer collaboration  in  new  web-based  new  service  development  reinforces and 

strengthens the customer bond developed from  self-service encounters. 

Customers  also  seem  to  develop  a  relationship  with  the  website.  Joe  observed  among  his 

customers: 

"some of the customers get to know the details of the site better than me; they spend 

so much time becoming expert that our relationship has a software-like legacy effect 

keeping them with us." 

Again a quote from the sole customer in this study is useful  as an illustration. Hans noted 

that his traders spent much of their day in front of the BankDealerFX screen: 

"We think of the site as a 'good friend'." 

P4.8:  Customers become emotionally involved with the service web site. 

Web-based NSD is iterative. Joe notes that "in theory" the bank has maintained an 8-step 

process for NPD, as it had prior to the migration to web-based services. But as noted, the process 

is much faster, there is much less rigor as changes are made and BankTreasury watches customer 


127 

usage.  The  new  "more  interactive  and  iterative"  process  is  significantly  different  than  the  old 

staged process. 

Helen  at  BankClearing  said  that  now  there  are  no  formal  stages  for  review:  we  show 

changes  to  some  customers,  get their  feedback  and  try  again;  when  we  stop  getting  suggestions 

we  evaluate whether we have  an improvement  that other customers would like—review  happens 

only if the budget gets high or when the new service stops  improving." 

The  same message will come through loud and clear in the exchange cases, NSD  in web-

based services are iterative: 

P4.9:  NSD for  a B2B  service  is significantly  more  iterative  after  the service  is delivered  on  the 

Internet. 

Helen  and  Joe  noted that  many  more  "incremental"  changes  had  taken place  than  before 

their  services  migrated  to  the  Web,  but  also  indicated  that  the  product  was  changing  more 

quickly  than before.  The overnight  changes  are not  significant  but  over  six months  or a year  the 

change  in  a  service  is  significant.  What  formerly  would  have  been  a  big  project  is  more  often 

split into small incremental steps to be tested quickly by clients: 

P4.10:  NSD for  Web-based  services  is  broken  into  multiple  incremental  changes  to  enhance 

speed  and customer  input  during  development. 


128 

L.  Global Derivatives Exchanges Climb "Out of the Pits" 

International  financial  derivatives  exchanges  offer  highly  liquid,  highly  leveraged, 

standardized  instruments  ("contracts")  to  manage  risk  or  initiate  a  position  in  a  benchmark 

security or index. Popular products include indexes on a variety of stock markets, including the 

S&P  500  and  Dow  Jones  index  and  their  equivalents  in  Europe  and  Asia;  government  bond 

indexes such as the US treasury bond and German Bund and their equivalent in major nations of 

Europe and Asia; foreign  currencies; options in individual  stocks; and commodities  such as oil 

for delivery at specific locations such as London or New York. 

"Liquidity",  the  ability  to  enter  and  exit  a  large  number  of  contracts  quickly  and  with 

little price slippage, is the holy grail of the exchange-traded derivatives industry. All participants, 

corporate  hedgers,  long  term  traders  and  short  term  traders  strongly  prefer  to  trade  liquid 

contracts.  This  creates  a  "chicken  and  egg"  situation  for  new  contracts:  if  everyone  waits  for 

liquidity in a new product, how does it ever get liquid? 

The exchanges  have had two major  changes  during the  last  decade. Most  of the  major 

exchanges have converted  from being private membership  owned and traded entities into being 

public  corporations.  The  major  exchanges  also  converted  to open  online  trading.  The  industry 

has experienced dramatic growth and a surge in new products over the past five years. The fact 

that demutualization and electronic trading occurred around the same time muddies some of the 

analysis of changes  from  going  online. Some of the exchange  executives  I talked to attribute a 

recent increase  in innovation to online trading, while others argue that demutualization  and the 

pressure of public ownership forced exchanges increase innovation. 

The key informants of the two exchanges included here are both long-term veterans in the 

exchange-traded  derivatives industry with over twenty year's experience. Prior to my academic 

pursuits I had enjoyed  a fifteen  year career in the financial  derivatives  industry. Neither  of the 


129 

subjects  was  a  friend,  nor  had  either  ever  been  a  coworker  of  mine.  However  each  of  us  had 

achieved  some  prominence  in  a  specialized  business,  and  therefore  we  had  met  at  a  number  of 

industry  functions,  had  seen  each  other  speak  at  conferences,  and  had  many  friends  and 

acquaintances  in common. 

In the days when I had been active at derivative exchanges all trading  and customer  trade 

execution  was done by persons  with raspy voices, a badge, and a bright  sport  coat,  shouting  and 

shoving  in  a  small  defined  "pit",  or  mini-amphitheater.  All  decisions  on  new  product 

development  or the launching  and de-listing  of products were made by committees  selected  from 

the  same raspy-voiced  badge-wearers  after  trading hours. I had been on new product  committees 

at two derivative  exchanges; once as a  supporting  staff  person  and the  second time  as one of the 

persons with badges. I therefore  personally enjoyed  these two cases because of the opportunity  to 

view  the  adjustments  at  exchanges  since  (1)  the  traded  products  had  gone  online  and  (2)  the 

exchanges had demutualized  and become public for-profit  entities managed by professional  staff. 

1.  ExchangeFDl 

When  I  walked  into  Jerry's  office  a  full  wall  of  windows  immersed  me  in  the 

spectacular  architecture  of  a  modern  city.  Jerry,  though  nodding  to  me,  was  staring  at  the 

opposite  wall  where  a  flat  panel  displayed  the  rapidly  changing  prices  of  his  exchange's 

products.  "Watch,  it is going to  set new highs" he said. Fortunately  the contract  quickly  reached 

a new daily high and we began our discussion. 

When  I  asked  Jerry  the  source  of the  flurry  of  innovation  at his  exchange  he  mentioned 

three  key  factors  (1) the advent  of electronic trading  ~  the migration  of training  online,  whether 

over  private  networks  or  the  Internet,  (2)  demutualization,  and  (3)  short-term  competitive 

pressures  from  becoming  a  publicly-listed  corporation.  He  had  obviously  given  the  topic 

considerable  thought: 


130 

"its electronics and the fact that we are a for-profit corporation whose mission is to 

increase shareholder values. What... that all means is that competition is intensifying. 

Successful futures are based upon benchmark products and the bottom line it is that... 

A  benchmark  is easy  to  identify...the  S&P500,  the  10-year  Treasury  note,  the  Fed 

Funds rate, etc. So we  need to  identify  emerging benchmarks, what's going to  be a 

benchmark  in the future.  We  need to  get there  early...  So are  looking  upstream to 

things which may not be quite ripe for commoditization. 

Online trading is key to all of this. It extends the shelf life of new products... We can 

afford to develop markets... more slowly. This is a great thing for us... The bottom line 

is that we're generating more new products than ever... Electronic trading allows us to 

hang in there and increase shelf life. We can afford to see the market develop over an 

extended  period of time, instead of watching something die  in the first four  weeks 

because we didn't  have the massive influx of outside order flow to support locals in 

the pit." 

To Jerry "going upstream" means launching contracts that the exchange anticipates may 

take  a while to become  popular.  He also mentioned  that the exchange  was  able to  experiment 

with other execution techniques besides open bids and offers.  Standard auctions, Dutch auctions, 

bookie-style odds-making — these were all new techniques being used or considered  for  future 

use. 

Jerry  had  stacks  of  documents  on  his  desk,  organized  into  stacks  of  the  new  product 

development  process,  newly  launched  products,  products  launched  since  demutualization, 

planned  new  products,  shelved  new  products,  etc.  He  had  made  an  effort  to  plan  for  our 

discussion. Using most of the data in the documentation would either violate trade secrets of the 

exchange  or  the  confidentiality  of  our  discussion.  However,  the  time  we  spent  reviewing  the 

documents was valuable  for my contextual understanding  of NSD at the exchange. I  suspected 

that part of Jerry's motivation in providing the extensive documentation to me was to show how 


131 

far  state-of-the-art  exchange  product  development  had  advanced  since  my  days  of  being 

involved  in such  efforts. 

The  most  surprising  information  revealed  in  the  documentation  was  a  strong  effort  to 

make  new product  development  more  structured,  more  so than it had ever been  in the  pre-online 

days. "Need to make the process more formal"  is a major  theme  from  the grounded  study of new 

service  development  in  Chapter  Three.  Even  while  praising  on-the-fly  product  changes, 

experimentation,  and willingness  to fail,  Jerry, Helen  at BankClearing,  and Joe at  BankTreasury 

expressed a wish to  structure and better control the process. This is a replication  of a theme  from 

the  grounded  study,  not  a  new  proposal;  but  it  is  interesting  that  it  is  also  a  theme  in the  freer 

environment  of online services. 

Jerry's  proposed  NPD  structure  had  definite  elements  of  a  Stage-Gate®  system  (Cooper 

1990;  Sethi  and  Iqbal  2004),  but  after  pressing  him  on  the  details  and  examining  the 

documentation,  it was clear that there are no real  gate-keepers  in the process. Therefore  the  new 

procedure is really a checklist or a formal tracking  system. However, even as a checklist  it  injects 

some structure into the development process. 

Jerry  stated  that  the  "chicken  and  egg"  issue  of new  product  liquidity  is  still present  but 

(1)  electronic  trading  has  changed  the  nature  of  liquidity  providers  (2) the  new  platform  allows 

for  a longer period to establish  liquidity,  and  (3) ultimately  new executive methods  should  favor 

contracts that do not achieve  short-term liquidity but have long holding periods. In  pre-electronic 

days, when  live traders  shouted  and  shoved  in crowded  pits, a contract  was  expensive  to  launch 

and  if  outside  volume  didn't  come  quickly  the  live  bodies  would  desert  the  new  pit,  not  return 

until there was a different  new product in it. 

We don't have to beg for 15 minutes anymore. 


132 

[Jerry  was  referring  to  the  legend  -  actually  a  true  story  -  of  a  chairman  of  a  major 

exchange  who  stood  at  the  exchange  exit  when  the  meat  futures  contracts  closed, and 

asked  the  hog,  pork  belly,  and  live  cattle  traders  to  venture  into  the  new  stock  index 

futures  pit  for  just  15  minutes  and  "trade  a few"  contracts.  A trader  himself,  he  knew 

full well that  these traders were  used to  being "masters of the  universe"  in their  pits  and 

could  not  simply trade  a "few"  contracts. Even though  the  meat traders  knew  nothing  of 

the  new  product,  they  would  have  to  be  seen trading  in  size,  risking their  Jaguars  and 

their  children's  Ivy  League  educations  trading  products  they  didn't  understand.  In  the 

process  trading  volume  surged  and  outside  participants  assumed  liquidity  had  been 

established  in the  new  contracts.] 

Jerry notes that online trading has changed the nature of "locals", the short-term in-and-

out traders who help provide liquidity by frequently posting bids and offers: 

"We  no  longer  have  to  beg a  select  group  of  members  to  give  a  new  contract  a  try. 

There  are  people  located, who  knows where  in the  world, who  are  very  happy  to  be 

electronic market makers often on an almost completely automated  basis. So they can 

provide  liquidity...  Cyber-locals...  [I  was  in]...  Israel  and  Poland  giving  lectures  to 

proprietary]  trading  houses  regarding  our  products.  This  underscores  the  value  of 

electronic  trading  where  you  can  bring  in  business  from  far  flung  places...  These 

outfits  recruit smart  kids straight out of school and in places where  perhaps good jobs 

in the  finance  field  are  hard  to  find... smart  and  hungry  recruits. That's  a  good  thing 

and  allows  us  to  be  more  competitive  and  helps  the  product  development  cycle... 

We're  more  aggressive  now;  we  are  willing  to  take  a  chance  because  we  have 

electronic 

trading  which  will  extend  the  shelf 

life  and  allow  more 

remote 

participation." 

The primary contributions to increased  innovation from  online trading that he cited in a 

variety  of ways  are  (1)  lower  fixed  cost  of  a new  launch,  (2) more time  to  succeed,  (3) more 

willingness  to  try  something  new  and  possibly  fail,  and  (4)  the possibility  of  new  trading 

techniques that were not as dependent on short term liquidity. The single biggest change in new 

product development at the exchange is that it will accept a "higher failure rate." 


133 

2.  ExchangeFD2 

Colin  is  senior  marketing  executive  for  ExchangeFD2,  a  major  financial 

derivatives  exchange  headquartered  outside  the  U.S.  I  met  Colin  in  a  guest  office  in  his 

exchange's regional office;  it was fairly  Spartan office  but did have the ubiquitous flat screen for 

live  exchange  quotes.  It  was  Colin  who  provided  the  "opening  monologue"  for  this  chapter, 

illustrating the importance of customer collaboration  and how it is facilitated  by online trading. 

A shortened version: 

"...  suddenly  you...  interact  with  your  members  on  a  basis  of  something  that  is 

commercially  important  to  them...  whether  you  define  your  customers  as  your 

members or as your end users [there  is more  collaboration]...  Much more.., I cannot 

tell you the new lines [services] we've generated... 

But the  single  biggest  benefit  of  [product  x,  which  ultimately  failed], and  /  knew it 

before we launched it, is that it allowed us to interact with a whole group of traders in 

the US that we hadn't in the past -on a productive commercial basis. And the minute 

you establish that  relationship, you can maintain  it. And it's helped us immensely in 

terms  of  growing  [and  developing  new  products  such  as  product  y].  You  know, 

sometimes, the dividends don't pay off immediately, but they do pay off." 

The  migration  of  the  product  online  fostered  the  first  intensive  collaboration  with 

customers who had been exchange members -  and therefore part owners! -  for years. The failure 

of  a  new  product,  a  specialized  interest  rate  derivative,  that  had  appeal  to  traders  in  the  US 

actually turned out to be a big success for the exchange because the failed  contract introduced a 

new  set  of  American  users  to  the  exchange.  These  new  users  soon  became  collaborators  in 

innovation and ultimately contributed to a successful  contract launch. 

Electronic trading put the exchange in direct active contact with users for the first time. 

The  biggest  users  were  typically  clients  of  brokers  who  were  members  of  the  exchange. 

Traditionally  the  exchange  had  only  received  user  input  through  the  broker-members.  Colin 


134 

argued that the information  filtered  by brokers  was not  as rich and useful  as from  direct  contact. 

He  is  supported  by  NPD  research  that  shows  that  direct  unfiltered  user  contact  advances 

innovation  (Griffin  and Hauser  1993; McQuarrie  1998; Workman Jr.  1993). 

Colin  notes  that  many  persons  in the  industry  had  forecast  that  electronic  trading  would 

lead to disintermediation -  the exchanges would  start trading with customers directly, cutting  out 

the brokers and claim the  full  transaction  fee.  Colin notes that brokers  are  still acting as  financial 

intermediaries,  but  that  has  been  a  sort  of  disintermediation  of  information  from  the  advent  of 

electronic  trading: 

[User contact has led to a sense of]... "greater  immediacy. You have a greater  pool of 

potential  advocates.  Because... you  have  electronic  trading, you, even  if  you  don't 

actively disintermediate  your  members, you have greater  end user know-how... you 

get a lot of ideas that percolate up from end users, while in the past, you never would 

have had that ability..." 

In  an  information-intensive  business  like  financial  services  "disintermediating"  user  ideas  and 

knowledge  may  be  more  important  then  disintermediating  their  commissions  away  from  the 

brokers! 

3.  Propositions  about New Service Development  for Online  Services 

The two exchange cases emphasized  some recurring themes of this study;  moving 

a  service  to  the  internet  results  in:  more  customer  involvement,  faster  and  more  innovation  and 

willingness to try new products or services with less testing and less certainty. 

Helen  at BankClearing  noted that  internal testing was reduced  as new  services  rolled  out 

to trial use  quickly.  Moving  clearing  online  "really  pushed  the product  to a whole  new realm  of 

enhancements that went from  Version  1 to 2,000  in a matter of months." 

Iterative  prototyping  and  getting  a  product  into  the  marketplace  for  feedback  has  been 

advocated  for new products  in turbulent markets in NPD literature  (Eisenhardt  and Tabrizi  1995; 

Lynn  and  Morone  1996; Workman  Jr.  1993). Migration  to  the  internet  seems  to  facilitate  these 

strategies: 

P4.11:  Ease  of service  changes  online  leads  to more  experimentation  after services  become  web-

based. 


135 

Colin noted that ExchangeFD2 launched a new contract that was probably a long shot for 

success  with the knowledge  that  even  if  it  failed  it would  attract  new users.  Those  new  users 

became partners  in innovation  and the  contract  was a big win  for the exchange because  of the 

increased  user  collaboration.  After  all  as  Colin notes,  "a  lot  of  ideas...  percolate  up  from  end 

users." 

Jerry  noted  that  the  single  biggest  change  in  new  product  development  at  the 

ExchangeFDl  is: 

that it will accept a "higher failure rate." 

[He notes that ExchangeFDl is]... "taking more chances. I'm not concerned about a low 

success  rate.  If we  don't  -  you  know,  if we  can minimize the  costs associated  with 

developing a new product..." 

This theme leads to a related proposition related to P4.12, but distinct: 

P4.12:  The migration to the Internet reduces the cost of failure:  online services will have more 

new launches and more failures than services not web-based. 


136 

M. Wholesale Financial  Services for Independent  Firms 

Mortgage  banking 

is  a  very  different  business  from  securities  and 

investments. 

SecuritiesIB was combined with BankMortgage  into one story because of their common  business 

model:  both  firms  provide  turnkey  financial  service  businesses  to  other  firms  serving  retail 

customers.  SecuritiesIB  makes  it  possible  for  financial  planners  or  small  investment  firms  to 

offer  stocks,  bonds,  mutual  funds  and  a  full  array  of  other  investment  vehicles  to  individual 

clients. Bank mortgage  enables  financial  planners, real estate brokers, insurance agents and  other 

nontraditional  lenders to originate mortgages  for new homebuyers or  refinancers. 

1.  BankMortgage 

Ed  is the  president  of  BankMortgage,  a  startup  operation  that  seeks  to  empower 

independent  financial  professionals  to  make  mortgages.  Ed  is  a  well  know  veteran  of  the 

mortgage banking industry who left  a large firm to join this startup. 

Ed  notes  that  a  house  is  typically  the  biggest  asset  that  an  individual  owns,  so  an 

individual's  mortgage  should be a big part of their  financial  plan. Yet the financial  professionals 

individuals  rely  on —  financial  planners,  accountants,  insurance  agents, even  realtors  ~  typically 

have  no  role  in  the  selection  of  a  mortgage.  Mortgage  bankers  are  transaction-oriented  and 

generally  showed  little  interest  in  developing  a  relationship  with  their  customers  or  discussing 

how a mortgage  fits  into their financial  plans. Ed believes that enabling  financial  professionals  to 

originate mortgages  would  improve  the  customers'  decision-making  and provide  BankMortgage 

a lucrative business. 

The  Internet  has  made  the  new  business  possible.  Ed  notes  that  a  well-known  former 

bank  consultant  used  to  say  that  "in  financial  services  process  is  the  product."  A  new  process 

utilizing  the  capabilities  of the  Internet  allows  a part-time  originator  to  process  a  mortgage  and 

intelligently  choose between options. 


Ed  credits  Internet  delivery  and  the  flexibility  to  easily  change  the  web  interface  with 

allowing  BankMortgage  to quickly  adapt to customer  demands and to experiment  with new or 

changed services. He points out how they were able to turn around an incorrect decision: 

137 

"...one of the partners really wanted the agents to get the borrower qualified up front. 

Just don't  put  in  the  application  information; pull  down  the  credit  from  the  credit 

bureau since you can at the site and find the right product and the pricing for it... and 

then run it through the automated underwriting system yourself and come back with 

a conditional approval. And while the rest of us said, gee, that's nice, but... the tools 

aren't  slick enough yet to  make the  average  insurance agent  comfortably go all the 

way through and get a conditional approval. 

About  three  weeks ago, we  had  kind of  a 'come to  Jesus' meeting among us, with 

agents and they said look, we'll even pay more, $100 a month more guys, to... get the 

conditional approval back to where it was initially... the nifty thing is... it didn't work 

and [it was corrected  in a month or so]... it shows [the capability of experimenting on 

the platform]... get both expected and unexpected results... And... react to them." 

Try  something,  make  a  mistake,  and  change  it;  this  is  another  example  of  the 

experimentation  discussed  in  the  last  case.  It  evokes  the  "probe  and  learn"  concept  for 

development (Lynn and Morone 1996). 

Ed worries that  the biggest  weakness  of his new  firm  is a lack  of  market  research and 

limited contact with the end users. However he is hopeful  that the capability  for rapid  changes 

and testing  on the platform  will ultimately push innovation in the correct direction through the 

demands made by their client originators. 


138 

2.  SecuritiesIB 

Securities  IB  is  one  of  the  larger  firms  offering  full  brokerage  and  investment 

services to correspondent firms, independent brokers and financial planners. Jennifer has worked 

for  securities  IB for  over 20 years  and  is currently  a senior manager  for  new products  in their 

correspondent division. The correspondent business is communication and information intensive; 

moving the services to the Internet has been a boon for the business. 

The securities business is heavily regulated. When a firm wants to offer  a new product or 

offer new services from outside managers a traditional source of delay was getting updated forms 

to the correspondents and making sure that they maintained the current paperwork. Jennifer  says 

that putting the forms online was a huge gain for speed and accuracy -  if a correspondent pulls a 

form off the website it is automatically the most current form. 

In  the  pre-Internet  era  a  new  product  launch  would  require  travel  and  meetings  for 

publicity, onsite training, and printing and distribution of new forms. All of those functions  have 

migrated  to  the  website.  This  dramatically  cuts  the  cost  and  lead  time  for  the  launch  of  new 

investment products. Jennifer  talked at length about the  flexibility  to change forms,  investment 

managers,  and  products  quickly.  The  biggest  impact  of  the  Internet  is  democratization  of 

information and therefore the democratization of financial products: 

" in the past, you know, you had certain corporations that were able to provide the 

best [and most up-to-date]... array of products and the creme de la creme of products, 

whatever they are. Today, just about anybody can do that...  My  clients can provide 

their clients the same products that Merrill Lynch provides their clients. That's pretty 

phenomenal. I think technology is allowing smaller entrepreneurial firms to be able to 

compete in today's world like they were not able to before. Small firms were always 

good at [personal] service... now they can offer all the products... You don't have to go 

to Merrill Lynch... There is a choice. 


139 

3.  Summary  of Wholesaling Financial  Services 

The  Internet  is  a  "boon"  to  financial  wholesalers.  One  or  two-person  financial 

firms  can  offer  the  products  and  have  access  to  the  information  once  only  available  in  large 

organizations.  The migration  of the  services to the  web has  cut the  launch time  of new  products 

for  SecurtiesIB  from  months  to  hours.  The  same  migration  has  enabled  BankMortgage  to 

experiment  with  new  services  and  correct  mistakes  or  respond  to  customer  suggestions  for 

changes in a service very quickly, almost on the  fly. 

4.  Proposition: Customization for the Masses 

A  new  theme  that  emerged  from  the  analysis  of  the  these  interviews  was  the 

delivery  of  better  services  and  more  customized  services  to  smaller  accounts.  Hans  at  "his  little 

bank" can trade  sophisticated customized  derivatives online. The smallest client of  BankClearing 

can  now  design  their  own  reports;  pre-Internet  only  the  giant  clearers  could  tweak  the  stand 

reports.  The  local  two-person  independent  broker  can  now  offer  the  custom  products  that  once 

only  the  giant  Wall  Street  firms  could  offer.  Mass  customization  is  an  interesting  result  of  the 

spread of the Internet but what does it have to do with ongoing innovation in  services? 

BankMortgage  can  experiment  based  on  a  client  request  and  tweak  it until  it  works.  All 

of the good ideas for innovation  at BankClearing  are coming from  customers, both lead users  and 

small  typical  customers.  Hans  bragged  about  an  idea  from  his  bank  desk  that  ended  up  being 

offered  to the big trading banks in London. Customization for  smaller customers engages them in 

NSD and increases the flow  of new ideas, therefore: 

P4.13  Internet  delivery  allows  customization  of  services  for  smaller  customers  and  therefore 

engages  smaller  customers  in new service  development. 

The  Long  Tail  shows  how  cheaper  distribution  and  communication  due  to  the  Internet  enables 

retailers  such  as  Amazon  or  Netflix  to  profit  from  small  niche  markets  or  customization 

(Anderson 2006). P4.13 suggests that  The Long  Tail effect  applies to B2B finance  also! 


140 

N.  Coding the Cases 

Table  4.1  displayed  eight  constructs  from  the  literature  and  from  Chapter  Three  that  I 

expected to be important in this study. All eight of them proved to be useful  in open coding of 

the data for the eight cases. Table 4.3 shows the eight most used open codes after the completion 

of coding  and the consolidation;  four  constructs  from  the original  list of eight  in Table 4.1 are 

among the top eight. 

The  genesis  of  the  propositions  of  this  chapter  can  be  seen  in  these  eight  most-used 

codes.  Since migration to the internet NSD  for these  services have changed  and likely  become 

less  formal  since: changes  are more  frequent;  the process  is more  iterative;  and  there  is more 

customer collaboration as experimentation and pilot programs are more used. 

Table 4.3: Most used open codes 

Rank 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 

Since the migration of the service to the internet: 

#Codes 

#Cases 

More Frequent  Changes 
Iterativeness has increased* 
Increased  customer  collaboration* 
More incremental changes, but as innovative  as before* 
Reduced cost and concern about  failure 
More  customization 
More pilot programs 
Experimentation* 

50 
27 
28 
23 
23 
21 
19 
17 

8 
7 
6 
4 
3 
4 
4 
3 

Original or modified original construct (pre-data analysis) 

Table 4.4 shows the eleven "tree  nodes", consolidated categories from open coding, that 

I used in analyzing the multiple cases. The two columns show the consolidated category and the 

number of individual codes that were included in each category. 


141 

Table 4.4: "Tree Nodes" -  Consolidated categories of codes 

Consolidated Categories 

Customer - Sticky Info and Market Research 
Customer Collaboration in NSD 
Customer Customization 
Customer Relationship 
Experimentation 
More Innovative NSD 
NSD - Change in process 
NSD - Iterative Process 
NSD - Small or Incremental Changes 
Process- or Technology-driven NSD 
Competitive Analysis, boundary spanner, and other 

# 
5 
5 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
3 
2 
2 
4 

One  of  the  major  themes  that  emerged  in  the  grounded  study  of  Chapter  Three  was 

"getting to know customers and their needs"; in this study the customer is again a primary theme 

but the focus is modified  to "involving the customer in NSD and the service". Examining Table 

4.4 it is probably no  surprise that the major  themes that emerged  from this multiple case study 

were that the key to successful new service development is: 

1.  Involving the customer in NSD and the online service. 

2.  Iterative, incremental-evolutionary change in web-based services. 

A final  major theme developed from  the interaction of these two themes: 

3.  Using the incremental, flexible process to involve customers in NSD. 

The  enhanced  interaction  and  communication  from  delivering  a  service  on the  Internet 

facilitates  known 

techniques 

to  engage  customers 

in  development.  Tools  such  as 

experimentation,  user  toolkits,  and  a  probe  and  learn  prototyping  are  the  main  focus  of  new 

service  development  efforts  for  these  web-based  services.  Changes  can  be  made  quickly  and 


142 

cheaply; corrections can be made on the fly. As noted in proposition P 4.12, cost of "failure" can 

be very low for enhancements or new services. 

Observing results from a class assigned to develop applications for Facebook, a Stanford 

professor  concludes that "many crummy trials beat deep thinking" and "flexibility beats quality" 

(Fogg 2008). Similarly a recent book focused on Internet development states "The cost of trying 

is  lower  than  the  cost  of  analyzing"  (Shirky  2008).  These  lessons  from  studying  the  hottest 

application for networking young people and the coolest new developments on the Internet, were 

also evident in the development of these financial  services for business, several years earlier. As 

I talked to the creators of B2B financial  services I thought of slogans such as "act then analyze" 

or "ready, fire, aim", but the phenomenon is the same. 

This  is not the  world  of the  Stage-Gate®  model  of new  product  development.  A  final 

proposition emerging from these cases is: 

P4.14:  Extensive  analysis,  and  multiple  formal  decision  points  during  development,  is  not  a 

relevant model of new service development for Internet-based B2B services. 

Lessons  from  new  internet  businesses  such  as  Facebook  (Fogg  2008),  other  new 

networking  businesses  (Shirky  2008),  and  online  retailers  such 

as  Amazon  and  Netflix 

(Anderson 2006) seem applicable to online B2B financial  services. The migration of a service to 

the Internet changes service development. 


143 

O.  Discussion of Results 

The preceding  discussion  of these cases has conveyed  some of the rich  and  fascinating 

stories uncovered  in this research. Ed at BankMortgage  says that "process  innovation is service 

innovation."  It  is clear  from  the discussions  with these  eight  service providers  that the  shift  in 

processes  from  the migration  of  services to the Internet  has dramatically  changed the services, 

the delivery of the services, and the ongoing innovation and evolution of the services. 

I uncovered  clear  evidence  of  increased  and extensive  collaboration  in developing  new 

web-based  business-to-business  financial  services. The constructs that I expected to  observe at 

the start of the study were in evidence. Customer collaboration, Lead Users, sticky  information, 

experimentation,  and  user  toolkits  were  observed  in  these  case  studies  involving  leading 

purveyors of web-based  financial  services. This is support for the thesis that these concepts are 

well suited to new service development for web-based business-to-business financial services. 

Three main themes emerged  from this  study. First, firms  seek customer  involvement  in 

the web-site and the continued innovation of the web-based  service. Second, small changes can 

be  made  quickly  and undone  if not  right:  NSD  becomes  iterative  and  incremental,  sometimes 

major  changes  result  from  the  cumulative  effect  of  incremental/evolutionary  development. 

Finally, firms take advantage of the iterative easy changes in the Internet environment to involve 

users in the NSD process. 

In  Table  4.5  the  propositions  developed  in this  chapter  are  summarized  and  organized 

under  the  four  questions  that  began this  study.  Progress  has been made  in understanding  how 

web-delivery  affects  the NSD effort  for new services. However there is still considerable  effort 

needed  to  generalize  the  results  ~  to  convert  the  propositions  to  testable  hypotheses,  find 

representative samples and test the propositions. Perhaps it is true that: 

"qualitative studies do not have endings, only questions (Wolcott 1994)." 


Table 4.5: Summary of propositions  from the case results 

How  does NSD  user  collaboration  occur  in  web-based  services  & how  is it  facilitated? 

P4.5:  Web-based  services  incorporate  "customer  toolkits"  to  facilitate  collaboration  in 

design and  customization. 

P4.6:  Early  collaboration  in  services  migrating  to  the  Internet  involves  typical  users; 

later collaboration involves lead users. 

P4.13  Internet  delivery  allows  customization  of  services  for  smaller  customers  and 

therefore  engages  smaller customers in new service  development 

How  did user  collaboration  in NSD  change  as B2B  services  migrated  to the  web? 

P4.2:  Customer involvement  in NSD  is more  frequent  and more  extensive  in web-based 

services than other  services. 

P4.4:  Web-based  services can uncover "sticky information"  from users remotely. 

P4.ll:  Ease  of  service  changes  online  leads  to  more  experimentation  after  services 

become  web-based. 

What  are  the  benefits  to user  collaboration  in  new  service  development? 

P4.3:  Web-based 

services  help  motivated 

individuals  uncover  client 

"sticky 

information" by focusing  discussions on details of customer usage. 

P4.7:  Customer  collaboration  in  web-based  new  service  development  reinforces  and 

strengthens the customer bond developed  from  self-service  encounters. 

P4.8:  Customers become emotionally  involved with the service web site. 

Does  NSD follow  formal  stages for  B2B  web-based  service?  How  has NSD  changed? 

P4.1:  The  NSD  process  for  web-based  services  is  less  formal  or  structured  than  for 

similar non-web-based  services. 

P4.9:  NSD  for a B2B  service is significantly  more iterative after  the service is  delivered 

on the Internet. 

P4.10:  NSD  for  Web-based  services  is  broken  into  multiple  incremental  changes  when 

possible to enhance  speed and customer input during  development. 

P4.12:  The migration to the Internet reduces the cost of failure:  online  services  will  have 

more new launches and more failures than services not  web-based. 

P4.14:  Extensive  analysis  and  multiple 

formal  decision  points  during 

service 

development is not a relevant model of NSD for Internet-based  B2B services. 


145 

P.  Further  Research 

The  propositions  of  this  paper  should  be  tested  in  a  broader  sample  of  web-based 

financial  services  and  then 

in  general  B2B  web-based  services.  Proposition  P4.7,  that 

strengthened customer ties result from  collaboration in new service development  should be tested 

for all services, web-based or not. 

Additional  qualitative  study  as  well  as  empirical  testing  of  these  propositions  and 

observations  would  be  useful,  as  would  a  study  of  the  strategies  of  B2B  followers.  Studies  of 

web  games  and  open  source  software  have  extended  B2B  customer  collaboration  to  retail 

products  as  well.  Studying  whether  these  propositions  and  ideas  apply  to  retail  web-based 

services would be another logical extension of this research. 

Q.  Limitations, Implications, and  Impressions 

1.  Limitations of the  Research 

This  study  was  deliberately  limited  to  leading  purveyors  of  web-based  institutional 

financial  services.  The  specific  services  studied  were  services  used  regularly  by  institutional 

clients and known to be offered  as web-based  services. The objective  of case study is to acquire a 

deep  understanding  of the  selected  cases; as  noted  previously  generalizability  is  a term  that  has 

little  meaning  to  a  qualitative  researcher  (Glense  and  Peshkin  1992).  Therefore,  additional 

research is needed to generalize  for any larger group, such as web-based services overall. 

Memories  of  the  subjects  should  be  fairly  fresh,  since  the  services  were  started  at  most 

four to five years earlier and most were two years or ongoing. However,  all retrospective  studies 

are  subject  to  bias  from  memory  loss,  "ex-post  rationalization"  (Van  de  Ven  and  Huber  1990) 

and survivor bias. 

The  leading  firms  in  web-based  institutional  financial  services,  represented  by  these 

subjects,  may  not  be  representative  of  industry  "followers."  An  earlier  study  of  the  derivatives 


markets,  showed  that  many  competitors  simply  copied  developments  of  the  industry  leaders 

146 

(Johne and Pavlidis 1996). 

2.  Managerial Implications 

Firms  offering  web-based  B2B  services  should  plan  ahead  for  customer 

collaboration  on new  service development.  After  moving basic  functionality  online, web-based 

services  should  go  beyond  co-delivery  and  minor  customization  and  strive  to  offer  true 

customization  and  enhanced  communication  with  customer  service  and  developers.  "User 

toolkits" and simulation tools should be an explicit part of the web-based service from the initial 

launch. Firms must adapt their development processes to permit extensive iterative development 

during pilot programs and alpha and beta testing. 

The literature  indicates that  customer  collaboration  shortens the development  cycle and 

produces  more  customer-oriented  services.  The  results  of  this  paper  supports  extending  those 

benefits  to  web-based  services  and  suggests  that  such  customer  collaboration  in  new  service 

development  may  strengthen  the  relationship  between  the  producer  of  the  service  and  the 

collaborating  customers.  A  service  provider  should  facilitate  collaboration  in  new  web-based 

service development. 

If the  service  is delivered  well  and the  customer  collaboration  managed  effectively  the 

web-based  services  may  avoid  "de-personalization."  The  cases  suggest  that  customers  may 

develop an emotional tie to the website itself—an  agent of the firm won't leave unexpectedly  for 

a small raise and try to take customers. 

3.  An Overall Impression: Joy 

This  study went  beyond  "a  labor  of  love"; parts  of  it were  a JOY.  The coding  and re-

coding,  then  axial  coding  of  the  transcripts;  the  search  for  subjects;  and  the  logistics  of 

scheduling and re-scheduling and travelling to appointments would all fall  ~  at best ~  into "the 


147 

labor  of  love"  category.  However  the  interviews  themselves,  the  interaction  with  the  subjects, 

and the attempt to capture their stories were genuinely  enjoyable. 

Service  innovation  is  a  strong  research  interest  of  mine.  In  addition  I  had  spent  a  good 

part  of  my  previous  career  trying  to  innovate  in the  financial  services  or related  sectors.  It  was 

fascinating  to  talk  to  the  exchanges  and  see  how  things  have  changed  since  I  worked  in  that 

realm. Nevertheless the source of the joy was external, from the  subjects. 

It  was  a  delight  to  talk  to  people  who  love  their  work.  New  service  creators  know  that 

what  they  do  daily  is creative,  important,  and  fun.  They  were  every  bit  as  interested  as I was  in 

exploring  the  changes  in  their  new  service  development  processes  resulting  from  moving  their 

services to the Internet. 

R.  Closing  Vignette 

Instead of ending with a fresh  vignette as suggested by  Stake (1995) and Creswell (1998), 

I  have  chosen  to  repeat  a  customer's  expression  of joy  in  helping  his  supplier  develop  a  new 

service product: 

"a couple times my little bank came up with a new derivative or gave BankDealerFX an 

idea they could show to the major firms of the world." 

"We think of the site as a 'good friend'." 

Customer collaboration in new service development results in better services. 

Involving  customers  in new  service  development  delights  them  and  converts  web-based 

customers into "good  friends." 


V. 

QUANTITATIVE  TESTS 

A.  Summary and  Introduction 

This  chapter  tests  hypotheses  that  evolved  from  the  two  qualitative  studies  already 

presented. New constructs and proposed antecedents of NSD success are tested. Then  hypotheses 

about the change in effectiveness  of antecedents  over varying innovativeness  are tested. Finally a 

simple  linear  version  of the proposed  culture-tools-process  model  of NSD  success  is tested.  The 

entire first  study tests two of the new measures as antecedents; the second study begins with tests 

of  new  measures  and  antecedents  and  then  tests  changes  in  effectiveness  as  innovativeness 

increases;  it  is  not  until  the  final  nine  pages  of  the  second  study  that  the  culture-tools-process 

model  of  NSD  success  is  tested.  This  emphasis  on  individual  new  measures  and  type  of 

antecedents  is by  design;  I believe  that this  dissertation  can  contribute to  future  research  in  new 

service  development  by  providing  new  measures  that  researchers  can  incorporate  into  their 

models and research. The encouraging results of the model test are of course important also! 

To  test  selected  hypotheses  developed  from  the  propositions  that  emerged  in  the  two 

qualitative studies of NSD, the author had access to two data bases: 

1.  The 2003  Comparative  Performance  Assessment  Study ("CPAS")  database produced  by 

the  Product  Development  &  Management  Association  ("PDMA")  of  new  product 

development practices in assorted service and goods firms,  and 

2.  The  2007  Bank  New  Service  Development  Survey  database  produced  by  the  author  for 

this dissertation with the help of the American Bankers Association  ("ABA"), the  leading 

bank industry  association. 

Using  these  two  data  sets,  the  author  tested  antecedents  of  NSD  success  and  models  that 

developed  from  the  qualitative  studies. The  author organized  these  tests  into two  closely  related 

studies: 

148 


149 

A.  Customer/user  engagement methods as antecedents of NPD and NSD success (using the 

CPAS study); and 

B.  NSD  success  predicted  by  all  three  groups  on  antecedents:  (1)  research  methods, 

(2) formality  or iterativeness  of the NSD process, and  (3) bank  culture  (using  a survey 

designed for this purpose). 

The details of the two  data  sets and  statistical methods  employed  for  analysis  are described  in 

detail in Study 1  and Study 2. 


A. 

Study 1: Testing Customer Research Antecedents with the CPAS dataset 

150 

There  has  been  extensive  research  and  development  of  methods  and  tools  to  facilitate 

individual  customer  engagement  in  innovation  and  new  product  development.  These  methods 

have common goals of creating  a deeper understanding  of the customer, uncovering  sticky and 

tacit information about product use and customer needs, and drawing out customer creativity. 

Since the use of these methods have common purposes and functions, this paper proposes 

that  individual  customer  engagement  ("ICE")  methods  and tools  form  a defining  construct  for 

organizations involved in product innovation. The extent of the use of ICE methods is one of the 

factors  that defines  the new product development process of an organization. The constructs of 

ICE  and  more  traditional  group  or  constrained  customer  research  ("GCR")  market  research 

methods are defined. Using the Comparative Performance Assessment Study ("CPAS") database 

of the Product Development & Management Association ("PDMA"), the constructs are shown to 

exhibit good reliability. 

The use of ICE methods is then shown to be an antecedent of new product  development 

success  for  firms  in the  CPAS  data  set and ICE methods  are shown to be more powerful  than 

GCR  methods  for  predicting  NPD  success.  The  relative  effect  of  ICE  on  new  product 

development  success in B2B and B2C firms,  in goods manufacturers  and service firms,  and on 

success in more innovative projects is explored. 

Special  thanks  to:  (1)  the  Product  Development  &  Management  Association  ("PDMA")  Research 
Foundation and to Thomas Hustad and Stephen K. Markham of the Foundation; (2) the Institute for the 
Studies  of  Business  Markets  ("ISBM")  for  their  support  of the research,  (3) Abbie  Griffin,  University  of 
Utah,  and  Marjorie  Adams-Bigelow;  and  (4)  Andy  Conway,  Princeton  University,  for  his  helpful 
suggestions  on the  SEM methods and analysis used in this  study. 


151 

Beginning  with  the  customer-active  paradigm  of  new  product  development  (von  Hippel 

1978),  there  has  been  extensive  research  on  methods  that  facilitate 

individual  customer 

engagement  in  innovation  and  new  product  development  (Griffin  and  Hauser  1993).  These 

methods  have  common  goals  of  creating  a deeper  understanding  of the  customer  (Cooper  1999; 

Flint  2002), uncovering  sticky  information  about  product  use  (von  Hippel  and  Katz  2002),  and 

drawing out customer creativity (C. K. Prahalad 2004). 

Since  the  use  of  these  methods  have  common  purposes  and  functions,  this  article 

proposes  that  individual  customer  engagement  ("ICE")  methods  and  tools  form  a  defining 

construct  for  organizations  involved  in product  innovation.  The  extent  of use  of  ICE methods  is 

one of the factors  that partially defines  the new product  development  process  of an  organization. 

The  use  of  ICE  methods  by  an  organization:  (1)  can  be  contrasted  with  the  use  of  traditional, 

group  or  constrained  ("GCR")  market  research  techniques,  (2)  measures  the  solicitation  of 

individual  involvement  by  customers  in  an  organization's  new  product  development  ("NPD") 

and (3) may predict the likelihood of success in developing new goods and services. 

The objective  of this study is to demonstrate that 30 years of research into better  methods 

of customer engagement has produced a set of tools that collectively enhance NPD. 

1.  Literature  Review 

As discussed  in the Literature Review (Chapter Two of this dissertation), there have been 

multiple  studies  advocating  new  methods  to  encourage  customer/user  engagement  in NPD  and 

NSD  collaboration.  For  this  study  it  is worth  restating  Table  2.2  from  the  Literature  Review  as 

Table  5.1  to  include  here.  The  methods  outlined  in the  figure  comprise  the  core  of  a  construct 

that the author will advocate in this study—individual  customer engagement  ("ICE"). 


152 

Table 5.1:  Summary of Selected Customer/User Engagement Methods 

Engagement  Method 

Article(s) 

Background/ideas 

Concepts & Prototypes 
from Customers/users 

von Hippel (1978) 

Customer-active paradigm of NPD. Customers 
do development work—tap into it. 

Lead Users 

von Hippel (1986) 

Voice of the Customer 

Griffin  &Hauser (1993) 

"Standard" customers may inhibit novel ideas. 
Find customers/users who gain from innovation. 

Make use of 1-on-l interviews with customers. 
Brainstorming less  effective. 

Customer Contact for 

NPD Managers 

Griffin  &Hauser (1993) 

Workman (1993) 

NPD managers, including technical & operations 
people should have direct customer contact. 

Rapid Prototyping/Dev 

Lynn and Morone (1996) 

Site Visits 

McQuarrie(1998) 

Experimentation 

Thomke (1998) 

Probe and Learn: get a product "good enough" 
and into the hands of users. 

Viewing the customer in action doing work, 
enhances understanding and relevant questioning. 

Flexible tools allow companies to expand 
experimenting beyond testing to discovery. 

Co-opting Customer 

Competence 

Prahalad & Ramaswamy 

(2000) 

By observing customer action (e.g. on a web 
site), tacit information  about opportunities. 

User Toolkits 

von Hippel (2001) 

Firms should design techniques to facilitate 
design and experimentation by customers/users. 

Ethnography 

Flint (2002) 
Cooper(1999) 

Deep understanding of customers results in 
improved products and speed of development. 

Table  5.1  illustrates  a  series  of  methods  and  tools  that  have  been  developed  in  NPD 

research to facilitate  individual customer involvement in product innovation. These are designed 

to involve customers in the firm's  product development activities. Their use is an indicator of a 

type of activity in the organization's innovation process, that the author calls individual customer 

engagement ("ICE"). 

The  author's  interest  in ICE market  research methods  is motivated by propositions  that 

emerged  from  the  grounded  study  of  diverse  service  firms  described  in  Chapter  Three  of this 

dissertation,  specifically  proposition  P3.12  which  states  that  "Market  research  methods  that 


153 

engage  a  customer  with  the  service  or  in  one-on-one  discussions  and  facilitate  open-ended 

discussion  will  have  more  effect  than  other  market  research  methods  for  more  innovative or 

radical  new services."  "Use of ICE  methods" is an operationalization  of the  type  of methods 

described in Proposition P3.12 from Chapter Three. 

Individual customer engagement methods can be contrasted to traditional market research 

techniques  such as customer  surveys  and focus  groups. Two key differences  set ICE methods 

apart:  (1)  customers  are  engaged  in  either  a  1-on-l  conversation  with  an  agent  of  the 

organization or a 1-to-l interaction with a product or prototype and (2) customer communication 

is  not  narrowly  constrained.  Group  techniques,  such  as  moderated  brainstorming  and  focus 

groups violate the first  criteria, while techniques using defined  limited choices such as multiple-

choice surveys, conjoint analysis and final test markets violate the second. 

These two criteria  to define  the constructs  were  developed  by examining  the methods 

identified  in Table 5.1 to encourage user involvement and determining what differentiated  them 

from  other methods. There is empirical  and theoretical  support  for both of these  factors  being 

criteria  for  effective  user  involvement.  One-on-one  interaction  seems  imperative  for  good 

ideation:  group  efforts  such as focus  groups or brainstorming  have  consistently  been  found to 

reduce the number and quality of new ideas (Diehl and Stroebe  1987; Dunnette et al. 1963; Fern 

1982; Griffin  and Hauser  1993; Morgan  1996; Taylor et al.  1958). Indeed,  "40 or so years of 

research  on  brainstorming  has  found  that  brainstorming  is  significantly  worse  in  terms  of 

fostering  creativity  than  just  having  the  same  number  of  individuals  work  independently" 

(Thompson 2003, p. 100).  Similarly, open-ended  questions and observation of the user actually 

using goods and services are key to the effort:  valuable customer or user knowledge is tacit and 

requires deep observation to uncover (Mascitelli 2000; Szulanski 2003; von Hippel 1994). 


154 

2.  Proposed Constructs and Hypotheses 

Using  the  two  criteria  discussed  in  the  previous  section,  the  author  divided 

common  market  research  methods  into  two  categories,  individual  customer  engagement  and 

group or constrained customer research ("GCR"), shown as Figure 5.1. The ICE methods are the 

ones  already  shown  in Table  5.1  as well  as alpha  and beta testing  and web  laboratories. GCR 

methods are traditional group methods or constrained-answer techniques. The author faced some 

uncertainty  classifying  Pre-Test Markets and Gamma Testing; each can meet  criterion one, but 

since the product is finished the tests may constrain customers' answers and creativity. Thus Pre 

test Marketing and Gamma Testing both likely belong in GCR. 

Figure 5.1: Proposed Categories/Constructs for Customer Engagement 

Individual Customer  Engagement 
Testing-Alpha, Beta, etc 
Ethnography 
VOC:  1-on-l  interviews 
Customer  Site Visits 
Lead User  methods 
Web  "laboratories" 
Experiments 
Customer  Toolkits 
Prototyping 
Solicit Customer  Prototypes 
NSD managers  1:1  users 

Group/constrained  Customer  Research 
Focus  Groups 
Brainstorming 
Customer Advisory  Groups 
Concept  Testing 
Conjoint  Analysis 
Customer  Surveys 
Web Customer  Community 
Test  Markets 
Pre-Test Markets* 
Gamma  Testing* 

*some uncertainty categorizing Pre-Test Markets and Gamma Testing—the choices are constrained 

but not as constrained as Test Markets. 

A similar characterization of methods to understand customers was discussed in an earlier 

article  contrasting  "customer-led"  and  market  oriented  businesses  (Slater  and  Narver  1998). 

Slater and Narver state that customer-led businesses use "focus  groups and customer  surveys... 


155 

and  techniques  such  as  concept  testing  and  conjoint  analysis  [tradeoff  analysis—author]."  The 

value  of  these  is  limited  since  they  "rely  on  users  being  capable  of  articulating  their  needs  and 

also  being  able  to  devise  solutions."  (p.  1002)  In  contrast  they  state  that  market-oriented 

businesses  seek to uncover  latent needs by techniques  such as closely  observing  customer use  in 

normal  routines  [site visits—author], working  with  lead users, experimentation,  probe  and  learn, 

and  prototyping  (p.  1003).  Slater  and Narver  did  not  complete  their  analysis  of  market  research 

tools,  but  their  two  categories  matched  those  of  ICE  and  GCR  for  the  limited  number  of  tools 

they discussed.  This is not  surprising because they  focused  on "latent needs", the key  component 

of the "sticky  information"  which ICE methods seek to uncover. 

Four propositions  about these types of market research methods emerged  in the  grounded 

study of Chapter Three: 

P3.11:  Use of market research methods to understand customer needs is an antecedent ofNSD success. 

P3.12:  Market research methods that engage a customer with the service or in one-on-one discussions 
and facilitate  open-ended discussion will have more effect than other market research  methods 
for  more innovative or radical new services. 

P3.13:  Experiential learning through prototyping, Beta-testing,  experimenting,  and after-launch changes 

are antecedents ofNSD success. 

P3.14:  Customer collaboration in all phases  of  new  service development, including ideation,  concept 
testing, alpha- and beta- testing,  development, prototyping and launch is an antecedent  ofNSD 
success. 

ICE  and  GCR  are more  than  categories  of market  research  or  customer  access  methods. 

ICE  and  GCR  are  entirely  different  approaches  to  customer  information;  and  involve  customers 

in  very  different  ways.  NPD  employing  extensive  ICE  methods  will  be  different  than  NPD 

employing  mostly  GCR tools and methods. Results  should differ  as well.  The first  hypothesis  of 

this study is that ICE and GCR are identifiable  constructs that impact NPD: 

HI: 

The  tools  and  methods  of  ICE  form  a  construct  of 
customers/users  that  is  distinct from  group  or  constrained  market  research 
which form  a separate  construct,  GCR. 

individual  engagement  of 
techniques, 


156 

ICE  methods  were  developed  to  enable  a  deeper  customer  understanding,  often  with  the 

objective  of enhancing  more  innovative NPD  projects.  ICE  should  make  a positive  contribution 

to  a  NPD  program,  outperform  GCR  methods,  and  excel  in  more  innovative  and  radical  NPD 

efforts.  Since ICE methods  should outperform  GCR methods in both innovative and radical  NSD 

or NPD efforts  and since ICE methods should collect deeper information  it seems reasonable that 

ICE  methods  should  outperform  GCR  methods  for  an  overall  NPD  program.  The  resulting  six 

performance  hypotheses—modifications  of P3.11-14 that will be tested in this study are: 

H2: 

The use of ICE  market  research  methods  is an antecedent  of overall  NPD  success. 

H3: 

The use of GCR market  research  methods  is an antecedent  of overall  NPD  success. 

H4: 

The use of ICE  methods  is an antecedent  of success  of more  innovative/radical  NSD. 

H5a:  The use of ICE  methods  is more  effective  than  the use of group  or constrained  market 

research  tools  to predict  the success  of more  innovative  NPD. 

H5b:  The  use  of  ICE  methods  is  more  effective  than  the  use  of  group  or  constrained  market 

research  tools  to predict  the success  of an overall  NSD  program. 

H6: 

ICE  methods  are antecedents  of success for  goods  and service firms;  the ICE  methods 
have more  impact  on NSD  success  in service  firms  than for  NPD  success  in goods  firms. 

Service  firms  would  seem  likely  to  benefit  significantly  from  using  ICE  methods.  The 

very  nature  of  services  —  the  joint  production  between  producer  and  user  —  would  seem  to 

facilitate  customer engagement methods of market  research. 

3.  Data: CPAS from  PDMA 

The  Product  Development  &  Management  Association  ("PDMA")  Foundation, 

granted the author access to the data from  the 2003 Comparative Performance  Assessment  Study 

("CPAS")  for use in this research. The PDMA has a multi-industry, multi-functional  membership 

with  a  common  interest  in  new  product  development.  The  PDMA  publishes  the  Journal  of 


157 

Product  and Innovation  Management,  a leading academic journal on NPD, and  Visions  magazine 

for NPD practitioners. 

CPAS  is the third  comprehensive  study  of NPD  practices  conducted  by the PDMA  since 

1990.  The  PDMA  states  that  CPAS  is  "one  of  the  most  definitive  databases  of  information  on 

product  development  practices  available"  (Adams-Bigelow  and  Boike  2004).  A  detailed  report 

on  the  CPAS  study  is  available  to  PDMA  members  for  a  fee;  a  summary  article  appeared  in 

Visions in 2004 (Adams-Bigelow  and Boike 2004). 

The  CPAS  data  were  attractive  for  this  study  since:  (1)  it  included  fifteen  items  for 

research methods to track customers that  fit  into the categories  of Figure  5.1; (2) it also  included 

multiple-item  success  measures  for  new  product  development;  and  (3)  it  included  a  diverse 

group of participants actively engaged in new product  development. 

a.  Survey  Development1 

The  Comparative  Performance  Assessment  Study  (CPAS)  Survey 

was  conducted  under  the  auspices  of the PDMA  Foundation  (Adams-Bigelow  and Boike  2004). 

This  is  the  third  survey  of  product  development  practices  that  PDMA  has  conducted  (Griffin 

1997a;  Griffin  1997b;  Page  1993).  Questions  from  the  previous  surveys  were  included  so  that 

selected trends could be examined over time (Adams-Bigelow  and Griffin  2005). 

An advisory board consisting  of two academics and four practitioners produced the  initial 

draft  of  the  survey.  That  draft  was  then  sent  to  selected  academics  and  practitioners  for  review 

and  feedback;  it was  then pre-tested  by  five  practitioners  involved  in new product  development. 

The  comments  and  suggestions  of  the  reviewers  and  testers  were  incorporated  into  the  final 

1  The following  description  of the  CPAS  survey  was based  on  information  provided  directly  by Marjorie  Adams-
Bigelow,  director  of the  CPAS project,  and from  a conference  presentation  Adams-Bigelow,  Marjorie  and  Abbie 
Griffin  (2005),  "Product  Development  Cycle  Time and  Success:  New  Results form  PDMA's  Comparative 
Performance  Assessment  Study,"  in Product  Development  & Management  Association  Research  Forum,  K. 
Sivakumar  (Ed.)  Vol. 2005.  San  Diego,  CA: PDMA.  (Adams-Bigelow  and  Griffin  2005). 


158 

version of the survey. 

The  survey  packet  sent  to  participants  comprised  16  pages  of  questions,  a  12-page 

glossary,  and  2-page  explanation  of  the  industry  categories  (from  which  participants  selected 

their industry  categories). The  survey took  a minimum of  30 minutes to complete. The  survey 

asked  respondents  to  answer  questions  for  their business  unit based  on the unit's  overall  new 

product development ("NPD") program. 

b.  Sample and Survey Administration 

The  primary  source  for  respondents  was  U.S.-based  practitioner 

members of the PDMA.  Survey administration  followed  a modified  version  of the total  design 

method  (Dillman  2000)  for  PDMA  respondents,  which  involves  a  progressive  campaign  of 

multiple contacts and media. A pre-notification  one-page letter requested participation and asked 

for updates to contact information  and/or other people to whom the survey  should be sent. The 

initial  letter  also  told  participants  about  an  online  response  option  and  provided  a  link  to  the 

online version. This letter was followed  10 days later with a two-page personalized cover letter, 

the  survey,  glossary,  and  explanation  of  the  industry  categories.  Three  days  after  the  surveys 

were sent out, an email reminder was sent that included a link to the online response option and 

offered  the opportunity  to attend a web cast introduction to the survey. This was followed  two 

weeks later with a postcard reminder, and one week after that with a second email reminder that 

included  information  about  future  web  casts.  A  second  wave  of  surveys  was  sent  one  month 

later, followed by phone calls and a third wave of surveys. A small incentive was offered  -  two 

names were drawn from the respondents and awarded $500. 

Visitors to  the PDMA web  site could  click  on the  research  announcement  prominently 

displayed  and  survey  materials  were  sent  to  them.  Some  of  the  new  product  development 

resources  of the  PDMA web  site were  available  free  to  interested  parties  who registered  their 


159 

name  and  email  address,  so the posting  on the website  served  as reinforcement  to the PDMA 

campaign as well as a route for participants interested in new product development who used the 

free areas of the PDMA site but were not members. 

Two  other  sources  of  respondents  were  used:  the  Institute  for  the  Study  of  Business 

Markets (ISBM) provided their membership list; and the Corptech mailing list of companies with 

greater  than  100  employees  was  purchased,  using  respondents  with  titles  related  to  Product 

Development. 

c.  PDMA Response Rates 

Of the 416 survey respondents,  124 (29.8%) completed the survey 

online. Response rates for PDMA Members and those who expressed interest on the PDMA web 

site were  17.9% and  17.8% respectively. The respondents from the web site lagged the PDMA 

email/mail campaign sample on their perceptions of NPD program market/financial  success with 

40.5%o declaring their program a success versus 43.2%> for the email/mail campaign respondents 

as shown in Table 5.2. 

Table 5.2; Response Rate Summary: PDMA Members and Web Site Users 

Number Mailed out 
Number Undeliverable 
Number Inappropriate 
Net Number 
Number Usable Returns 

Response Rate 

Members 
1403 
19 
16 
1368 
245 

17.9% 

Market/Financial Success 

43.2% 

Web Site 
216 
2 
0 
214 
38 

17.8% 
40.5% 

PDMA 
Total 

1619 
21 
16 
1582 
283 

17.9% 
42.9% 


d.  Supplemental Respondents 

As  noted  there  were  two  additional  non-PDMA  sources  for 

160 

respondents. The Institute for the Study of Business Markets (ISBM), an organization devoted to 

research on B2B markets, provided their membership list to CPAS. The Corptech mailing list of 

companies with greater than  100 employees was purchased, using respondents with titles related 

to Product Development. These additional sources did not provide response rates close to the two 

PDMA  samples.  The  lower  response  rate  was  likely  due  in  part  to  the  fact  that  the  Dillman 

(2000) campaign tactics were not employed due to limits on the lists. It is encouraging that the 

averages  for  several  success  measures  differed  little  from  the  data  from  PDMA  respondents, 

demonstrating respondent  similarity in the outcome measures. A summary of the response rates 

and an indicative success measure, the items shown in Table 5.2 is included in Table 5.3. 

Table 5.3: Response Rate Summary: Supplemental Respondents 

Corptech 

ISBM 

Non-PDMA 

Total 

TOTAL 

Number Mailed out 
Number  Undeliverable 
Number  Inappropriate 
Net Number 
Number Usable Returns 

4532 
70 
1 
4461 
84 

Response  Rate 

1.9% 

1573 
28 
5 
1540 
28 
1.8% 

6105 
98 
6 
6001 
112 

7724 
119 
22 
7583 
395 

1.9% 

5.2% 

Market/Financial  Success 

44.0% 

39.3% 

40.8% 

Based on the similarity with respect to the  success measures  and our desire for  a large, 

broad  sample, all responses  are included  here.  The  diversity  of the CPAS  sample  is  shown in 

Table 5.4. 


161 

Table 5.4: Mix in CPAS data set 

Number 

Percent 

Goods 
Mixture 
Services 

Hi-Tech 
Mixture 
Lo-Tech 

Consumer 
Mixture 
B2B 

Sales < $100  MM 
Sales > $100 MM 

231 
133 
46 

146 
107 
157 

100 
20 
287 

164 
236 

56% 
32% 
11% 

35% 
26% 
38% 

25% 
5% 
70% 

41% 
59% 

e.  Marketing Research Tools 

The  CPAS  data  set  is  well  suited  to  test  the  ICE  and  GCR 

constructs. Respondents were asked about their usage of fifteen  "market research" methods, six 

of which fit the idealized ICE category from Figure 5.1, seven fit the GCR category and the two 

remaining are uncertain but would most likely belong in the GCR category by the criterion used. 

The constructs created from CPAS items are shown as Figure 5.2. 


162 

Figure 5.2: Categories/Constructs from CPAS "Market Research'' 

Individual Customer Engagement 
Alpha Testing 
Beta Testing 
Ethnography 
VOC: 1-on-l interviews 
Customer Site Visits 
Lead User methods 

Group or constrained Customer Research 
Focus Groups 
Moderated Creativity Sessions 
Concept Engineering 
Concept Testing 
Trade-off Analysis (Conjoint or models) 
Web-based market research 
Test Markets 
Pre-Test Markets* 
Gamma Testing* 

*As noted earlier, some uncertainty in categorizing ¥re-test Markets and Gamma Testing 

The  initial  focus  of  the  analysis  will  be  on  the  ICE  and  GCR  constructs.  If  HI  is 

supported the author will continue to test whether ICE does predict NPD success as postulated in 

the  remaining  hypotheses.  The  basic  model  posits  that  the  use  of  ICE  and  GCR  may  be 

correlated, as a company tends to employ multiple forms of market research, and that the use of 

each category of research is an antecedent of NPD success. The simple model depiction is shown 

in Figure 5.3. 

Figure 5.3: Model to test hypotheses 


163 

In the CPAS  survey the use of ICE is collected  at the NPD program  level. There are a 

number of success items for the program level so H2 and H3 can be tested, based on a construct 

for program success. Success constructs will be tested before the model tests. 

Unfortunately there will be no complete test for H4 and H5 using these data, since (1) the 

use  of  ICE  and  GCR  are not  collected  at the  individual  NPD  project  level  or  on the  basis  of 

innovativeness, so there is a level of analysis mismatch and (2) there are also fewer success items 

at the innovativeness levels, so as will be shown, a construct for innovative project success is less 

complete. Model tests at the more innovative new product  levels will therefore  be indicative or 

exploratory. 

4.  Methods 

Tests  of  the  ICE  and  GCR  scales  and  factor  analysis  were  run  on  SPSS  14.0; 

factor analyses and scale analyses for success measures were also run on SPSS; the models were 

tested  on  AMOS  16.0  and  6.0  using  structural  equation  modeling  techniques  (Bollen  1989; 

Byrne  2001;  Kline  1998).  As  noted  earlier  the  ICE  and  GCR  measures  were  developed 

theoretically  and  are  therefore  tested  for  reliability.  The  success  measures  are  guided  by 

guidelines for good success metrics (Griffin  and Page  1996), but exploratory  factor  analysis, as 

will be discussed, was used in selected items for the success constructs. The model used is based 

on  the  literature  review  of  methods  for  customer  engagement  in NPD.  The  dashed  line  from 

GCR to the success measure in Figure 5.3 indicates that the key hypotheses could be supported if 

the coefficient  on the direct path from ICE were greater than that for the direct path from GCR or 

if a model that did not include a direct effect  from GCR was optimal. 

AMOS  provides  over  twenty-five  measures  of  goodness  of  fit  for  SEM  analysis.  The 

author consulted  Kline (1998) and Byrne (2001) to choose the  significance  of Chi-squared  and 

six commonly-used  and currently  in-favor  SEM  fit  measures  of  different  styles, as well  as the 


general  "rules  of  thumb"  for  acceptable  and  good  ranges  of  values  for  the  measures.  The  fit 

statistics  displayed  throughout  this  study  are  CMIN/DF,  GFI,  AGFI,  CFI,  PCFI,  and  RMSEA. 

These  goodness  of  fit  statistics  are  displayed  for  all  models  analyzed  along  with  the  "rules  of 

164 

thumb" for good levels (Kline  1998; Byrne 2001). 

5.  Constructs and HI 

The  CPAS  data  included  fifteen  market  research  tools  to  understand  customers' 

needs.  Two  were  group  exercises—creativity  sessions  (brainstorming),  and  focus  groups;  while 

by the definitions  in the survey  five more offered  constrained  choices to surveyed  users—concept 

engineering,  concept  testing,  trade-off  analysis,  web-based  market  research,  and  test  markets. 

Pre-test  markets  and  Gamma  testing  were judged  by  the  author  to  be  likely  GCR  because  the 

product  was  already  fully  designed  in  each  case.  Six  items  fit  the  ICE  definitions:  four  from 

Table  5.1—Lead  User analysis, customer  site visits, ethnography,  Voice of the Customer;  as well 

as alpha- and beta- testing, since those tests were designed for change and  improvement. 

The  items  MR  tools  comprising  ICE  and  CGR  constructs  are  5-point  Likert  scale  items 

indicating  the  degree to which  each method was used  in the NPD  process:  (1) never,  (2)  around 

25% of the time, (3) around 50%, (4) around 75%, and (5) nearly always. 

Measures  of  skewness  and  kurtosis  for  all  of  the  items  used  in  this  study—methods  or 

success  items—were  well  below  the  3.0  and  10.0  "problem"  level  benchmarks  suggested  by 

Kline  (1998,  p.  82).  AMOS  has  an  option  to  standardize  coefficients  in  all  SEM  and  CFA 

analyses,  but  the  author  chose  to  standardize  the  items  used  within  the  data  set,  so  that  all 

analysis would be based on standardized  data. 

Seven  of  the  416  respondents  did  not  answer  the  detailed  questions  on  market  research 

methods used.  The remaining  missing  items were replaced  with means  for the  items, which  may 

dampen  volatility  and  reduce  measured  effect  sizes.  However,  none  of  the  remaining  409 


165 

respondents  skipped  more  than  two  items  from  the  six-  and  eight  item  constructs.  Of  the  5,726 

items in the two constructs only 74, or  1.3%, were  mean-replaced. 

a.  Market Research Constructs; ICE and  GCR 

EFA is properly used to empirically  create new factors  or categories, not 

as a final test of existing measures or theoretically-derived  constructs. Exploratory  factor 

analysis was conducted to test whether the items of uncertain classification  might be included  in 

GCR and to further  insight into numerical relationships between the items. 

b.  Exploratory Factor Analysis 

A  Varimax  Rotation  on  a  Principal  Components  extraction  of  factors  on 

all fifteen  of the items of market research in the CPAS  database  constrained to  form  two  factors 

is  summarized  in Table  5.5. The two-factor  constraint  was used  instead  of  an  Eigenvalue  level 

or  some  other  numerical  rule-of-thumb,  because  the  constructs  are  theoretical  designs  not 

atheoretical  numerical  explorations.  The  items  load  virtually  as  expected.  All  of  the  items 

loaded  as  theoretically  categorized  except  for  one  of  the  two  "uncertain"  items.  "Gamma 

Testing",  which  was  expected  to  load  as  GCR  actually  showed  a  weak  ICE  loading.  Gamma 

testing  was  eliminated  as  an  item because  (1)  it didn't  load  as  theoretically  expected  and  (2)  it 

didn't  load  cleanly—.41  was  the  lowest  lead  factor  coefficient  and  0.09  was  the  lowest 

difference  between the two factor  loadings. 


Table 5.5: Rotated Component Matrix—Limit 2 components 

166 

Customer  Tool 

Creativity  Sessions 
Focus  Groups 
Concept  Engineering 
Concept  Testing 
Trade-off  Analysis 
Web-based Market  Research-
Test  Markets 
Pre-test  Markets 

Beta-testing 
Lead User Analysis 
Alpha-testing 
Customer  Site Visits 
Ethnography 
VOC (1-on-l  detailed  interviews) 

1 
.74 
.71 
.58 
.70 
.57 
.63 
.47 
.51 

2 
.04 
.04 
.23 
.30 
.24 
-.01 
.28 
.39 

Theory Pred. 

GCR(l) 
GCR(l) 
GCR  (1) 
GCR(l) 
GCR  (1) 
GCR(l) 
GCR(l) 

GCR/Uncertain 

.05 
.10 
.12 
.44 
.30 
.30 

.76 
.66 
.66 
.65 
.53 
.51 

ICE  (2) 
ICE  (2) 
ICE  (2) 
ICE  (2) 
ICE  (2) 
ICE  (2) 

Gamma Testing ("Ideal"  Product) 

.32 

.41 

GCR/Uncertain 

The good EFA loadings provide some support for the constructs and suggest going forward with 

more formal testing of the two constructs comprising  14 items. 

c.  Cronbach's Alpha 

Both  the  ICE  and  GCR  measures  showed  acceptable  Cronbach's  Alpha 

scores above .70. Each item in both constructs would have lowered the Cronbach's Alpha score 

if removed.  Spearman-Brown  and Guttman  Split-Half  Coefficient  scores were  .05 to  .07 lower 

when  split  sample  analysis  was  performed.  These  tests  provide  quantitative  support  to 

theoretically-derived constructs. The results are summarized in Table 5.6. 


167 

Table 5.6; ICE and GCR  Reliability 

Individual Cust. Engagement 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

Group or Constrained Research 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

Alpha Testing 
Beta Testing 
Ethnography 
VOC:  1-on-l interviews 
Customer Site Visits 
Lead User methods 

ICE Cronbach's Alpha 
n using pairwise exclusion 

.468 
.534 
.495 
.446 
.514 
.484 

.750 
393 

Focus Groups 
Moderated Creativity Sessions 
Concept Engineering 
Concept Testing 
Trade-off Analysis 
Web-based market research 
Test Markets 
Pre-Test Markets 

GCR Cronbach's Alpha 

(Total Data set n=416) 

.523 
.572 
.483 
.633 
.504 
.424 
.455 
.515 
.802 
390 

d.  Confirmatory  Factor Analysis of ICE and CGR 

Using  AMOS  16.0, a  confirmatory  factor  analysis  was run  on  the two 

independent  constructs of customer involvement methods. A CFA is essentially an SEM with no 

defined  paths,  only  two-way  arrows.  The author  assumed  that  there  would  be a  correlation  of 

error  terms  for  the  two  pairs  of  items  that  were  closely  related:  Pre-Test  Markets  and  Test 

Markets,  and  Alpha-Test  and  Beta-Test.  Each  pair  is  essentially  the  same  market  research 

method  performed  at different  points  in the NPD process,  so it  seemed  likely  that  there  would 

likely be a high correlation between those item pairs. 

The CFA results from  this data set were very encouraging. The fourteen  items all loaded 

in  their  constructs  with  p  <  .001. The  standardized  regression  coefficients  for  the items  were 

strong, ranging  from  .38 to .77. The details in the standard  SEM fit measure  format  of this  study 

are shown as Table 5.1. While the Chi-square  statistic was significant,  the SEM fit statistics  were 

good—five  of six meeting "rules of thumb" and CFI reasonably close—indicating  a good fit with 

the data. Thus the CFA supported HI. 


168 

Table 5.7: CFA for ICE and CGR 

Name 

Measure 

"Rule of Thumb" 

/?ofChi-Sq 
CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 

n 

p>  .05 

<3 OK,  < 2 strong 

>.90 
>.90 

> .90 OK>.95 strong 
>.60 OK, >.72 strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 

.00 
2.44 
.94 
.92 
.93 
.76 
.06 
409 

An  exploratory  factor  analysis  replicated  the  theoretical  construct  development; 

Cronbach's  Alpha  of  the  constructs  indicates  acceptable  reliability;  and  a  confirmatory  factor 

analysis shows proper loading and good fit  statistics: the data analysis thus supports HI  and the 

study will proceed with a test of the success model. 

e.  Success Measures 

The  CPAS  data  includes  seven  items  measuring  "overall NPD  success." 

There are three subjective items measuring success—degree to which new products meet overall 

objectives,  degree  to  which  they  meet  profit  objectives,  and  success  relative  to  competitors. 

There  are  two  pairs  of  related  percentage  items—(1)  percentage  of  NPD  projects  that  are 

successful  and percent  that  meet  profit  objectives,  and  (2) the percent  of revenues  and  profits 

from  products  introduced  in  the  past  five  years.  These  items  and  measures  based  on  a 

combination  of  these  items  meet  guidelines  for  good  NPD  metrics  (Griffin  and  Page  1993). 

Success  constructs  were  created  by  using  exploratory  factor  analysis  to  reduce  the  items  to 

usable measures. 


169 

Performing  an exploratory factor analysis on the seven success measures, forming  factors 

using an Eigenvalue of 1, formed three factors consisting of (1) the three subjective items, and (2 

&  3)  each  of  the  pair  of  percentage  items.  Forcing  a  two-factor  solution  grouped  the  three 

subjective items with the percentage-success pair. Thus two possible success constructs of three 

or more items are suggested by the exploratory  factors  analysis. Both use a variety of measures 

recommended  for  success  measures  (Griffin  and  Page  1993).  Table  5.8  shows  a  summary  of 

item-total  correlations  and  the  Cronbach's  Alpha  measure  of  reliability  for  the  two  program 

success measures. 

Table 5.8: Cronbach's Alpha for two Program Success Measures 

NPD Program  Success 

3-item 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

5-item 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

NPD outcomes compared to  competitors 
NPD program meets performance  objectives 
NPD program is a  success 
% of new products  successful 
% of new products that meet profit  objectives 
NPD Success Measure  Cronbach's  Alpha 

n (after  pairwise) 

.897 
.681 
.574 
— 
~ 
.804 
406 

.432 
.562 
.646 
.414 
.477 
.741 
327 

Both Cronbach's Alphas indicate acceptable reliability; the level above .8 for the  3-item 

measure  is  a  strong  measure.  A  second  reason  for  using  the  3-item  measure  as  the  primary 

dependent  variable  is  shown on the last row of the table: virtually  the  complete  CPAS  sample 

set,  without  further  mean-replacement,  can be  used  for  SEM  studies  using  the  3-item  success 

measure; using  the  5-item  measure  will  result  in  a both  data reduction  and  mean-substitution. 

The  3-item  success  measure  will  be  employed  to  assess  the  effect  of  ICE  and  GCR  on NPD 


170 

program  success;  the  5-item  measure  will  be  used  to  check  those  results.  Since  the  two 

quantitative  questions, percent successful  and percent  success by profit  objective,  are so similar 

and are even paired in the questionnaire, correlation of their error terms will be assumed when 

the model is tested using the 5-item construct. 

In  Table  5.9,  the  Cronbach's  Alpha  measures  for  a  construct  of  success  in  more 

innovative NPD are summarized. Once again it is worth noting that a test of prediction of "more 

innovative" NPD success will be indicative or exploratory since (1) GCR and ICE are measured 

at the overall NPD program level—not for innovative projects and (2) there is a lack of diversity 

of items desirable in a success metric (Griffin  and Page,  1993)—two  sets of identical items  for 

radical and innovative projects, both sets the author assumes will have correlated error terms. 

Table 5.9: Cronbach's Alpha for Innovative Success 

More Innovative  Success 

% Radical  Successful 
%Radical Profitability  Success 
% Innovative  Successful 
% Innovative Profitability  Success 
Innovative Cronbach's  Alpha 

n (after pairwise exclusion-no  subst.) 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

.664 
.657 
.638 
.637 
.825 
239 

To the already noted limitations of the "more innovative success" construct, the pairwise 

exclusion  indicates  considerable  data  reduction  and  mean-replacement  will  be  necessary  to 

conduct a model test. Table 5.9 shows a strong Cronbach's Alpha measure of reliability over .8, 

but the model  test will  have to be  considered  somewhat  preliminary  and  indicative  due to the 

noted problems with the measure. 


171 

Table 5.10 compares the reduced and mean-substituted data sets to test success models to 

the original data  set using  selected data for each set. It is not surprising that the data for the 3-

item  success  measure  matches  up  so  well  with  the  full  data  set:  only  15  respondents  were 

eliminated, most of the eliminations were missing multiple data, and only  1% of data used were 

mean-replaced. In fact it is reasonable to consider the data for the 3-item success measure, which 

is used to test H2, H3, and H6, as using the full data set. 

Table 5.10: Comparison of Data Available in Tests 

Full CPAS 

N 

Mean-NPD vs. Competition (4 pt. scale) 
Mean-NPD Success (7-point scale) 
Cronbach - ICE 
% Mean Replacement 
% B2B 
Sales > $100 MM 

416 
2.4 
5.5 
.75* 
~ 

70% 
59% 

3-item 
401 
2.4 
5.5 
.75 
1% 
70% 
59% 

5-item Succ. 

Innovative 

344 
2.4 
5.5 
.73 
1% 
71% 
60% 

334 
2.4 
5.5 
.73 
4% 
71% 
60% 

* Pairwise excl., n=393 

The 5-item Success and the More Innovative Success constructs required deleting 57 and 

67 respondents, respectively. The More Innovative construct also required mean-substitution  for 

4%  of  data.  Nevertheless  the  data  exclusion  and  mean-substitutions  do  not  seem  to  have 

significantly  changed  the  nature  of the  data  set:  success  measures  are  fairly  constant  and  the 

changes in measured Cronbach's Alpha of the ICE construct  (slight decline) and the percent of 

B2B SBUs and over-$100 million proportion of the SBUs (small increase) changed only slightly. 

Table  5.11  summarizes  the results  of  confirmatory  factor  analyses  of  each  of the  three 

dependent  measures  with the two  independent  constructs.  In  each  case the  success  items  load 


172 

with  standardized  coefficients  of  .28 or higher (.63  and higher  for  the 3-item) and each  item's 

path is significant  at p  < .001. The error-term correlations  were  supported  except  that an error 

message in the CFA on innovative success measures led to the discovery that one of the pairs of 

measures in the innovative measure should have an error term correlation but not the other. Chi-

squares were significant, but the fit measures were acceptable. 

Table 5.11: CFA on the Success Measures and Independent Variables 

Name 

3-item 

5-item 

Innovative 

"Rule of Thumb" 

pofChi-Sq 
CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 

n 

.00 

2.0 
.94 
.92 
.95 
.79 
.05 

401 

.00 

1.6 
.94 
.92 
.96 
.81 
.04 

344 

.00 

1.6 
.94 
.91 
.96 
.81 
.04 

334 

p>.05 

<3 OK,  < 2  strong 

>.90 
>.90 

>  .90 OK^.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 


173 

6.  Results 

Hypotheses  H2  and  H4  require  that  ICE  be  a predictor  of  the  success  of  a  NPD 

program  and that ICE be a stronger or better predictor  of  success than CGR. Referring  to  Figure 

5.4,  there  are  really  three  variations  of  the  model  that  would  support  both  hypotheses:  (A)  ICE 

and  CGR  could  both  have  a direct  effect  on NPD  success  (thereby  also  supporting  H2, that  the 

use  of  GCR  methods  is also  a  success  antecedent), but  the  direct  relationship  would be  stronger 

between ICE and  success; (B) ICE could have  a direct positive  effect  on  success with CGR  only 

having  an  indirect  effect  through  ICE;  or  the  best  predictor  could  be  (C)  a  simple  direct 

relationship  from  ICE to NPD  Success. In proper  SEM analysis  a model  is always tested  against 

another model:  it is never just better than nothing; the three above  scenarios  above  will be  tested 

with  corresponding  models  for  CGR.  Therefore  model  (D)  is a  direct  effect  from  GCR  to  NPD 

success  with  an  indirect  relationship  with  ICE,  and  (E)  is  a  simple  direct  relationship  between 

CGR and success. 

Figure  5.4  illustrates the three models that could  support H2  and H4. The actual  resulting 

standardized coefficients  and p values for the paths from the SEM analysis have been  inserted. 

Figure 5.4: The three models  supporting H2, H4 and H5b..and two not 

Models  that Support  the  Hypotheses 

'P<.01 


174 

Models  that wouldn 't support  the  hypotheses 

(D) 

(E) 

These  analyses  support  the hypotheses:  in  each  case  the  standardized  coefficient  for  the 

path  from  ICE  to  NPD  success  is  a  reasonably  large  coefficient  and  is  significant  at p  < .05. 

When  two  direct  effects  are  used  (A)  the  ICE  path  has  the  larger  coefficient  and  is  significant, 

while the CGR  coefficient  is smaller and not  significant  (p = .33). In  (B) and  (C), where the  use 

of CGR is eliminated, the path coefficient  on ICE is even higher and significant  atp  < .01. 

The fit  statistics of all five models is summarized in Table  5.12. As already discussed,  the 

ICE  path  dominates  the  CGR  path  in  terms  of  coefficient  size  and  significance  in  model  (A) 

where both were assigned  a direct path to NPD  success. To compare direct effects  from  ICE  and 

CGR  in  the  single  direct  path  models  (B)  should  be  compared  to  (D)  and  (C)  to  (E).  All  the 

models  have  acceptable  fit  statistics, but  once  again  the  ICE path  is clearly  superior  with  higher 

effect  sizes,  coefficient  sizes  and  coefficient  significance  when  comparing  similar  pairs.  This 

SEM analysis using the 3-item  success construct provides  support for H2 and H4. 

The "best" model of NPD  success is one of the two models with a single direct path  from 

ICE to  success, either (B) or (C): all of (B)'s  fit  statistics meet the fit  "rule  of thumbs" and it has 

a  slightly higher  effect  size; (C) has  strong fit measures  and  also achieves  a non-significant  Chi-

square  for  the  model.  Even  though  both  models  have  good  fit  statistics  and  strong  effect  sizes, 


Model  (C), use of ICE methods as a single direct antecedent, would be slightly  favored  due to 

simplicity and the non-significant  Chi-square. 

175 

Table 5.12: SEM Analysis on CPAS full data set 

Name 

Primary  Coefficient 
p for primary  coeff. 

/?ofChi-Sq 
CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

(A) 
.24 
.03 

.00 
2.0 
.94 
.92 
.95 
.79 
.05 

.09 
401 

(B) 
.31 
.00 

.00 
2.0 
.94 
.92 
.95 
.79 
.05 

(Q 
.48 
.00 

.09 
1.4 
.98 
.97 
.99 
.66 
.03 

.10 
401 

.09 
401 

(D) 
.25 
.01 

.00 
2.0 
.94 
.92 
.94 
.79 
.05 

.06 
401 

(E) 
.28 
.02 

.00 
2.0 
.97 
.94 
.97 
.72 
.05 

.05 
401 

"Rule of Thumb" 

p>.05 

<3 OK < 2 strong 

>.90 
>.90 

> .90 OK>.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05  strong 

In Table  5.13 the results of testing the  same models on the  5-item  success measure are 

shown.  The  results  are  fully  consistent  with  the  results  on  the  full  data  set  with  the  3-item 

measure. The best model is either the  simple ICE to success model  (C) or the direct path  from 

ICE with interaction between ICE and CGR. Most importantly: H2. H5b, and H4 are supported. 

The use of ICE methods predicts NPD success and has a more important effect  on success than 

the methods of the CGR construct. It must also be noted that H3 is supported: the use of GCR 

market research methods is also an antecedent of NPD success for this data set; the effect  is not 

as strong, and the use of ICE methods alone is a better model in terms of fit and effect,  but GCR 

methods are an antecedent of success. 


176 

Table 5.13: Testing the same five models using the 5-item success model 

Name 

Primary  Coefficient 
p for primary  coeff. 

/?ofChi-Sq 

CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

(A) 
.20* 
.03 

.00 

1.6 
.94 
.92 
.96 
.81 
.04 

(B) 
.26 
.00 

.00 

1.6 
.93 
.92 
.96 
.82 
.04 

(Q 
.26 
.00 

.17 
1.2 
.98 
.96 
.99 
.72 
.03 

(D) 
.17 
.00 

.00 

1.6 
.93 
.91 
.95 
.81 
.04 

(E) 
.16 
.00 

.00 

1.7 
.95 
.94 
.97 
.76 
.04 

.11 
344 

.11 
344 

.10 
344 

.08 
344 

.07 
344 

"Rule of Thumb" 

p > . 05 

<3 OK < 2 strong 

>.90 
>.90 

>  .90 OK>.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05  strong 

* This is Model A, the two direct path model; the coefficient  on CGR was .06 and/? = .32 

It  should  be  noted  that  a  single  construct  predicting  9  -  11% of  the  variance  in  NPD 

program  success  is very  encouraging.  If this  sort  of effect  size had been replicated  in multiple 

studies  before  the  most  recent  meta-analysis  of  NPD  success  antecedents  (Henard  and 

Szymanski 2001), ICE would have been in the upper tier of "process" variables: 

Table 5.14: ICE compared to other process antecedents of NPD Success 

Process  Variables 
Launch  Proficiency 
Marketing tasks 
Pre-dev  tasks 
Tech  Proficiency 
Customer  Input 
ICE  Methods 

R-Sq 
0.16 
0.15 
0.14 
0.12 
0.11 
.09-. 11 

Process  Variables 

Market  Orientation 
Reduced Cycle Time 
Senior Management  Support 
Structured Approach to NPD 
Cross Functional  Integration 
Cross Functional  Communication 

R-Sq 
0.10 
0.05 
0.05 
0.04 
0.04 
0.00 


177 

Table  5.14  was  computed  from  a table  in the  meta-analysis,  assuming  that  ICE  had  a 

replicated  effect  size  as  measured  here  for  multiple  studies  (Henard  and  Szymanski  2001, p. 

367).  It  is  interesting  that  the  effect  size  for  ICE  is  similar  to  Customer  Input  and  Market 

Orientation,  since ICE is a construct  comprising  methods to induce customer involvement. It is 

also  worth  knowing  that  the  ICE  effect  size  dwarfs  the  measured  effects  of  some  process 

variables  that  have  received  considerable  study,  such  as  structure  of  the NPD  process,  senior 

management  support  of  NPD,  and  cross-functional  integration  and  communication  of  new 

product teams. 

a.  More Innovative NPD 

As noted previously, the success metric for "More Innovative NPD" is (1) 

not as varied as the measure used for overall NPD success, and (2) ICE usage was measured at 

the overall NPD program level and not specifically  for incremental and more innovative projects. 

Theory might  suggest  a greater effect  for these methods in more innovative projects—some  of 

the items were developed with more innovative projects  in mind (Lynn and Morone  1996; von 

Hippel 1986)—but the difference  in levels of measurement should dampen measured  effect. 

The  effect  sizes  for  the three  models  with  a direct  effect  from  ICE  are  indeed  slightly 

smaller  than  on  the  overall  NPD  success  measures  as  seen  in  Table  5.15.  One  unanticipated 

indication  of  the  relative  importance  of  ICE  methods  is  observed  in  Table  5.15,  however:  all 

direct paths  from  GCR methods  are no  longer merely  less  strong than  from  ICE—all  are now 

insignificant.  The full model with direct effects  from both ICE and GCR methods had a negative 

coefficient  from GCR with ap=.07. 

Since these tests and all remaining ones will be done on subsets of the CPAS data set and 

since  some of the effect  sizes will be likely lower than produced  in our NPD program  success 

tests, another fit measure is added to Table 5.15 and all following tables: the Hoelter estimate of 


ideal  sample  size to test the model. The Hoelter estimate  differs  based  on the  complexity  of a 

model and the model  fit  and effect  size. As was the case with the previous tests, the N  for the 

"More Innovative" tests exceeded the Hoelter ideal minimum. 

178 

Table 5.15: SEM testing the five models for More Innovative Success 

Name 

Primary  Coefficient 
p for primary  coeff. 

^ofChi-Sq 

CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

Hoelter (.05)  n 

(A) 
.38* 
.00 

.00 

1.6 
.94 
.92 
.96 
.81 
.04 
.09 
334 
249 

(B) 
.24 
.00 

.00 

1.6 
.93 
.91 
.95 
.81 
.04 
.06 
334 
247 

(C) 
.26 
.00 

.01 

1.7 
.97 
.94 
.98 
.70 
.05 
.07 
334 
284 

"Rule of Thumb" 

(D) 
.08 
.23 

(E) 
.05 
.48 

p > . 05 

<3 OK < 2 strong 

>.90 
>.90 

> .90 OK^.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 

334 

334 

*Model (A) is the model with direct effects  from both ICE and GCR; coefficient  for GCR path was -.18 at/? =.07 

These test results support hypotheses H4 and H5b. ICE methods contribute to the success 

of  more innovative NPD projects  and  are  better predictors  of  success than  the  use  of GCR 

methods. 

b.  Services vs. Goods 

As  noted  earlier,  service  firms  are  a  minority  of  firms  in  the  CPAS 

database. Mean comparison and the SEM runs were done with 320 respondents from goods firms 

and  only  45  respondents  from  service  firms.  Given  the  small  sample  size  of  goods  firms  this 

comparison should be considered indicative or exploratory and an incomplete test of the service 

firm hypotheses. 


Only one of the mean differences  shown, use of GCR methods, is significant  at p < .05. 

179 

Table 5.16a: Frequencies of Methods—Goods versus Services 

Method 

Goods  Mean 

Service  Mean 

Customer  Site Visit 
Ethnography 
Lead User 
Voice of the  Customer 
Alpha  Testing 
Beta  Testing 

ICE Mean 
GCR Mean 

Formal  Process 

n 

3.26 
2.16 
2.52 
2.92 
2.81 
3.29 

2.82 
1.97* 

3.54* 

320 

* difference  significant  at p  < .05 

2.93 
2.10 
2.22 
2.75 
2.69 
3.18 

2.64 
1.70* 

3.02* 

45 

Table 5.16a indicates that goods manufacturers  may make more use of the ICE methods 

for  user  input  than  do  service  companies:  on the  5-point  scale  used  in the  CPAS  survey,  the 

average use of ICE methods by goods manufacturers  was 2.82 and 2.64 by service firms. All six 

of the ICE items showed greater usage in goods firms. This is surprising since the impact of ICE 

usage  is  expected  to  be  significant  on  new  service  development,  but  may  be  explained  by  a 

proposition  from  the  grounded  research that  new  service  development  is generally  less  formal 

than NPD for goods. (That proposition is supported by a single-item measure that measures the 

formality  of the process on an increasing four-point  scale: as shown the difference  is over half a 

point and significant  at/? < .05.) Again, it must be noted among the use of methods means only 

the difference  in use of GCR met significance tests at/? < .05. 

Table 5.16b summarizes the results of an SEM analysis of the simple direct model of ICE 

as  an  antecedent  of  success  in  goods  firms  and  service  firms.  Both  models  showed  good  fit 

statistics, even achieving non-significant  Chi-square values. There was a notable disparity in the 

effect  sizes however:  use of ICE methods predicted  only  5% of the variance  in the  success of 


180 

new  goods using  the  3-item measure,  only  about  half  of the  effect  for  the  whole  database.  In 

contrast, the squared multiple correlation for service success was at 19%: double the effect  of the 

overall  data  set  and  thus four  times the  effect  for  goods  firms.  The  fit  and  effect  size  was  so 

strong in the test of success of new services that the small sample size of 45 fell only 33 short of 

the Hoelter  suggested  sample  size. Due to the  small effect  size for new goods  success, the 320 

goods sample actually fell short of the Hoelter ideal. 

Table 5.16b: SEM Summary for Services versus Goods using simple direct model (C) 

Name 

Services 

Goods 

"Rule of Thumb" 

Coefficient  on use of ICE 
p for primary  coefficient 

pofChi-Sq 

CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

Hoelter (.05) N 

(C) 
.44 
.03 

.65 

0.9 
.91 
.83 
.99 
.67 
.00 

.19 
45 
78 

(C) 
.22 
.04 

.15 

1.3 
.98 
.96 
.99 
.66 
.03 

.05 
320 
380 

p > . 05 

<3 OK < 2  strong 

>.90 
>.90 

>  .90 OK>.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 

The  empirical  results  were  consistent  with  H6.  in  that  (1)  use  of  ICE  methods  are  a 

predictor of NPD success for both goods and services producers, but  (2) the methods are more 

powerful  for service firms. Unfortunately,  the sample size is insufficient  to claim strong support 

for the hypotheses, but this indicative support suggests that there should be further exploration of 

the predictive power of ICE methods on new service success. 


181 

7.  Conclusion 

Categorizing  market  research  methods  to  understand  customer  needs  into  two 

sets,  individual  customer  engagement  (ICE)  methods  and  group  or constrained-response 

(GCR) 

research  methods  was  shown  to  create  two  reliable  constructs.  The  classification  utilized  two 

simple  criteria:  (1)  one-on-one 

involvement  with  customers/users;  and  (2)  open-ended 

information  from  the user versus  constrained  choices.  Tests  of the two constructs  as  antecedents 

of new product development  success supported hypotheses that: 

H2: 

The use of ICE  market  research  methods  is a antecedent  of overall  NPD  success. 

H3: 

The use of GCR market  research  methods  is a antecedent  of overall  NPD  success. 

H5b:  The  use  of  ICE  methods  is  more  effective  than  the  use  of  group  or  constrained  market 

research  tools to predict  the success  of an overall  NSD  program. 

Due  to  limitations  of  the  data  set,  examination  of  the  remaining  hypotheses  must  be 

considered  only  indicative. However results  of the additional  model runs, although they must  be 

considered preliminary  and indicative for reasons already cited, were consistent  with: 

H4: 

The use of ICE  methods  is an antecedent  of success  of more  innovative/radical  NSD. 

H5a:  The  use  of  ICE  methods  is  more  effective  than  the  use  of  group  or  constrained  market 

research  tools  to predict  the success  of more  innovative  NPD. 

H6: 

ICE  methods  are  antecedents  of  success  for  goods  and  service  firms;  the  ICE  research 
methods  have  more  impact  on  NSD  success  in  service  firms  than for  NPD  success  in 
goods  firms. 

The  choice  of  market  research  methods  is  observable  and  measurable  and  under  project 

management  control.  The  effect  sizes  from  these  decisions  in these  first  tests  were  higher  than 

effects  measured  for  most  of  the  process  variables  studied  as  antecedents  in  a  recent  meta 

analysis  including  such  popular  variables  as  structure  of  the  NPD  process,  senior  management 

support  and  cross-functional 

integration  and  communication  of  NPD  teams  (Henard  and 

Szymanski 2001). 


182 

The  results  suggest  that  the  extensive  research  on  market  research  methods  to  engage 

customers  in NPD,  beginning  with  von  Hippel's  (1977  and  1978)  work  on  the  customer  active 

paradigm  of new  product  development,  have  produced  useful  tools  to  enhance  innovation.  As  a 

group these methods predict NPD  success. These results  suggest fruitful  areas of further  research 

and managerial implications  discussed in following  sections. 

8.  Limitations 

The  author  was  fortunate  to  be  granted  access  to  a  large  database  of  NPD  in 

diverse  firms  that  included  multiple  success  items  and  fifteen  customer  involvement  tools.  The 

author is comfortable  that a sufficient  number of diverse ICE methods were  included to make  it a 

useful  test.  Had  the  survey  been  designed  specifically  for  this  analysis  the  author  would  have 

included  additional  ICE  methods  such  as  prototyping  and  web-based  product  laboratories.  On 

balance, the  author believes  that  the  size  and  quality  of the  data  set more  than  compensated  for 

being limited to six ICE methods. 

For some of the more  specialized analysis and later hypotheses, it would have been  useful 

to have  more  service  firms  included  in the  data  and to have more  complete  measures  of  success 

for more innovative  and radical new product development. More research should be  forthcoming 

on the impact  of ICE methods  on new  service  development  and more  innovative NPD, as in  the 

following  study. 

The  CPAS  data  is  derived  from  a  single-respondent  survey.  Although  the  survey 

designers  employed  reverse  coding  and  separated  performance  measures  from  the  methods 

questions,  the  standard  concerns  about  biases  in  single-respondent  surveys,  included  the  halo 

effect,  are operative. 


183 

Finally  is  the  issue  of  generalizability.  The  CPAS  dataset  comprises  responses  from  a 

large  diverse  set  of  firms.  Services, as noted,  are underrepresented,  but  the  service  companies 

that were included exhibited a large effect  from the use of ICE methods. PDMA members may 

be more  aware  of new product  development  processes  and have  a  strong  interest  in NPD, but 

innovation and NPD seem to be of growing interest in industry and academic research (Page and 

Schirr  2008).  The  author  welcomes  replication  and  further  testing,  but  believes  that  it  is 

reasonable to expect these results to be apply to firms involved in NPD. 

9.  Future Research 

Researchers  should consider using the ICE construct  in future  attempts to model 

or  predict  NPD  success.  The  support  for  hypotheses  H1-H6  should  be  replicated  in  future 

studies. The effect  of using  ICE methods on more innovative goods and on services  should be 

tested using better  success measures  and a larger  sample of  service  firms,  as in study 2 of this 

chapter. 

The  ICE  construct  should  be  incorporated  into  other  new  product  success  models  to 

check for moderators or interactions as well as to simply enhance existing NPD success models. 

Market  research  methods  should be  studied  to  evaluate  whether  they  can be  revised  to 

include open ended discussion opportunities and better engage participants on an individualized 

basis. 


184 

10. Managerial Implications 

Executives  overseeing  organizational  new  product  development  and  managers 

involved in new product development should try to incorporate individual customer engagement 

and  the  ICE  methods  into  their  NPD  process.  Managers  should  turn  to  the  methods  and 

techniques that have been advanced by von Hippel, Griffin,  Hauser, Thomke and others over the 

past  twenty  years  for  deep  customer  understanding  and  engagement.  Consider  hiring  an 

anthropologist  or sociologist to oversee ethnographic  studies or to engage lead users, instead of 

employing another "expert moderator" to run focus groups or brainstorming sessions. 

In short: individual customer engagement ICEs group or constrained customer research! 

Any methods used to understand or involve customers should strive to increase individual 

engagement.  Surveys  should  include  open-ended  questions.  Focus  groups  or  brainstorming 

sessions—if  used—should  begin  with  1-on-l  idea  discussions  and  collections.  All  market 

research techniques should attempt to include individual engagement and open-ended discussion. 

Some  of  this  effort  is  already  underway—market  researchers  have  worked  on  techniques  to 

reduce  group  influences  when  conducting  brainstorming  or  focus  group  efforts  (Thompson 

2003). 


185 

C. 

Study 2:  Tests of Antecedents & a Model of NSD Success: 

Using the 2007 Bank New Service Development Survey 

1.  Summary 

With the cooperation  of the American Bankers Association, the author  surveyed 

bankers  who  had  been  involved  in  developing  a  new  service  within  the  past  two  years.  The 

resulting data set was used to test hypotheses about antecedents of new service success that had 

emerged in a grounded study of new service development ("NSD") in a diverse group of service 

companies in Chapter Three of this dissertation. 

All  of  the  suggested  antecedents—Usage  of  Market  Research  Methods,  customer 

engagement  and more traditional methods; Cultural Measures, customer orientation,  innovative 

orientation  and  proactive  customer  orientation;  and  Process  Measures,  formal  process  and 

iterativeness—are indeed supported as antecedents of success for NSD programs of the surveyed 

banks. The leading cultural constructs had the strongest effect,  but the usage of market research 

methods  also  showed  strong  effect  sizes. The effect  size  for the process  measures  were  not as 

large, but still acceptable by social and business research standards. 

There were interesting  differences  in the best predictive models using these  antecedents 

as the innovativeness of the NSD shifted  from incremental, to innovative, and to radical. 


186 

2.  Introduction 

This  study focuses  on the antecedents  of success in new  service development  in 

banks.  The  author  believes  that  a  single  industry  survey,  which  reduces  the  "noise"  from 

different  industry  practices  and  eliminates  the  need  to  adjust  for  industry  type,  would  be 

attractive for an initial study of the antecedents that emerged from the qualitative studies of new 

service development presented in Chapters Three and Four. The second qualitative study of this 

dissertation, discussed  in Chapter Four, focused  on banks and financial  services. Although new 

service  development  has  been  understudied  (Johne  and  Storey  1998; Page  and  Schirr  2008), 

banking  has been  a  focus  of  multiple  studies  of  new  service  development  (Alam  2003;  Alam 

2002; Alam and Perry 2002; Athanassopoulou and Johne 2004; Avlonitis et al. 2001; Cooper and 

Brentani  1991; Cooper and Edgett  1996; de Brentani and Cooper 1992; Ennew  1996; Gleason et 

al.  2003;  Howcroft  and  Durkin  2003;  Johne  and  Harborne  2003;  Johne  and  Pavlidis  1996; 

Lievens et al. 1999). 

Fortunately  the  American  Bankers  Association  ("ABA"),  the  leading  banking  industry 

Association, was interested in the study of innovation and lent their support to this  effort. 

3.  Hypotheses and Constructs 

In  Chapter  Three  of  this  dissertation  a  grounded  study  of  service  innovation 

suggested that the success of an NSD effort  was dependent on a set of antecedents including (1) 

the use of market research methods employed to understand customer needs, (2) measures of the 

firm's  culture, and (3) NSD process measures. Resulting hypotheses and constructs to measure 

these antecedents are discussed in this section. 

a.  The Use of Market Research Methods 

The  hypotheses  that  received  support  from  the  analysis  on  the  PDMA 

CPAS data set in Study  1 of this chapter were re-examined using data from  the Bank  Survey. 


187 

The  same  categories  of  market  research  methods  used  in  Study  1,  individual  engagement 

methods  ("ICE")  and  group  or  constrained  methods  ("GCR"),  is  again  used  to  predict  NSD 

success. More items were included in the ICE category  in the present  study to take advantage  of 

the  opportunity  to  design  the  survey  for  this  purpose.  H6  is not  relevant  for  this  study  since  it 

compares, NSD  to NPD-goods  and the data  set  in this  study  is all  services.  Since the new  data 

set is a single service industry set, NSD is generally  substituted  for NPD in these hypotheses. 

HI: 

The  tools  and  methods  of  ICE  form  a  construct  of 
customers/users  that  is  distinct from  group  or  constrained  market  research 
which form  a separate  construct,  GCR. 

individual  engagement  of 
techniques, 

H2: 

The use of ICE  market  research  methods  is an antecedent  of overall  NSD  success. 

H3: 

The use of GCR market  research  methods  is an antecedent  of overall  NSD  success. 

H4: 

The use of ICE  methods  is an antecedent  of success  of more  innovative/radical  NSD. 

H5a:  The  use  of  ICE  methods  is  more  effective  than  the  use  of group  or  constrained  market 

research  tools  to predict  the success  of more  innovative  NSD. 

H5b:  The  use  of  ICE  methods  is  more  effective  than  the  use  of  group  or  constrained  market 

research  tools  to predict  the success  of an overall  NSD  program. 

b.  Measures  of the Firm's  Culture 

Additional  hypotheses  were  adapted  from  the  propositions  about  NSD 

success that emerged in the grounded  study of service firms  in Chapter Three of this  dissertation. 

Two propositions  indicated cultural measures that would predict NSD  success: 

P3.7:  Customer  Orientation  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

P3.9:  An  innovative  culture  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

These propositions were simply adapted as hypotheses  for this  study. 

H7: 

An  innovation  orientation  ("IO")  is an antecedent  of NSD  success  at the service  firm. 

H8: 

A customer  orientation  ("CO  ") at a service  firm  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 


188 

Customer  orientation  ("CO")  and  innovation  orientation  are  constructs  that  have  been  tested  in 

previous  empirical  studies  of  new  product  development  and  were  easily  adapted  for  the  Bank 

Survey. 

Additional  propositions  about 

the  cultural  antecedents 

required  operationalizing 

descriptions  from the grounded  research: 

P3.6:  A focus  on sticky  or  contextual  information  and future  needs  will  be  more  important  the 

more  innovative  the new  service. 

P3.8:  Customer  Orientation  with a focus  on sticky  or contextual  information  and future  needs 

of users  is an antecedent  ofNSD  success for  more  innovative  services. 

P3.10:  Customer  orientation  will  be  more  important  than  an  innovative  culture  in  predicting 

NSD  success. 

"Forward-looking  Customer  Orientation  with  a  focus  on  sticky  or  contextual  information  and 

future  needs"  indicates  a  CO that  is more  forward  looking  and more  attuned  to  future  customer 

needs.  Narver,  Slater,  and  Maclachlan  (2000)  developed  a  measure  of  Proactive  Market 

Orientation that was tested in a later study of new product  development  success  (Atuahene-Gima 

et  al.  2005).  The  author  developed  a  new  measure  Proactive  Customer  Orientation  ("P-CO") 

from  the  Proactive  Market  Orientation  used  in those  two  studies.  The process  for  separating  P-

CO is discussed  in the next  section.  Through this operationalization  of the phenomena  described 

in the grounded  studies the following  hypotheses  result: 

H9: 

A proactive  customer  orientation  ("P-CO ") is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

HlOa:  Either  measure  of  customer  orientation,  CO  or  P-CO,  is  a  stronger  predictor  of  NSD 

success  than innovation  orientation  measures. 

HlOb:  P-CO  is more predictive  of NSD  success  than  traditional  customer  orientation  for  more 

innovative  services. 

c.  NSD Process  Measures 

Henard  and  Szymanski  (2004),  in  their  meta-analysis  of  antecedents  of 

NPD  success,  showed  that  (NPD) process  variables  tend  to have  little effect  on  success  in  NPD 


189 

programs.  This  was  a  surprising  finding  since  studying  the  NPD  process  is  the  most  popular 

research  in understanding  new  product  development  success  (Page  and  Schirr  2008).  However, 

despite  this  warning  from  the  meta-analysis,  a  common  theme  observed  among  the  NSD 

executives  in  Chapter  Three  was  seeking  to  make  their  NSD  process  more  formal.  Two  NSD 

process  antecedents  of  success  and three propositions  about the NSD process that  emerged  from 

the grounded research were: 

P3.16: New  services  should  be  designed  and planned  to  be flexible  and  to  adapt  to  experience 

and customer feedback;  such planned  flexibility  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

P3.17: An  iterative  process—breaking  NSD  into  small pieces,  making  swift  changes  to  respond 

to test results  and prototyping—is  an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

P3.18: A formal  process  is an antecedent  of NSD  success for  new  services. 

P3.19: A formal  NPD process  will be a stronger  antecedent  of NSD  success  if the process  is  also 

iterative. 

The  last  three  of  these  propositions  are  essentially  relabeled  as  hypotheses  to  be  tested  in  the 

2007 Bank New  Service Development  Study: 

H l l:  An  iterative process  —  breaking  NSD  efforts  into small pieces,  making frequent  changes, 

and prototyping  — is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

H12:  A formal  NSD process  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

H13:  NSD  will  be more successful  when  a process  is formal—but  also flexible  and  iterative. 

d.  Generalized Model  of NSD  Success 

The  author  attempted  to  discern  a  model  of  NSD  success  from  the 

antecedents  of  success that  emerged  from  the  grounded  study. These propositions  are  somewhat 

speculative,  based  on  the  researcher's  sense  of  interaction  and  relative  importance  of  the 

antecedents  discussed: 

P20:  A  phased  model  of  NSD  success  antecedents  beginning  with  (1)  customer  orientation, 
proceeding  through  a process  that  (2) balances formal  structure  and  iterativeness  and  (3) 
using  market  research  tools,  especially  one-on-one  engaging  tools,  will  predict  NSD 
success. 


190 

P21:  The  model from  P20  will  change  as  NSD  projects  become  more  innovative:  specifically 
(I)  customer  orientation  must  be more forward-looking  and  engaging;  (2) the process  of 
NSD  must  be  iterative  — formal  structure  less  important;  and  (3)  market  research 
methods  should  be more  one-on-one  and  engaging. 

Once  again  the  propositions  are  modified  slightly  to  become  hypotheses  to  be  tested  in  this 

study: 

H14:  A  model  incorporating  (I)  corporate  culture,  especially  standard  or proactive  customer 
orientation;  (2)  the  use  of  market  research  methods,  especially  ICE  methods,  and  (3)  a 
formal  — yet  iterative  — NSD process;  will  effectively predict  NSD  success. 

H15:  As  NSD projects  become  more  innovative,  a formal  structure  will  become  less  important, 
and  ICE  market  research  methods  will  be  more  important  than  traditional  market 
research  methods. 

Hypotheses  H14  and  H15  together  suggest  a  model  of  NSD  Success  predicted  by  (1) 

culture, especially customer orientation,  (2) tools, especially ICE customer engagement  methods, 

and  (3) a process  that  is both  formal  and iterative that varies depending  on the innovativeness  of 

the project.  Figure 5.5 depicts this model. 

Figure  5.5: A culture-tools-process  model of NSD  Success (shown earlier as Figure  3.2) 

More Innovative 

Methods 
CE+GCR 

Process 

"" 
'. Formal  •  /Iterative v 

NSD 
Success 

Methods 

a« B B « M^ Process 

C Formal CrterativeT' 

NSD 
Success 


191 

4.  Developing  Constructs 

Constructs  to  measure  antecedents  of  success  that  emerged  from  the  grounded  study  of 

new  service  development  were  the  primary  components  of  the  2007  Bank  New  Service 

Development  Survey  ("Bank  Survey").  Whenever  possible,  constructs  were  used  that  had  been 

tested and used  in previously published  studies. When there was not a perfect  fit,  an attempt  was 

first  made to  adapt  existing tested measures. When  it was  necessary  to  develop  a new  construct, 

standard  marketing  research  practice  was used,  including  deriving  multiple  items  from  research 

and  the  grounded  study,  securing  evaluation  from  academic  and  industry  experts,  and  testing 

with reasonable  subjects  (Churchill  1979; Peter  1981) 

The  details  of  the  constructs  used  in  the  survey  to  test  antecedents  of  new  service 

development  are  shown  in  their  entirety  in  Appendix  1.  In  this  discussion  of  construct 

development  the  author  will  show  items  only  for  newly-developed  constructs.  Following  the 

structure  of  the  preceding  section  constructs  will  be  discussed  in three  sections—(1)  The  use  of 

market  research  methods,  (2)  Measures  of  the  firm's  culture,  and  (3) NSD  process  measures— 

followed  by (4) Success measures. 

a.  The Use of Market Research  Methods 

The  two  constructs  for  the  use  of  market  research  methods,  individual 

customer  engagement  ("ICE"  or  "customer  engagement")  and  group  or  constrained  research 

("GCR"  or "traditional  MR"), comprise  items which  are essentially  a list  of the market  research 

methods.  These  constructs  were  developed  in  Study  1 of  this  chapter  for  use  with  the  PDMA 

CPAS  data.  For  measuring  usage  at  the  program  level,  e.g.  for  NSD  at  the  firm  or  for 

incremental, innovative or radical NSD, the same question is asked as in the CPAS (2003)  study: 

"What  is the degree  that these  methods  or tools are  used  in new service  development?" 

—never, 25% of the time, 50% of the time, 75% of the time, or always. 


192 

The Bank  Survey  also  asked  about market  research  methods  usage  in individual  projects 

with the following  question and four  choices: 

"Were  the following  tools or methodologies  used  in developing  the idea for  the new service?'''' 

—no, to a small degree, yes, yes-extensively. 

No  longer  constrained  by the  items  used  in the  CPAS  study,  the  Bank  Survey  expanded 

the number  of ICE items from  six to eleven.  The market research methods  included  are shown  in 

Table  5.17. 

Table 5.17: Items for ICE and GCR 

GCR: Group or Constrained  Research 

Focus  Groups 
Moderated Creativity  Brainstorming 
Test  Markets 
Concept  Testing 
Trade-off  Analysis 
Web-based market  research 

ICE: Individual Customer  Engagement 
Voice of the Customer:  1:1  interviews 
Lead User methods 
User  Toolkit 
Ethnography 
Field  Experiments 
Customer  Site Visits 
Prototyping 
Direct User interaction with NSD 
Web Lab 
Alpha  Testing 
Beta  Testing 

b.  Measures of the Firm's  Culture 

Customer  Orientation  has  been  one  of  three  components  of  Market 

Orientation  (Narver  and  Slater  1990), but  has  also been used  as a  stand-alone  construct  to  study 

NPD  outcomes  (Lukas  and  Ferrell  2000).  Customer  orientation  emerged  as  an  antecedent  of 

NSD  success  from  the  discussions  with  managers  involved  in NSD.  The  other  two  components 

of Market  Orientation,  competitor  orientation  and the integration  of functions  in the firm  did  not 


193 

emerge  in  the  grounded  study  as  key  factors.  Customer  Orientation  alone  as  an  antecedent  is 

consistent  with  the  findings  of  Lukas  and  Ferrell  (2000)  and  to  some  degree  the  findings  in  a 

more  recent  study  (Narver  et  al.  2004).  In  the  Bank  Survey  the  6-item  scale  for  customer 

orientation  from  Lukas and Ferrell (2000) was used. It is shown in Appendix  1. 

For  Innovative  Orientation,  a  variation  on  Entrepreneurial  Orientation  (Lumpkin  and 

Dess  1996) was employed.  Several recent  studies have used a three- and four-item  variant of  EO 

to  measure  innovativeness  in  a  firm,  "Entrepreneurial  Climate"  (Koen  et  al.  2005)  and 

"Innovation  Culture"  (de  Brentani  and  Kleinschmidt  2004,  ;  Kleinschmidt  et  al.  2005). 

Innovative  Orientation  in  the  Bank  Survey  combines  these  two  measures  in  a  single  4-item 

measure  that  is  shown  in  Appendix  1 with  the  two  preceding  measures.  The  resulting  measure 

can therefore  be  considered  a tested  construct  and  it  is not  too  surprising  that  it  displayed  good 

reliability measures when tested in the following  section. 

Proactive  Customer  Orientation  ("P-CO")  is  a  new  measure.  Fortunately  an  article 

already  cited  (Narver  et  al.  2004)  created  a  construct,  Proactive  Market  Orientation,  which 

provides  a  framework  for  creating  this  new  measure.  The  original  Market  Orientation  (Narver 

and  Slater  1990) comprised  three  constructs,  including  Customer  Orientation;  so logically  P-CO 

should be  separable  from  the new Proactive  Market  Orientation  construct.  In  fact  the author  was 

tempted  to  argue  that  the  new  construct  is  in  fact  misnamed  and  should  be  called  Proactive 

Customer  Orientation,  but  instead  chose  5  of  the  8  items  of  Proactive  Market  Orientation  that 

clearly measured P-CO  for use in the bank survey. Again refer to Appendix  1 for details. 

c.  NSD Process  Measures 

For  "formal  process",  a 4-item  measure,  based  on the  ubiquitous  Stage-Gate®  approach 

to  a new product  development  process  (Cooper  1990; Cooper  2001) was borrowed  from  a  2005 

study  (Kleinschmidt  et  al.  2005). A  subject  was  asked  to what  extent  they  agreed,  on a  7-point 


194 

Likert  scale  where  l=strongly  disagree  to  7=strongly  agree,  that  their bank:  (1)  has  a  formal 

NPD  process  in  place,  (2)  lists  or  defines  specific  stage  activities,  (3)  has  defined  gates  or 

decision points between stages or phases, and (4) has defined gatekeepers. 

For  "iterative  process"  a  new  construct  had  to  be  developed.  For  evaluation  at  the 

program  level  a  3-item  measure  was  used:  to  what  extent  do  you  agree  (same  7-point  Likert 

scale) that for the concept or design of a new service: (1) we usually maintain a working model 

or prototype  of a new  service  or product  for  customers  and others throughout  the new  service 

development process, (2) we tweak or change our working model or prototype of a new service 

throughout  development  to  experiment  with  alternatives  and  elicit  user  feedback,  , and  (3) we 

break new  services  into multiple  small projects  to  enable  faster  changes and more testing. For 

"iterative process" in individual projects an 8-item scale was used as shown in Appendix 1. 

Proposition P3.19 from Chapter Three indicates that the formality  and iterativeness of the 

process interact to predict success. I will first  look at these constructs individually for reliability 

and  to  check  whether  formality  does  become  less  important,  but  when  ultimately  testing  the 

model I will use an interactive term for process. 

d.  Success Measures 

For  NSD  performance  a  4-item  measure  of  success  was  used.  This 

established construct comprises items that ask how successful  a new service or a program of new 

service creation has been in meeting pre-set objectives  for market share, sales, growth and profit 

(Atuahene-Gima  1995).  The  use  of  multiple  success  objectives  is  consistent  with  past 

recommendations for success metrics in new product development (Griffin  and Page 1996). 

For incremental, innovative and radical NSD a 2-item scale was adopted from the CPAS 

study (Adams-Bigelow 2004). The two items were the percentage of successful  new products by 

(1) profitability  objectives and (2) by the criteria set by the bank for new products. 


5.  The Survey and Data 

The  survey  development,  administration  of the  survey,  and the response rate/  and 

195 

representativeness  of the sample are discussed  in this  section. 

a.  Survey  Development 

A preliminary  questionnaire  was developed based on the themes  and theory that  emerged 

from  the  grounded  research  with  managers  involved  in  new  service  development  — Chapter 

Three  of  this  dissertation  ~  primarily  using  constructs  from  past  academic  and  association 

research.  When  new  constructs  emerged,  standard  procedures  used  in  the  marketing  literature 

were  employed:  (1)  items  emerged  from  grounded  theory,  literature  and  suggestions;  (2)  items 

and  the  developing  construct  were  tested;  (3)  items  were  refined  based  on  the  results  of  testing 

and  feedback  from  experts, (4) the full  set of items were tested, using  Cronbach's  Alpha test  and 

factor  analysis; and  (5) testing  and  iteration  continued  until  a reasonable  construct  was  obtained 

(Churchill  1979; Narver and Slater  1990; Peter  1981). 

The development  of the survey  instrument mirrored the procedure  for new constructs  and 

was  done  simultaneously.  The  questionnaire  was  developed  from  the  grounded  research  of 

Chapter  Three  and  was  reviewed  by  expert  academic  researchers,  including  several  members  of 

the  dissertation  committee,  and  new  service  development  practitioners.  Clear  definitions  of  key 

items,  such  as  more  innovative  and  radical  new  service  development,  were  included  in  the 

survey. Respondents were urged to refer to documents when they didn't remember an  answer. 

A  paper  version  was  completed  by  four  service  managers  with  NSD  experience  in  the 

author's  presence,  so that they  could  ask  questions  while taking the  survey  and the  author  could 

observe points  at  which  they  seemed  to  stall  or take  too much  time.  The  instrument  was  placed 

on the Web  (Internet)  and  another group of  four  took the  survey. These testers were  interviewed 

for  a  half  hour  afterwards  by  the  author.  A  convenience  group  of  31  managers  with  NSD 


196 

experience,  including  participants  in  the  earlier  grounded  study  and  others  solicited  by  the 

author,  further  tested  the  instrument.  The  author  examined  the  data  and  performed  some 

preliminary  factor  analyses. 

A  concern  about  the  instrument  was  its  length.  The  initial  version  took  at  least  a  half  -

hour  to  complete.  The  length  was  even  more  of  a  concern  since  Web-based  surveys  seem  even 

more  susceptible  to  being  only  partially  completed  by  subjects  (Dillman  2000).  Since  the 

instrument  was  Web-based  it  was  easy  to  modify  during  testing  by  adding,  deleting,  or  moving 

items. The author checked new and existing constructs and worked to  shorten the instrument  and 

move key constructs to the beginning of the  survey. 

When 

the  American  Bankers  Association  agreed 

to  promote 

the  survey 

to 

its 

membership, the instrument was revised to include bank terminology  and some issues relating  to 

bank  new  service  development  (Alam  2002). The modified  instrument  was reviewed  by  a  set  of 

academic  researchers  and  bankers,  then  further  tested  on  five  bankers  who  agreed  to  be 

interviewed,  and  finally  was  tested  on  a  convenience  sample  of  twenty-one  bankers  who  had 

recently  been  involved  in  new  product  development.  Some  of  the banks  involved  in  the  testing 

would not have been eligible to participate  in the ABA  study, since they were located outside the 

United  State or had participated in the earlier grounded  study. 

Multiple-item  constructs  were  employed  in  the  survey  to  reduce  demand  bias  and 

affirmative  bias  (Baumgartner  and  Steenkamp  2001).  Item  distributions  were  checked  for 

significant  deviations  from  a normal  distribution.  The  individual  items  were  then  normalized  or 

standardized  in  order  to  reduce  yea-,  nay-,  mid-point  or  extreme-response  biases  (House  et  al. 

2004; Tellis et al. 2007). 


b.  Sample Administration: with the American Bankers  Association 

The  author  originally  had  hoped  that  the  American  Bankers  Association 

197 

("ABA")  would  agree  to  sponsor  the  survey,  but  was  initially  told  that  the  ABA  had  a  firm 

policy  to  never  do  surveys  with  outside  parties.  A  single-industry  study  is  attractive  to  study 

complex  and  subtle processes. Banking was targeted  since it is an important  service industry  and 

it  has  been  well-represented  in  the  limited  new  service  development  literature  to  date  (Alam 

2002;  Alam  and  Perry  2002;  Athanassopoulou  and  Johne  2004;  Cooper  and  Brentani  1991; 

Cooper  et  al.  1994;  Cooper  and  Edgett  1996;  Johne  and  Harborne  2003;  Johne  and  Pavlidis 

1996; Karas  2004; Lievens  et al.  1999). The ABA  was targeted  as  an association  because  it  was 

both  the  largest  association  and  the  general  association  of  choice  for  major  banks.  The  author 

was pleased  when  the ABA  executives  reversed  their  decision,  citing  a  strong  interest  in  service 

innovation  among their membership. 

The  American  Bankers  Association  is  the  leading  bank  association  for  large  banks  and 

for the  industry  as a whole. It is headquartered  in Washington,  D.C. and  lobbies the  government 

and regulators  for the industry.  It also organizes  extensive conferences  and continuing  education 

for  members.  At  the  time  of  the  survey  there  was  a  competing  association  for  community 

bankers,  which  meant  that  the  ABA  membership  was  skewed  towards  larger  banks.  This 

composition  of  members,  membership  from  banks  of  all  sizes  but  with  a  skew  towards  larger 

institutions,  was  favorable  for  a  single-industry  study  since  larger  banks  can  direct  more 

resources  for  new  service  development.  Bankers  from  all  departments  and  functions  of  a  bank 

can  and  do  belong  to  the  ABA,  so there  was  hope  that  a  survey  could  reach  the  diverse  set  of 

people involved in new service development—marketing  people, operations, management, etc. 

The  author  aimed  to  adhere  to  Dillman  (2000)  principles  on  improving  survey  response 

rates  and  did  so  as  much  as  possible  in  the  design  and  testing  of  the  instrument  and  the 


198 

solicitation  materials,  but  was  limited  by  the  restrictions  of  the  ABA.  The  American  Bankers 

Association required that the author not get access to the membership  list and limited publicity  to 

three ABA email "blasts" and three mentions in a daily ABA  e-newsletter. 

c.  Response Rates and  Representativeness 

The  sampling  goal  of  a  quantitative  survey  undertaken  to  test  theory  is  to  produce  a 

representative  sample of the entire population.  One measure that is usually  discussed  at length is 

the  "response  rate", the  percentage  of persons  contacted  who  fill  out  a  questionnaire.  Response 

rate  is  an  acknowledged  poor  measure  of  representativeness:  it  is  not  difficult  to  show  that 

"surveys  with  very  low  response  rates  can  be  more  accurate  than  surveys  with  much  higher 

response rates" (Krosnick  1999,  p. 540). 

With  the restrictive  ABA  practices  regarding  surveys, it was  inevitable  that  the  response 

rate  for  this  survey  would  seem  relatively  low.  The  survey  was  to  be  web-based.  Web-based 

surveys have lower response rates than mail surveys as shown by analyses of the survey  methods 

(Cook  et  al.  2000;  Kaplowitz  et  al.  2004).  The  ABA  specified  that  potential  respondents  could 

only  be  contacted  through  emails,  which  further  reduces  response  rates  in  Web-based  surveys 

(Dillman 2000; Kaplowitz et al. 2004). Furthermore the ABA specified  that the email  solicitation 

be  by  three  email  blasts,  which  limited  experimentation  in  subject  and  message  such  as 

suggested  by  Dillman  (2000).  The  email  blasts  were  to  2,000  members  who  were  on  the 

Marketing or Management mailing lists or had attended recent ABA educational  functions. 

In  addition,  the  ABA  membership  constituted  an  unqualified  sample;  most  members 

would  not  have  been  directly  involved  in  a  NSD  project  within  the  past  two  years  as  was 

required  of  survey  respondents  in the Bank  Survey.  A  survey respondent  was asked  about  direct 

responsibility  for  an NSD project  within 24 months  (1) before  starting the  survey,  (2) again  after 


199 

a  few  general  questions,  and  (3)  was  ultimately  asked  for  some  specifics  on  the  recent  NSD 

project  in the second page of the  survey. 

The  author  asked  the  three  persons  in  the  research  area  of  the  ABA  involved  in  this 

survey  and  four  ABA  members  who  helped  screen  the  questions  for  their  best  estimates  of  the 

percentage  of the  email  recipients who  would receive the emailing  that  would be  qualified:  they 

indicated that  at most  5-10% would be qualified.  The one positive indicator  for participation  was 

the  reason  that  the  association  eased  their  rule  against  outside  surveys:  the ABA  research  group 

believed that there was a high interest in new service development  among the membership. 

There  were  strong  reasons  for  working  with  the  ABA  despite  these  restrictions.  The 

membership  of  the  American  Bankers  Association  was  single-industry  but  diverse  in  that 

industry:  (1)  commercial  banks  and  retail  banks,  (2)  banks  of  all  sizes,  global  banks  and 

community  banks,  and  (3)  managers  of  all  functions  within  banking  are  represented  in  the 

American  Bankers Association membership. The affiliation  with their  leading  association  would 

hopefully  motivate bankers to finish  a long, complex and somewhat repetitive  survey. 

After  three  email  blasts,  80 bankers  had  started  the  Bank  Survey  and  70  had  completed 

the  success  and  culture  constructs.  The  email  blasts  reached  2120  mailboxes,  so  the  gross 

response  rate  was  only  3.3%.  However,  recall  that  in  the  opinion  of  experts  asked  about  the 

email list at most  5-10%  of AMA members  were  eligible by the rules the author  set to  complete 

the  survey.  If  that  estimated  range  is  correct  the  response  rate  among  qualified  members  is 

actually 33-66%, as shown in Table 5.18. 


Table 5.18: Response Rates -  Gross and Qualified  (211 total  responses) 

E-mail  blasts 
Total  Sent 
Total  Opened 
Total  Clicked 

Gross 
3.3% 
5.0% 
39.5% 

5 %Q 
66% 

10%  Q 
3 3% 
50% 

200 

The  ABA  is  able  to  track  the  number  of  people  that  actually  opened  the  HTML  emails 

from  each  email  blast.  Using  the  total  number  of  bankers  who  opened  their  email,  the  gross 

percentage  who completed  a good part  of the  survey  is 5%. This would  seem to indicate  a  100% 

response  rate  if  only  5% were  qualified!  However  since  "new  service  development"  was  in  the 

title line of two of the three email blasts it is likely that the people that opened the email note had 

at  least  somewhat  more  of an  interest  in NSD  than the  typical  ABA  member.  So only the  high-

end  10% qualified  rate  is  shown  on that  line  in  Table  5.18  indicating  a  50% qualified  response 

rate. On the other hand it should be noted the total number of bankers who opened the notes  was 

obtained by adding the number opened for each blast: since there were likely a number of people 

that opened more than one mailing the 5% response rate should be  understated. 

Finally  the  ABA  was  able  to  track  the  number  of  persons  that  actually  clicked  through 

from  an  email  to  the  survey  web  site.  As  shown  in  Table  5.18  nearly  40%  of  the  persons  who 

looked at the survey completed a meaningful  amount of it. 

One  final  indication that the email blasts had  a relatively  good response rate is that  based 

on past experience the ABA considers  100-125 responses on email blasts of this size to be  strong 

responses  when  the  majority  of  recipients  are  qualified.  It  does  seem  that  the  membership  was 

interested  in the topic. 


201 

Unfortunately 

there  are  not  similar  statistics  for  the  participants  who  came  from 

newsletter  publicity.  A  total  of  182  respondents  responded  to  the  introductory  questions  on  the 

website  from  the  newsletter  publicity  and  141  went  on  to  answer  the  questions  about  NSD 

success  and  bank  culture.  Newsbytes  is  a  daily  electronic  newsletter  sent  by  email  to  35,000 

bankers  daily.  The  qualified  percentage  of  the  readership  of  Newsbytes  would  likely  be  lower 

than  of  the  list  for  the  emailing.  But  it  is  near  impossible  to  quantify  how  many  bankers:  (1) 

opened  the  email  containing  the newsletter  on  a given  day,  (2) read  some  of the newsletter,  and 

(3) noticed the paragraph about the Bank  Survey. 

Table  5.19  shows  the  number  of  bankers  who  answered  any  of  the  introductory 

questions—"Do  you think that NSD  is important  in your bank", "Do you think that innovation  is 

more  important  than  5 years  ago"—and  the percentage  that went  on to  answer  meaningful  parts 

of the survey.  77% of the newsletter readers who visited the site and answered  at least one of the 

introductory  questions  went  on  to  complete  all  the  items  for  the  success,  culture  and  formal 

process  constructs  and  52%  answered  all  of  the  program-level  questions.  Remember  from  the 

earlier  discussion  that  40%  of  the  emailed  people  who  even  went  to  the  site,  completed  a 

meaningful  portion. 

These  statistics compare very favorably  to the statistics  for the website respondents  in the 

PDMA  CPAS  survey  where  only  18% of people  who  registered  on the  survey  website  went  on 

to complete the  survey. 

Table 5.19: Number that started the survey vs. completion  level 

Newsletter-web 
E-mail blasts 
Total 

Number 
Started 

182 
80 
262 

% Comp. Success 
and Culture 
77% 
88% 
81% 

% Comp. All 
Program Constructs 

52% 
61% 
55% 


202 

Overall  81% of the bankers who answered any of the introductory  questions went on to 

answer the success, culture and formality  constructs and 55% answered all of the program-level 

questions. This is further evidence that the membership was interested in service innovation. 

The  net  result  of  this  survey  procedure  was  a  database  comprising  responses  from  a 

diverse group of bank respondents who had been involved in a new service development  project 

in the past  24 months. As  shown  in  Table  5.20. just  over  a quarter  of respondents  were  from 

Marketing  and about  a third  identified  themselves  as senior  or middle  managers, with the rest 

being fairly  evenly spread between new products, operations, IT, and sales or customer support. 

The sample also has a good mix of banks by asset size with  17% of respondents from banks of 

over $50 billion in total assets and 15% with under $400 million. 

Table 5.20: Diverse Group of Respondents involved in Bank NSD 

Function of Respondent 

Marketing 
Senior  Management 
Middle  Management 
New Product  Development 
Operations 
Product  Management 
IT or R&D 
Sales or Customer  Service 

Percent 
27% 
21% 
13% 
10% 
8% 
8% 
7% 
7% 

Total Assets 
Greater than $ 50B 
$ 5 0 B > x > $ 2 0B 
$ 2 0 B > x > $ 1 0B 
$ 1 0 B > x > $ lB 
$ l B > x > $ 4 0 0M 
Less than  $400M 

Percent 
17% 
6% 
4% 
43% 
15% 
15% 

It should be noted that after this survey was conducted the ABA merged with the leading 

community  banker  association.  If  this  study  were  to  be  replicated  using  the  new  ABA 

membership, the researcher might consider methods to retain a balance in asset  size so that the 

under-$400 million asset banks didn't dominate the data set. 


203 

6.  Methods 

Tests of the constructs and measures included measure reliability analysis run on 

SPSS  14.0 and confirmatory  factor  analysis on AMOS  16.0; antecedents of success and models 

of NSD success were tested on AMOS using structural  equation modeling techniques  ("SEM") 

(Bollen 1989; Byrne 2001; Kline 1998). 

It is worth again noting that AMOS provides  over twenty-five  measures  of goodness of 

fit  for  SEM  analysis.  The  author  consulted  Kline  (1998)  and  Byrne  (2001)  to  choose  the 

significance  of Chi-squared and seven commonly-used  and currently in-favor  SEM fit measures 

of  different  styles,  as  well  as  the  general  "rules  of thumb" for  acceptable  and  good  ranges  of 

values for the measures. 

The fit  statistics  displayed throughout this study are CMIN/DF, GFI, AGFI, CFI, PCFI, 

and RMSEA.  These goodness  of fit  statistics  are displayed  for  all models analyzed  along with 

the "rules  of thumb" for  good levels  (Kline  1998; Byrne 2001). In addition the author checked 

the ideal sample size as indicated by the Hoelter (.05) measure and included it in the tables if it 

indicated that sample size, n, might be borderline or too small. 


204 

7.  Construct Review and Reliability 

Following the general structure of the preceding sections, constructs will be 

discussed in the following order: (1) The use of market research methods, (2) Measures of the 

firm's culture, and (3) NSD process measures. 

a.  The Use of Market Research Methods 

The constructs for types of market research, both individual engagement market research 

(ICE) and group or constrained market research (GCR), were developed in the first  study of this 

chapter  using  the  PDMA  CPAS  data.  The  number  of  items  for  individual  engagement  were 

expanded from six in that study to 11 in the 2007 bank new service development study, while the 

number of group or constrained market research items was reduced from eight to six. Table 5.21 

shows  that the reconstructed  constructs  continue to  show  acceptable  item total  correlation  and 

Cronbach's  alpha. Note that  of the total  sample of 211 that answered the success and customer 

orientation items, 144 completed the use of customer research methods items. 

Table 5.21: ICE and GCR Reliability 

Individual  Cust. 

Engagement 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

Alpha  Testing 
Beta  Testing 
Ethnography 
VOC:  1-on-l  interviews 
Customer  Site Visits 
Lead User  methods 
Direct 
Web Lab 
Toolkit 
Field  Experiments 
Prototyping 

ICE Cronbach's  Alpha 

n 

.47 
.54 
.62 
.63 
.52 
.65 
.62 
.48 
.52 
.54 
.60 

.86 
144 

Group or Constrained  Research 

Focus  Groups 
Moderated Creativity  Brainstorming 
Test  Markets 
Concept  Testing 
Trade-off  Analysis 
Web-based market  research 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

.54 
.50 
.44 
.64 
.59 
.47 

GCR Cronbach's  Alpha 

(Total Data set n=211) 

.77 
144 


b.  Measures of the Firm's  Culture 

Customer  orientation  ("CO")  has been  used  in many  previous  marketing 

205 

studies (Lukas and Ferrell 2000a; Narver and Slater  1990). The 6-item  measure used in the Bank 

Survey  was taken  from  Lukas  and Ferrell  (2000). All  211  survey  participants  completed  all six 

items of the  customer  orientation  construct.  As Table  5.22 shows  customer  orientation  achieved 

a  good  item total  correlation  and a Cronbach's  alpha of .89. This  favorable  result  is expected for 

a construct that has been used and tested as much as CO. 

Table 5.22: Reliability, Customer  Orientation 

Customer Orientation 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

Commitment to Customers 
Objective-Cust.  Satisfaction 
Strategy-Customer needs 
Value for Customers 
Measure Cust.  Satisfaction 
After  Sales Service 

CO Cronbach's Alpha 

n 

.75 
.77 
.75 
.71 
.65 
.65 

.89 
211 

Proactive  customer  orientation  ("P-CO")  is  a  new  construct  used  in  this  study.  As 

discussed  in the previous  section, the P-CO construct  used  in the Bank  Survey  is based  on the 

proactive market orientation construct used in earlier studies (Atuahene-Gima et al. 2005; Narver 

et  al. 2004).  Again  all of the  participants  responded  to all the items  in this  construct.  Table  7 

displays the strong item correlations and Cronbach's alpha,  .91, indicating a good reliability. 


206 

Table 5.23: Reliability, Proactive Customer Orientation 

Proactive 

Customer Orientation 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

Anticipate changes in Cust. 
Unknown Customer needs 
Solutions to unarticulated needs 
Opportunities in unaware needs 
Use of Lead Users 

P-CO Cronbach's Alpha 

n 

.68 
.83 
.79 
.82 
.74 

.91 
211 

Innovation  orientation  ("IO") was derived  from  earlier modifications  of  entrepreneurial 

orientation  (Koen  et  al.  2005).  Reflecting  this  history,  the  Cronbach's  alpha  for  the  186 

respondents who completed the IO questions was also strong at .85, as shown in Table 8. 

Table 5.24: Reliability, Innovative Orientation Reliability 

Innovation Orientation 

Encourage new service ideas 
Encourage open discussions 
Ensure that champions not punished 
Strongly reward entrepreneurship 

ICE Cronbach's Alpha 

n 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

.71 
.67 
.63 
.76 

.85 
186 


207 

c.  NSD Process Measures 

A four-item measure of how formal  a new product development process is 

was borrowed  from  an  earlier paper  (Kleinschmidt  et  al. 2005). A three-item  measure  of how 

iterative the process of new service development is was developed for the Bank Study.  The 

Cronbach's  alpha  for  both  of these NSD-process  constructs  was  strong,  over  .80, as shown  in 

Table 5.25. Details of the constructs are included in Appendix 1. 

Table 5.25: Formal Process and Iterative Reliability 

Formal  Process 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

Formal  Process 
Established  Stages 
Gates 
Formal  Review 

ICE Cronbach's  Alpha 

n 

.70 
.77 
.71 
.56 

.85 
211 

Iterative  Process 

Break into small tasks 
Prototyping 
Continuous  tweaking 

GCR Cronbach's  Alpha 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

.58 
.76 
.85 

.81 
186 

d.  Success Constructs 

New product development success is defined by the degree to which a new 

service meets a set of four objectives  for a new service launched by the bank. This measure has 

been used in a previous study (Atuahene-Gima  1995). Table 5.26 shows a strong Cronbach alpha 

for the construct of .90. 


208 

Table 5.26: Reliability, Success-met bank objectives 

Success 

Our bank's  NPD  meets 

objectives  for: 

Item-Total 
Correlation 

Market  Share 
Sales 
Growth 
Profit 

ICE Cronbach's  Alpha 

n 

.76 
.85 
.88 
.66 

.90 
211 

e.  CFA for Process and Success 

The  measure  for  iterativeness  is  new  to  this  study,  the  measure  of 

formality  was only  found  in one  study. Therefore  in addition to the Cronbach  alpha measures, 

the author performed  a confirmatory  factor  analysis on these two process  constructs  as well as 

success. The results of the CFA are shown in Table 5.27. Although the chi-square for the CFA is 

significant, the fit statistics are good. All of the items map to their construct with relatively large 

and significant  coefficients.  The CFA thus further  supports these constructs. 

Table 5.27: CFA for IT, Formal and  Success-Objectives 

Name 

Measure 

"Rule of Thumb" 

/?ofChi-Sq 
CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 

n 

p>  .05 

<3 0K,  < 2 strong 

>.90 
>.90 
>.95 

>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 

.00 
1.7 
.93 
.89 
.97 
.74 
.06 

186 


209 

f.  Missing Data 

As noted earlier, the survey instrument is reasonably long and the number 

of  responses  predictably  declined  in  the  later  stages  of  the  survey.  I  carefully  placed  the 

constructs  in order of importance. For example I put the use of market research constructs  last 

since they had already been tested in the previous study. Remarkably, for four of the constructs  -

success, customer orientation, proactive customer orientation, and formality  of the process —  all 

items were answered by all 211 respondents. The number of respondents dropped to  186 for the 

iterativeness measure and the innovative orientation  construct  and further  to  144 for the market 

research tools. 

Table  5.28 summarizes the data available  for the different  constructs and shows us how 

some indicative measures for each set. 

Table 5.28; Data sets for testing antecedents of success 

Constructs  -> 

Respondents,  n 
n (%) mean  replication 
Mean  Success  Objs. 
% assets  > $50  Billion 
% assets  < $1  Billion 

Initial  Set 

P-CO, CO, Formal 
(also Success Objs.) 

Culture/Process 
Previous + EO, 
iterative 

Tools 

+ ICE & GCR 

211 
0 
4.4 
17% 
30% 

186 
0 
4.4 
16% 
30% 

144 
1 
4.4 
15% 
23% 

* including  the construct(s)  eliminates  one  respondent 

Characteristics  of  the  data  set  were  reasonably  stable.  The  mean  success  for  the  four 

objectives  stay  the  same;  the  percentage  of  banks  with  assets  greater  than  $50  billion  was 

reasonably stable; but there was a drop-off in smaller banks—of less than $1 billion—answering 


the  questions  on  market  research  tools.  The  relative  stability  of  the  characteristics  does  not 

210 

indicate a logical bias in tests on the less-answered constructs. 

8.  Results; Antecedents of NSD success 

Again following the structure of the preceding  sections antecedents are discussed 

in three groups: (1) The use of market research methods, (2) Measures of the firm's  culture, and 

(3) NSD process. 

a.  The Use of Market Research Methods: ICE and GCR 

Hypotheses  H2  and  H3 postulate  that  the use  of  individual  engagement 

market  research  tools,  and  use  of  group  or  constrained  market  research  methods  will  be 

antecedents  of new service development  success. Table 5.29  shows the results of using each of 

these constructs as a single predictor of new service development success. 

Table 5.29: Usage of Market Research Tools as antecedents of NSD success 

Name 

Coefficient 
p for primary  coeff. 

pofChi-Sq 

CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

ICE 
.34 
.00 

.00 
1.9 
.86 
.81 
.91 
.77 
.08 
.11 
144 

GCR 
.35 
.00 

.02 
1.4 
.94 
.90 
.98 
.72 
.06 
.12 
144 

"Rule of Thumb" 

p<.05 

p>.05 

<3 OK < 2 strong 

>.90 
>.90 

>  .90 OK>.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 


211 

The fit measures for each individual predictor are acceptable. The explained variance for 

each is well above, almost double, the  .06 level which is considered  a moderate  effect  size  for 

business  and  social  research  (Sawyer  and  Ball  1981).  As  noted  in  Study  1,  this  range  of 

explained variance would place the usage of ICE and GCR research methods in the upper tier of 

"process"  variables  from  a  meta-analysis  of  antecedents  of  success  (Henard  and  Szymanski 

2001). This result provides support for H2 and H3. 

b.  Cultural Measures: IP, CO. P-CO 

Hypotheses H7, H8, and H9 postulate that innovative culture or, customer 

orientation,  and  proactive  customer  orientation,  respectively  are  antecedents  of  new  service 

development success. The results of simple direct SEM analysis of each of these constructs with 

path to success are shown in Table 5.30. 

Table 5.30: Individual Culture Measures as antecedents of NSD Success with Objectives 

ijlture; 

\success. 

Name 

Primary  Coefficient 
p for primary  coeff 

pofChi-Sq 

CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

EO 
.30 
.00 

.00 

2.0 
.96 
.91 
.98 
.63 
.07 
.09 
186 

CO 
.47 
.00 

.00 

3.4 
.89 
.83 
.94 
.69 
.11 

.22 
211 

P-CO 
.55 
.00 

.00 

2.6 
.93 
.89 
.97 
.70 
.09 
.31 
211 

"Rule of Thumb" 

p < . 05 

^ > . 05 

<3 OK < 2 strong 

>.90 
>.90 

> .90 OK>.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 


212 

Each  model  had  reasonable  effect  sizes  and  acceptable  fit  statistics.  This  serves  as 

support for H7, H8. and H9. 

The effect  sizes, as  shown by the  size of the  standardized  coefficient  and the  explained 

correlation are significantly better for CO and P-CO then for the innovation orientation construct. 

Proactive Customer Orientation  is the most powerful  single cultural antecedent  of success with 

its high effect  size and good fit statistics. 

Table  5.31  summarizes  the  results  and  fit  statistics  of  combining  cultural  measures  as 

antecedents  of  success.  The  coefficient  for  innovation  orientation  was  insignificant  in  any 

combination with the two customer orientation measures. 

None  of  the  combinations  were  as  attractive  ~  in terms  of  coefficient  significance,  fit 

statistics, and effect  ~ as Proactive Customer Orientation alone. 

Table 5.31: SEM Analysis: Multiple Cultural Factors 

Name 
Coeff. on EO 
(p) 
Coeff. on CO 
(p) 
Coeff.  on  P-CO 
(P) 

p of Chi-Sq 
CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

(3) 
-.01 
(.75) 
.23 
(.10) 
.40 
(.00) 

.00 
2.2 
.84 
.64 
.93 
.79 
.08 

.34 
186 

(2) 
-.01 
(.88) 
.52 
(.00) 
— 

.00 

(2) 
.04 
(.54) 

— 

.54 
(.04) 

.00 

.27 
186 

.32 
186 

(2) 
— 

.15 
(.30) 
.52 
(.00) 

.00 

2.6 
.86 
.81 
.94 
.78 
.09 

.31 
211 

(1) 
— 

— 

.55 
(.00) 

.00 

2.6 
.93 
.89 
.97 
.70 
.09 

.31 
211 

"Rule of Thumb" 

p<.05 

p<.05 

p<.05 

p>  .05 

<3 OK < 2  strong 

>.90 
>.90 

>  .90 OK^.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 


c.  NSD Process measures: Formal Process, Iterative Process 

Hypotheses  11 and  12 postulate that an iterative new service development 

213 

process and a formal  new service development process will each be antecedents of new service 

development  success. Table 5.32  shows the results of using each of these constructs as a single 

predictor of new service development success. 

Table 5.32: Process constructs as antecedents of NSD success 

Name 

Iterative 

Formal 

"Rule of Thumb" 

Coefficient 
p for primary  coeff. 

pofChi-Sq 
CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

.25 
.01 

.00 
1.5 
.96 
.92 
.98 
.57 
.06 

.06 
186 

.25 
.01 

.00 
2.4 
.93 
.86 
.97 
.62 
.10 

.06 
210 

p < . 05 

p>.Q5 

<3 OK < 2 strong 

>.90 
>.90 

>  .90 OK>.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 

The fit measures for each individual predictor are acceptable. The explained variance for 

at the .06 level which is again considered a moderate effect  size for business and social research 

(Sawyer and Ball 1981). This provides support for Hll  and H12. 


d.  Effect Sizes and Fit Statistics for Individual Antecedents 

The  effect  size  for  proactive  CO  and  standard  Customer  Orientation  are 

214 

very large. The effect  size as indicated by both explained variance and standardized coefficient  is 

bigger  for  the market  research usage constructs  them  for  the process  constructs: the  explained 

variance for the MR tools is 11% and 12% versus 6% for the process variables. 

However  all  of  these  effect  sizes  are  reasonable,  as  are  the  SEM  fit  statistics,  so  the 

predicted  antecedents  of  NSD  success  from  the  grounded  study  of  Chapter  Three  of  this 

dissertation are supported. 


215 

9.  Results: Models of NSD  Success 

The  analysis  of  antecedents  new  service  development  success,  performed  in  the 

previous  section,  is a  straightforward  testing  of hypotheses  developed  from  the  qualitative  study 

of  service  industries.  The  analysis  of  the  interviews  and  observations  with  new  service 

development  managers provided  some  insight  into which variables  should be  more  important  or 

the  interaction  between  certain variables, but that  guidance  is limited.  Therefore  in  investigating 

models  of NSD  success  the  analysis  is  a  combination  of  testing  hypotheses  from  the  previous 

qualitative analysis as well as some exploratory  work. 

Fortunately  examining  competing  models  for  better  fit  and  stronger  effect  is  consistent 

with  good  SEM  analysis  (Bollen  1989;  Byrne  2001; Kline  1998).  The  hypotheses  that  will  be 

tested as part of the model analysis are: 

H5a:  The  use  of ICE  methods  is  more  effective  than  the  use  of  group  or  constrained  market 

research  tools  to predict  the success  of more  innovative  NSD. 

H13:  An NSD  effort  will  be more successful  when  a process  is formal—but  also flexible  and 

iterative. 

H14:  A  model  incorporating  (1) corporate  culture,  especially  proactive  or  standard  customer 
orientation;  (2)  the  use  of  market  research  methods,  especially  ICE  methods,  and  (3)  a 
formal  — yet  iterative  — NSD process;  will effectively predict  NSD  success. 

H15:  As  NSD projects  become  more  innovative,  a formal  structure  will  become  less  important, 

and ICE  market  research  methods  will be more  important  than traditional  MR  methods. 

a.  Testing with Multiple Process and Market Research  Variables 

Using  multiple  process  and  or  market  research  variables  in  a  model  for 

SEM  analysis  generally  involved  the  same  problems  as  encountered  earlier  trying  to  combine 

culture  variables  in  a  single  model.  Table  5.33  shows  the  results  of  SEM  analysis  pairing  off 

each of the four  factors  as a single model. The diagram illustrates the simple two-variable  models 

that were tested and the table summarizes the coefficients  and fit  statistics for  each. 


Table 5.33: Process and MR methods in combination 

216 

( 

A 
.25 
(.04) 
.11 
(-38) 

— 

— 

.00 
1.7 
.93 
.89 
.97 
.74 
.06 

.11 
186 

Coeff. on Formal 

(p) 

Coeff. on Iterative 

(p) 

Coeff. on ICE 

(p) 

Coeff.  on GCR 

(p) 

pofChi-Sq 
CMIN/DF 
GFI 
AGFI 
CFI 
PCFI 
RMSEA 
Sq-M Corr. (R2) 

n 

(Success) 

B 

— 

— 

.25 
(.73) 
.11 
(.88) 

* 

.12 
144 

C 
.17 
(.06) 

— 

.27 
(.01) 
— 

.00 

1.6 
.85 
.81 
.93 
.81 
.07 

.13 
143 

D 
.16 
(.09) 

— 

— 

.30 
(.01) 

.00 
1.7 
.88 
.84 
.95 
.78 
.07 

.15 
143 

E 

— 

.16 
(.12) 
.26 
(.02) 

— 

.00 
1.6 
.85 
.81 
.93 
.79 
.07 

.13 
143 

F 

— 

.15 
(.14) 
— 

.31 
(.01) 

.00 
1.5 
.91 
.87 
.96 
.77 
.06 

.15 
143 

"Rule of Thumb" 

p<.05 

p<.05 

p<.05 

p<.05 

p>.05 

<3 OK < 2  strong 

>.90 
>.90 

> .90 OK^.95  strong 
>.60 OK, >.72  strong 
<.08 OK, < .05 strong 

*fit  statistics not  shown since there is no significant  coefficient  on an independent  variable 

In  each  instance  at  most  one  of  the  coefficients  on  the  independent  variables  was 

significant at thep  < .05 level. (The results were less favorable with three or more variables.) 

In a departure from the test on the PDMA CPAS data when testing the use of both ICE 

and  GCR  market  research  methods,  neither  coefficient  was  significant  and  there  was  no 

improvement on effect  size from using GCR methods alone. 


217 

The  thee  most  promising  combinations  were:  (A)  combining  a  formal  and  iterative 

process,  (C)  combining  the use  of individual  engagement  market  research  and  a formal  process, 

and (F) combining GCR market research methods with the iterative process. 

Even  though  the  coefficient  on  an  iterative  process  had  p  =  .38,  combining  the  two 

measures  of  the  NSD  process  (1)  nearly  doubled  the  effect  size,  bringing  it  in  line  with  the 

single-variable  results  from  the use  of  market  research,  and  (2)  showed  good  SEM  fit  statistics. 

Therefore  the  results  of  the  test  of  model  A  shown  in  Table  5.33  provide  support  for  H13  and 

suggest that an effective  NSD process  should be both formal  and iterative. 

Model  C  from  Table  5.28,  predicting  NSD  success  from  the  usage  of  individual 

engagement  research  and  using  a  Formal  process,  was  the  closest  to  having  two  strongly 

significant  coefficients  (p  =  .06  for  Formal).  Model  F,  combining  the  use  of  GCR  market 

research methods and an iterative process produced relatively strong  SEM fit  statistics. 

Model C and F are intuitively appealing: they seem to say that when  using  the more  open-

ended  market  research  techniques  of  ICE  a formal  NSD process  is  a  beneficial  counterweight, 

while  when  using  more  structured  GCR  market  research  methods  an  iterative  NSD  process  is 

helpful.  However  appealing  this  idea,  it  is unfortunately  true that  in both  models  the  coefficient 

on the process  variable  has p >  .05 and that  the  increase  in explained  success  variation  is  small, 

.02 and  .03, from  adding the process variables. Therefore  these two results must be considered  at 

best tentative and  exploratory. 

b.  Using all the Variables 

Table  5.34  shows the results  when the leading  cultural  variable,  proactive 

customer  orientation,  was  included  in  the  same  two-variable  type  models  examined  in  the 

previous  section.  Proactive  customer  orientation  dominated  any  other  construct  it  with  which  it 

was paired. 


218 

Table 5.34: Proactive Customer Orientation plus second variable vs. success  objectives 

Second Variable  -> 
Coefficient 
p for primary  coeff. 
Sq-M Corr.  (R2) 

n 

— 
.55 
.00 

.31 
211 

Iterative 

Formal 

.05 
.56 

.33 
186 

.06 
.46 

.35 
210 

ICE 
-.02 
.85 

.35 
144 

GCR 
.09 
.38 

.37 
144 

"Rule of Thumb" 

p < . 05 

To predict  overall  new  service  development  success  using  the  three  measures  of the  bank 

culture,  the  two measures  of the NSD process,  and  the usage  of the  two  types  of market  research 

methods  included  in  the  survey,  the  best  model  is  a  simple  one  variable  direct  effect  — the 

proactive  customer  orientation  of the bank.  The original proposed model of NSD  success,  Figure 

5.5, can be simplified  to reflect  the results of this SEM analysis as shown in Figure  5.6. 

Figure 5.6: Revised culture-tools-process  model of NSD 

Methods 
ICE + GCR 

process 

Formal +/x  Iterative 

More 

Innovative 

Methods 

ICE 

Process 

ormal +/x  Iterative 

NSD 
Success 


219 

10. Results by Innovativeness  of NSD 

As reflected  in H13 and H15, individuals  involved  in new  service  development  indicated 

during  interviews  that  processes  differed  for  more  innovative  projects.  Specifically  for  more 

innovative  projects  a  formal  process  is  less  important,  proactive  customer  orientation  is  more 

important  and  individual  engagement  market  research  methods  will  become  more  useful  than 

GCR  or  more  traditional  approaches.  To  test  these  hypotheses  a  typology  of  innovativeness  of 

new  service  development  projects  employing  three  categories  —  incremental,  innovative,  and 

radical  ~  was used  (Garcia  and Calantone  2002). In this  survey  definitions  similar to those  used 

in the 2003 CPAS  study were used (Adams-Bigelow  2004): 

• 

• 

Incremental  new  services  involve  the  repositioning  or  incremental  improvement  of 
existing  services. 

Innovative  new  services  are  new  to  the  bank  and  may  be  additions  to  product  lines  or 
service offerings  or major revisions/next-generation  advances of current  offerings. 

•  Radical  or  breakthrough  services/products  are  new  to  the  bank  and  new  to  the  market 

served. 

In  an  effort  to  manage  the  length  of  the  survey  and  redundancy  of  questions,  bank 

respondents  were  asked to  indicate  the  success  of their NSD  efforts  for  incremental,  innovative, 

and radical  services by answering two  success items for  each: (1) the percentage  of new  services 

launched  at  each  innovativeness  level  that  were  successful  by  the  banks'  total  criteria  for  such 

projects; and (2) the percentage that met profit  objectives  for the  service. 

Table  5.35  shows  the  item  correlations  for  the  two-item  measures  of  success  for  each 

category  of  innovativeness.  The  correlations  are  acceptable.  (The  Cronbach's  alpha  for  each  are 

shown  for  illustration  but  the  alpha  is  not  meaningful  in  measures  with  two  items.)  There  is  a 

sharp  drop-off  in  a  number  of  respondents  to  these  items:  less  than  half  the  number  of 


participants  that  responded  to  the  success  of  overall  NSD  program  responded  to  the 

innovativeness success measures. 

220 

Table 5.35: Success measure for incremental, innovative and Radical NPD success 

Measure 

# Items 

Item  correlations 

C.  Abha 

Incremental %  Success 
Innovative NSD %  Success 
Radical NSD %  Success 

2 
2 
2 

.64 
.75 
.72 

(.78) 
(.85) 
(.84) 

n 
102 
101 
100 

With  this  significant  drop-off  in  a  number  of  respondents,  it  is  reasonable  to  doubt 

whether the  sample  for  these tests is as representative  as in the  earlier model tests. Table  5.36 

summarizes  and  contrasts  selected  information  about  the  smaller  set  responding  to  the 

innovativeness items and the full data set. 

Table 5.36: Data sets for testing antecedents of success by innovativeness of NSD 

Constructs  -> 

Respondents,  n 
n (%) Mean  Replication 
Mean  Success  Objectives 
% assets  > $50  Billion 
% assets  < $1  Billion 

Initial  Set 

P-CO, CO, Formal 

Inc/Inn/Rad 
Inc, Inn or Rad 
NSD Bank/SBU 

211 
0 
4.4 
17% 
30% 

102 
0 
4.5 
16% 
25% 

The author anticipated that the smaller data set would include larger banks or banks that 

had  been  more  successful  in  their  NSD  efforts.  The  mean  score  on  the  4-item  overall  NSD 


221 

success  measures  was  4.5  for  the  smaller  set  versus  4.4  for  the  full  data  set.  The  percentage  of 

banks  with  total  assets  of  less  than  $1  billion  declined  from  30%  in  the  full  set  to  25%  in  the 

smaller  set; however the percentage  of very  large banks, assets  greater than  $50 billion,  actually 

showed a small decline from  17% to  16%. In the author's judgment the innovativeness  data set is 

sufficiently  large, and  sufficiently  similar to the initial  data  set, that testing the hypotheses  about 

the degree of innovativeness in the NSD projects was worthwhile. 

The smaller data  set is on the very low end of the suggested range  for  SEM analysis.  The 

author  omitted  showing  the  Hoelter  (.05)  SEM  fit  measure,  which  suggests  a  minimum  sample 

size, in the tables for all previous  SEM analyses because all of them met the minimum.  Generally 

the minimum  ranged between  120 and  140, indicating that the innovativeness  subset  is too  small 

to  analyze  the  same  models.  In  addition  the  two-items  success  measure  is  below  the  suggested 

size  for  a  construct  (Byrne  2001)  in  SEM.  For  these  reasons  the  analysis  of  success  models  for 

NSD by innovativeness employs linear regression instead of SEM analysis. 

The three 2-item  success measures  for NSD by innovativeness, and the seven  antecedents 

of  success  used  throughout  this  chapter  were  reduced  to  single  measures  by  standardizing  the 

sum of their component  items. Item weightings loading  on independent  constructs  shift  when the 

dependent  measure  changes.  With  reliable  constructs  and  strong  item  coefficients 

it  is  a 

convention to  simply  add the  items, or assume  a uniform  1:1  loading  when  reducing  a  construct 

to  a  single  item  measure,  instead  of  using  a  weighting  scheme  from  previous  selected  SEM 

(Kline  1998). In this  fashion,  success  at the three  innovativeness  levels and the  seven  antecedent 

constructs were converted to single variables. 

The  correlation  between  the  newly  constructed  measures  of  the  seven  antecedents  of 

NSD  success  and  the  two  item  measures  of  incremental,  innovative,  and  radical  NSD  program 

success are shown in Table  5.37. 


222 

Table 5.37: Correlations of NSD innovativeness and predictor variables 

Proactive CO 
Customer Orientation 
Innovation Orientation 
Formal Process 
Iterative Process 
ICE-individual engagement 
GCR-group/constrained MR 

Incremental 

37** 
40** 
30** 
32** 
.24* 
26** 
27** 

**p<.01,  *p <.05 

Innovative 

.43** 
.35** 
.30** 
32** 
.20* 
.31** 
29** 

Radical 
44** 
32** 
27** 
.15 
.25* 
.36** 
29** 

As would be anticipated  from the strong  SEM analysis results when each construct  was 

tested as a direct predictor of NSD success, the correlations are generally strong and  significant. 

It is interesting to note that formal process goes from being strong and significant  for incremental 

and innovative projects to not significant  for radical projects, and that the correlation  coefficient 

for  individual  engagement  market  research  increases  as the projects  become  more  innovative, 

both results seem in line with the innovativeness hypotheses. 

The tests of the antecedents of new service development  success are shown in the same 

order  as  in  the  SEM  analyses  on  the  full  data  set:  (1)  cultural  measures  -  P-CO  and  CO; 

(2) market research methods or tools -  ICE and GCR; and (3) process measures, to what extent 

the process is iterative and formal -  F and I. These statistical tests will check the antecedents for 

projects  of different  innovativeness and test the hypotheses about the change in effectiveness  of 

antecedents as projects become more innovative. Ideally the antecedent tests will facilitate  a test 

of a culture-tools-process model in the following section of the article. 


a.  Bank Culture and NSD Success by Innovativeness 

The SEM tests on overall program success indicate that the two measures 

223 

of  customer  orientation  are  more  effective  antecedents  of  success  than  innovative  orientation. 

HI Ob  suggests  that  a  proactive  customer  orientation  by  the  innovating  firm  will  be  more 

important relative to standard customer orientation  as projects  become more innovative. Linear 

regressions  testing  NSD  success  of  incremental,  innovative  and  radical  projects  seek  to  (1) 

replicate the dominance of the customer orientation measures and (2) test whether P-CO indeed 

is  increasingly  more  effective  versus  standard  customer  orientation  as  projects  become  more 

innovative. 

Table 5.38a shows the results of regression when all three culture measures are included 

in a model. The three measures  show positive correlations ranging from  .42 to  .69, beneath the 

super-correlation levels that would signal an obvious multicollinearity problem, but as in the case 

the  SEM  studies,  a  single  variable  model  dominated  the  multivariable  for  these  cultural 

measures. It is worth noting in Table 5.37b that proactive customer orientation was significant  at 

p < .01 for innovative and radical projects. 

Table 5.38a: Culture Measures and incremental/innovative/radical NSD success 

NSD Type 

Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

adj-R2 
.15 
.18 
.18 

P-CO 
.17 
37** 
43** 

CO 
.23 
.04 
-.05 

IO 
.09 
.13 
.10 

pof  F-test 

.00 
.00 
.00 

*p < .05,  **p < .01 for  t-test  on independent  coefficient 


224 

Table 5.38b summarizes the results of the culture measures as single antecedents of NSD 

success  at  the  three  levels  of  innovativeness.  The  results  of  the  earlier  study  on  full  NSD 

programs were replicated here: the two customer orientations had effect  sizes dramatically higher 

than  innovative  orientation.  In  addition  proactive  customer  orientation  had  more  effect  than 

standard customer orientation for innovative and radical projects. 

Table 5.38b: Culture Measures -  single variables and success by innovativeness of project 

NSD  Type 
Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 
*p < .05,  **p < .01 for  t-test  on  independent  coefficient,  p  ofF-test 

P-CO 
27** 
.43** 
.44** 

CO 
.40** 
.35** 
22** 

adj-R 
.15 
.12 
.10 

adj-R2 
.13 
.18 
.19 

IO 
29** 
.30** 
.28** 

adj-R2 
.08 
.08 
.08 

is .00  in each  regression 

Table  5.38b  provides  strong  support  for  HlOa  and  HI0b:  (a)  the  two  customer 

orientation  measures  are  the  most  important  cultural  measures  and  (b)  proactive  customer 

orientation  becomes  more  effective  than  customer  orientation  for  projects  that  are  more 

innovative. This supports the indication from the earlier study of full NSD programs that either 

P-CO or CO could function as the cultural term in a culture-tools-process model of NSD success. 

b.  Use of Market Research Methods and NSD Success 

Regressions were run to test the pair of use of market research measures as antecedents of 

NSD success for projects  at the three different  levels of innovativeness. Table 5.39a shows that 

the two use-of-methods  measures produced reasonable adjusted  R2 percentages, but in only one 

of the three levels of innovativeness was even one of the two significant at/? < .05. 


225 

Table 5.39a: Regressions of success versus use of market research methods 

NSD  Type 
Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

ICE 
.14 
.22 
.32* 

CGR 
.16 
.12 
.05 

p of F-test 

adj-R2 

.02 
.01 
.00 

.06 
.08 
.10 

*p < .05,  **p < .01 for  t-test on independent coefficient 

Table 5.39b shows the results of regressions using each measure of use of type of market 

research method as single success antecedents. The single variable measures of market research 

use were significant  at p < .01 and showed higher adjusted R2 levels than when the two measures 

were used together. 

Table 5.39b: Single variable regressions on use of market research methods 

NSD  Type 
Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

ICE 
.26** 
.31** 
.36** 

adj-R2 

.06 
.09 
.13 

GCR 
27** 
29** 
29** 

adj-R2 

.06 
.07 
.07 

*p < .05, **p < .01 for  t-test on independent coefficient, p of F-test was .00 for  all 

Note that Table 5.39b supports hypothesis H4 — that for more innovative NSD, customer 

engagement (ICE) methods of market research have more effect than the traditional methods: the 

two  techniques  seem  equally  good  for  incremental  projects,  but  ICE  is  more  effective  for 

innovative  projects  and  shows nearly  double the  R2  for  radical  new  service  efforts.  This table 

lends  support  to  further  simplifying  the  culture-tools-process  model  of NSD  success. A  single 

term, ICE, can be used for all three levels of NSD innovativeness. 


c.  Process Variables  and NSD  success 

In  the  earlier  analysis  on  full  NSD  programs  combining  the  iterativeness 

226 

process  measure  with  the  formal  process  measure  produced  a  two  term  model  with  moderate 

effect  (R2 =  .11). However,  comparing  the  first  four  columns  of Table  5.40b to Table  5.40a,  it is 

clear that a single factor  antecedent model, using the formal  process measure  for incremental  and 

innovative projects  and the iterative process measure for radical projects, is most  effective. 

Table 5.40a: Formal and Iterative Process, two variable  regression 

NSD  Type 
Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

adj-R2 

Formal 

Iterative 

p of F-test 

.09 
.08 
.04 

.27* 
.29* 
.02 

.10 
.04 
.24* 

.00 
.00 
.04 

*p < .05, **p < .01 for  t-test on independent coefficient 

Table  5.40b provides  support  for  HI 5, that  iterativeness  becomes  more  important  as  the 

project  becomes  more  innovative.  Hypothesis  H13  states that NSD  will  be  more  successful  when  a 

process is both iterative and formal. An interactive term was created by multiply the measures of  formal 

process and iterative process and then standardizing the product. 

Table 5.40b: Formal and Iterative Process: Single Construct vs.  Interactive 

NSD Type 

Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

adj-R2 
(p of F-test) 
.10  (.00) 
.09  (.00) 
.05  (.01) 

Formal 

Iterative 

32** 
.31** 
— 

— 
— 
.25** 

adj-R2 
(p of F-test) 
.16  (.00) 
.15  (.00) 
.07  (.01) 

FXI 

.41** 
.40** 
.29** 

*p < .05, **p < .01 for  t-test on independent coefficient 


227 

Table 5.40b also supports H13:  the interactive term had more effect than the combination of  the 

two  terms  or  each  separately.  A process  should  be  both  iterative  and  formal.  A  more  formal, 

structured process  is good for NSD results, but only to the extent that  flexibility  is not reduced 

and the innovation process can continue to be highly iterative. This interactive term, the product 

of the formal process measure and the iterativeness measure, is the logical term to use in a simple 

culture-tools-process model of new service development success. 

11. Testing a Culture-Tools-Process Model of NSD  Success 

At this point it is appropriate to test a simple three-terms, four-measures, model of 

NSD  success  for  incremental,  innovative  and  radical  service  innovation  projects.  Figure  5.7a 

depicts  the  single  grounded  culture-tools-process  model,  using  the  interactive  term  for  the 

process measure and ICE for use of customer research. Figure 5.7b shows the direct effect  linear 

model to be tested on the 2007 Bank Survey data categorized by innovativeness. NSD success is 

predicted  by  the  measure  of  (1)  either  customer  orientation  or proactive  customer  orientation 

(culture), (2) the use of ICE customer engagement market research methods (tools), and (3) the 

degree to which the NSD process is both formal and iterative (process). 

Figure 5.7a: Single grounded culture-tools-process model of NSD success 

Customer 
Orientation] 

(orP-CO) 

/\ 

JCE 

Customer Research 

\J 

mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm 

Process 

Formal x Iterative 


Figure 5.7b: Linear regression grounded culture-tools-process  model of NSD  success 

228 

Customer 

research (ICE)\ 

[Orientation/* 

(or P-CO) 

Customer 
Engagement 

Process 
Formal 

X 

Iterative 

NSD 
Success 

Table  5.41a  summarizes  the  results  of  regressions  of  NSD  success  by  innovativeness 

predicted  by  culture-tools-process  model,  in  this  case  with  F  indicating  the  measure  of  formal 

process and I the iterativeness of the process: 

[NSD Success] = a + Bl  [CO:  customer orientation] + B2  [use of ICE methods] + B3 [ F  x I ] 

This  culture-tools-process  model  seems  a  very  effective  predictor  of NSD  development  success: 

nearly  a  quarter  of  the  variance  in  the  success  of  incremental,  innovative  and  radical  service 

innovation is explained by the independent variables. 

Table 5.41a: Regressions  on a culture-tools-process model by  innovativeness 

NSD Type 
Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

adj-R2 
.24 
.24 
.23 

P, F-test 

.00 
.00 
.00 

CO 

.26  (.03) 
.23  (.05) 
.25  (.05) 

ICE 

.13  (.29) 
.20  (.09) 
.32  (.01) 

F  X  I 
.26  (.04) 
.22  (.07) 
.05  (.67) 

In the three regressions  for the innovativeness  of the NSD program  summarized  in  Table 

5.41a.  two  of  the  independent  terms  were  significant  at  p  <  .05  or  close  to  it.  For  innovative 

projects  all three  independent  terms were  significant  at p <  .10. In Table  5.42b the  culture-tools-


229 

process  model  is  reduced  to  two  significant  terms  (at  p  <  .05).  This  is  not  to  imply  that  these 

truncated models are in any way  superior. The choice of a significance  level such as .05 is totally 

arbitrary;  there  is  a  growing  literature  on the  abuse  of  significance  testing  in  social  science  and 

business  research  and  its  potential  for  misleading  results  (Armstrong  2007;  Hubbard  and 

Armstrong  2006;  Kline  2004).  The  culture-tools-process  model  emerged  from  grounded  study 

and  explains  nearly  a  quarter  of the  variance  in  success  for  three  categories  of NSD  success  by 

innovativeness  of project.  Therefore,  the model used in Table 5.41a  should be considered the key 

model from this  dissertation. 

Table  5.41b  shows  the  two-term  models  that  would  be  derived  from  the  culture-tools-

process  model  of  NSD  success.  Despite  the  misgivings  about  atheoretical  significance  testing 

noted  in  the  previous  paragraph,  and  the  understanding  that  these  truncated  models  are  not 

suggested  as  an  improvement  on the  original,  these  results  are  shown  to  illustrate  what  the  key 

terms  were  that  effected  NSD  success  at  each  level  of  innovativeness.  A  quick  summary  of  the 

results of Table  5.41b  would  indicate that the culture term, customer orientation  was key  in  each 

level  of  innovativeness,  while  the  process  term  was  important  for  incremental  and  innovative 

projects  and the use of ICE methods  for radical new services. This should probably be restated to 

note  the  results  of  the  innovative  projects  test  in  Table  5.41a  where  all  three  terms  had 

standardized  coefficients  of  .2 or better  and p  <  .10; taking this  into  account  a better  assessment 

might be that: 

1.  the cultural term, customer orientation was key to success at each level of innovativeness, 

2. 

the use of ICE market research methods was key in innovative and radical projects  and 

3. 

the  process  interaction  of  formality  and  iterativeness  was  important  for  incremental  and 

innovative projects. 


Table 5.41b: Two-term models with independent variables significant at p < .05 

230 

NSD Type 
Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

ad.j-R2 

P, F-test 

ICE 
— 
~ 
.34 
All independent variables significant  at;? < .05 

CO 
.30 
.29 
.26 

.00 
.00 
.00 

.26 
.22 
.26 

F  X  I 

.31 
.29 
— 

a.  Using Proactive Customer Orientation in the Model 

As expected the use of proactive customer orientation in the culture-tools-

process  model  resulted  in a higher R2  for  innovative  and radical projects  and  a lower  one  for 

incremental  projects.  Table  5.42a  shows  the  summary  statistics  for  the  three  regressions  by 

innovativeness  using  P-CO.  Table  5.42b  shows  the  reduced  models  if  the  coefficients  on  the 

independent  variables were arbitrarily  required to be significant  at p < .05. A cultural measure, 

proactive  customer  orientation,  is a key variable  at all three levels of innovativeness, while the 

process interaction  variable  is key  for  success in incremental projects,  and the use of customer 

engagement market research is key to success in developing radical new services. 

Table 5.42a: Substituting proactive customer orientation in a three-term model 

NSD Type 
Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

adj-R2 
.23 
.28 
.27 

P, F-test 

.00 
.00 
.00 

P-CO 
.26  (.05) 
.35  (.01) 
.36  (.01) 

ICE 

.11  (.35) 
.16  (.19) 
.27 (.03) 

F  X  I 
.25  (.05) 
.16  (.09) 
.00  (.97) 


Table 5.42b Reduced-term sparse reduced models 

NSD Type 
Incremental 
Innovative 
Radical 

P, F-test 

adj-R2 
.24 
.26 
.28 

ICE 
— 
— 
.28 
All independent variables significant  at p < .05 

P-CO 
.30 
.52 
.36 

.00 
.00 
.00 

231 

F  X  I 

.28 
— 
— 

These  tests  provide  support  for  a  cultural-tools-process  model  of  NSD  success  that 

emerged  from  a  grounded  study  of  diverse  service  firms.  The  data  was  from  a  single  service 

industry  and  allowed  a test  across  three  defined  levels  of  innovativeness  of NSD  programs  -

incremental, innovative and radical. 

b.  Exploratory Path Analysis 

In the original discussion of the culture-tools-process original model, I had 

hypothesized  that  customer  orientation  would  have  a  direct  effect  on  NSD  success  and 

predict/support the other two predictive terms, tools and process. There was no evidence of that 

effect  in  the  analysis  on  all  projects,  since  none  of  the  multivariable  tests  were  positive.  I 

performed  an  exploratory  path  analysis  for  incremental,  innovative  and  radical  NSD  success, 

with similar results for each. 

Figure 5.8: A path analysis of innovative NSD success 

Use of ICE 

Formal 

X  Iterative 

Innovative 

NSD 
Success 
Mcorr=.ia  " 

* Significant at/) < .05;  "Significant  at/? < .01 


232 

Figure  5.8  summarizes  the  results  for  innovative  NSD  success.  All  three  paths  from 

customer orientation are significant and the multiple correlation results shows that  16-19% of the 

variation in the measures of use of ice methods, process, and NSD success are explained by the 

paths. Unfortunately,  as noted in the regression results, only one of the paths from the other two 

predictor variables is significant. When the insignificant path is removed the model is reduced to 

a  form that  does not  identify  a chi-square to  check  for  significance  or fit  of the model.  So the 

more complete version of the model is not supported by these tests. 

Strong  results  of  a  test  of  the  simple  linear form  of  the  culture-tools-process  model 

remains the key result of this chapter.  The exploratory path results are included to suggest that in 

future  studies focusing on success by innovativeness of NSD, or in tests of models incorporating 

additional  terms  —  such  as  the  use  multi-functional  teams,  speed  of  development  or  cycle 

strategy  from  other  NSD  models  (Froehle  et  al.  2000;  Hull  2004)  —  the  effect  of  customer 

orientation on process and customer research methods should be tested. 


233 

12.  Conclusion 

An  analysis  of  a  series  of models  to predict  success  of  new  service  development 

using  the  data  set  derived  from  the  2007  bank  new  service  development  survey  supported  the 

antecedents  of  success  generated  from  a  qualitative  study  of NSD  in  diverse  service  firms.  The 

analysis  also  supported  predicted  shifts  in  the  relative  importance  of  the  antecedents  as  NSD 

projects  became  more  innovative.  Finally  a  simple  linear  version  of  the  culture-tools-process 

model  from  Chapter Three was supported by tests. 

Specifically  using the bank data, the following  hypotheses were tested and  supported: 

HI: 

tools  and  methods  of  ICE  form  a  construct  of 

The 
customers/users  that  is  distinct from  group  or  constrained  market  research 
which form  a separate  construct,  GCR. 

individual  engagement  of 
techniques, 

H2: 

The use of ICE  market  research  methods  is an antecedent  of overall  NSD  success. 

H3: 

The use of  GCR market  research  methods  is an antecedent  of overall  NSD  success. 

H4: 

The use of ICE  methods  is an antecedent  of success  of more  innovative/radical  NSD. 

H5a:  The  use  of  ICE  methods  is  more  effective  than  the  use  of group  or  constrained  market 

research  tools  to predict  the success  of more  innovative  NSD. 

H5b:  The  use  of  ICE  methods  is  more  effective  than  the  use  of  group  or  constrained  market 
research  tools  to predict  the success  of an overall  NSD program,  (supported  2 of 3  tests) 

H7: 

An  innovation  orientation  ("10")  is an antecedent  of NSD  success  at the service  firm. 

H8: 

A customer  orientation  ("CO  ") at a service firm  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

H9: 

A proactive  customer  orientation  ("P-CO ") is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

HlOa:  Either  measure  of  customer  orientation,  CO  or  P-CO,  is  a  stronger  predictor  of  NSD 

success  than other  cultural  measures. 

HlOb:  P-CO  is  more predictive  of NSD  success  than  traditional  customer  orientation  for  more 

innovative  services. 

H l l:  An  iterative process  -- breaking  NSD  efforts  into small pieces,  making frequent  changes, 

and prototyping  — is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 

H12:  A formal  NSD process  is an antecedent  of NSD  success. 


H13:  NSD  will be more successful  when  a process  is formal—but  also flexible  and  iterative. 

a.  A Culture-Tools-Process  Model of NSD  success 

As noted, the final two hypotheses that were tested  in this chapter  define  a 

culture-tools-process  of NSD  success: 

234 

H14:  A  model 

incorporating 

(I)  corporate  culture,  especially  customer  orientation  or 
proactive  customer  orientation;  (2)  the  use  of  market  research  methods,  especially  ICE 
methods,  and  (3)  a formal  — yet  iterative  —  NSD  process;  will  effectively  predict  NSD 
success. 

H15:  As  NSD projects  become  more  innovative,  a formal  structure  will  become  less  important, 

and ICE  market  research  methods  will be more  important  than  traditional  MR  methods. 

A  predictive  model,  incorporating  antecedents  from  (1)  bank  cultures  measures  -  customer 

orientation  and  proactive  CO;  (2) usage  of  market  research  methods  -  ICE  tools;  and  (3)  NSD 

process  measures  -  interactive  degree  of  formal  process  and  iterativeness,  was  supported  by 

quantitative  tests.  Using  customer  orientation  as  an  organizational  culture  measure,  the 

interaction  of  formal  process  and  iterativeness  as  an  NSD  process  measure,  and  customer 

engagement research methods (ICE) as the tools or methods measure H14 was operationalized  as 

a simple three-term predictive model, shown as Figure  5.9. 

Figure 5.9: Culture-tools-process model of NSD  success 

Customer 

Research (ICE) 

[Orientation i + 

(orP-CO) 

Customer 
Engagement 

Process 
Formal 

X 

Iterative 

NSD 
Success 

'  V 

J 


235 

This CO/Process/ICE  model of NSD  success emerged  from  grounded  study. Tested against  NSD 

success  measures  for  incremental,  innovative,  and  radical  new  services  this  simple  model 

explained  a  quarter  of  the  variance  in  the  success  measures.  This  is  an  exciting  result  for  two 

reasons: 

1.  This  simple  culture-tools-process  model  of  NSD  success  has  significant  theoretical 

and managerial implications, and 

2.  These  results  support  the  importance  as  antecedents  of  new  service  development 

success  of  two  measures,  iterativeness  of  NSD  and  use  of  customer  engagement 

methods, developed in this dissertation. 

b.  Incremental, Innovative  and Radical  NSD 

A  series  of  studies  have  shown  more  innovative  and  radical  NPD  to  be 

different  processes  from  incremental  NPD  (McDermott  and  O'Connor  2002;  O'Connor  1998; 

Rice  et  al.  2001).  Several  articles  have  urged  firms  to  have  separate  tracks  for  innovation  of 

varying  innovation  (Benner  and  Tushman  2003;  O'Reilly  and  Tushman  2004).  These  results 

from  the Bank Survey give further  support for more innovative NSD being  different. 

Future  studies  of  antecedents  of  success  should  focus  from  the  start  on NSD  or NPD  of 

varying  innovativeness  instead of initially trying to predict the success of overall NPD or NSD. 


236 

13. Limitations 

This study is based on a single-respondent  survey and is therefore  subject  to the 

well-known  biases  of  such  studies  despite the  authors  attempt to use multiple  item  constructs, 

normalization  and  some negative  questions  to minimize  tendencies  to  answer  scales  in  similar 

fashion. 

This  survey  is  a  single-industry-study  and  further  research  may  be  necessary  before 

generalizing conclusions for all service firms. The single-industry design was deliberate to more 

accurate measure multiple effects  without predictable noise from industry-specific  conditions. It 

should  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  hypotheses  tested  were  derived  from  grounded  research  on 

diverse service firms. 

14. Future Research 

A  model  and  new  measures  and  suggested  antecedents  of  new  service 

development  success  that  emerged  from  grounded  study  were  tested  on  single-industry  bank 

data. The culture-tools-process model of NSD success should be tested replicated, including tests 

on  data  from  other  service  industries. New  constructs  from  this  research,  especially  proactive 

customer  orientation  and  individual  engagement  market  research  methods,  should  be 

incorporated in other models to predict success of new product and new service development  for 

other industries and goods firms as well to further generalize findings. 

Ideally after  multiple replications the impact  of the culture-tools-process  model of NSD 

success and the effect  the new measures, developed in this dissertation, on NSD success can be 

verified in future meta-analyses. 


VI.  CONCLUSION 

This dissertation  has  studied new  service  development  and customer  collaboration  or co-

creation  in  new  services  through  four  empirical  studies.  By  showing  that  new  service 

development  differs  from  standard  practices  for  NPD-goods,  by  developing  and  testing  a 

grounded  model  of NSD  success, by  developing  new  measures  of  antecedents  of NSD  success 

that  can  be  utilized  in  future  research,  and  by  describing  the  process  of  service  innovation  in 

cases,  this  dissertation  has  contributed  to  knowledge  of  service  innovation.  The  knowledge  and 

new  measures  will  assist  future  research  of  NSD  and  user  co-creation.  The  purpose  of  this 

Conclusion  chapter  is  to  review  what  has  been  accomplished  and  suggest  areas  of  further 

exploration  suggested by the findings  of this  dissertation. 

There are many  other issues that could have been discussed  from  the collected  data; there 

are  even  more  questions  to  explore  going  forward.  In  the  original  literature  review  for  the 

proposal  for this effort,  I came to the conclusion that this dissertation was likely to be  successful. 

The logic was  straightforward:  (1)  services  are 70-80+% of the economies  of the richest  nations; 

(2)  an  award-winning  paper  argues  that  all  marketing  is  service  marketing  (Vargo  and  Lusch 

2004a); (3) customers play a key role in service delivery (Bitner et al.  1990; Zeithaml  1991); and 

(4) there has been  little research on new service development,  especially the role of customers  in 

NSD  (Page  and  Schirr  2008;  Tidd  and  Hull  2003).  Given  points  (1)  -  (4)  above,  how  could  a 

major  research  effort  on  customer  involvement  in  new  service  development  not  contribute  to 

knowledge  in  this  key  area?  The  three  empirical  studies  in  this  paper  have  contributed  new 

knowledge  of  NSD  in  the  form  of  answers  to  the  research  question,  a  model  of  NSD  success, 

new  measures  and  antecedents  of  success  to  study  service  innovation,  and  perhaps  equally 

important, new questions  to study in NSD research. 

237 


238 

A.  Research  Questions 

In the introduction to the dissertation the guiding research questions were stated as: 

How  are  new  services  developed?  What is  the  role  of customer  collaboration  in  new 

service  development?  How  does  the  migration  of  services  to  web-delivery  affect 

customer  collaboration  in new service  development? 

Qualitative  methods were used  in this  dissertation  in order to  discover  a description  of the  NSD 

process  and  to  develop  grounded  theory  of  how  service  innovation  occurs.  It  was  a  goal  of  the 

analysis to  develop  a model  of NSD  success that  could be tested with  quantitative  methods. It  is 

appropriate to begin this conclusion with a summary of answers to the central  question. 

1.  How are New Services  Developed? 

As  discussed  at the outset,  new  service  development  is different from  NPD-goods 

and  a  recurring  theme  is  that  NSD  is  less  structured  than  NPD-goods.  In  addition  NSD  is  an 

iterative  evolutionary  process.  These themes were present  in both the grounded  and the  multiple 

case  studies. The quantitative  tests  indicated  that more  structure was an antecedent  of  success  in 

incremental  NSD  but  not  in  new  service  development  for  more  innovative  or  radical  new 

services. An iterative NSD process was an antecedent  of success for more innovative  and  radical 

projects.  However  managers  were  determinedly  pursuing  ways  to  add  structure  to  NSD.  This 

suggests that  traditional  well-known  structures for  managing  NPD-goods  were  difficult  to  apply 

to more flexible  iterative  NSD.  Ultimately  it was  shown that an NSD process would benefit  from 

a more formal  structure, if the process retained the flexibility  to be iterative. 

2.  The Role of Customer  Collaboration in New Service  Development 

NSD  is  customer  centric:  it  is  all  about  the  customers.  Executives  involved  in 

NSD  work  to  (1)  make  their  organization  cultures  more  customer-oriented,  (2)  seek  methods  to 

uncover  sticky  or  tacit  knowledge  or  information  while  engaging  users  in  new  service 

development,  and  (3)  maintain  a  flexibility  and  iterativeness  in  the  process  so  that  user 


239 

suggestions  can be  quickly  incorporated  in the  service. It is more than  a focus  on customers  ~  it 

is  more  like  an  obsession.  All  three  terms  of  the  culture-tools-process  model  of  NSD  success 

reflect  customer-centricism.  The culture measure is customer orientation, the most effective  tools 

enhance  customer  engagement  in the  NSD  effort,  and  the  process  must  be  iterative  to  adapt  to 

customer  feedback. 

3.  The Migration to the Internet  and Customer  Collaboration in NSD 

Process 

innovation 

is  service 

innovation.  Unlike  NPD-goods,  new  service 

development  cannot  be  broken  into  two  separate  efforts  —  NPD  and  process  or  manufacturing 

innovation. When a service migrates to the internet, the ease of process  changes makes  iterations 

more  frequent  and  design  more  flexible.  Internet  service  innovation  may  look  like  software 

development.  "Probe and learn" (Lynn and Morone  1996) is an integral part of NSD  for  services 

that have migrated to the Internet. 

4.  Another Theme: the Innovativeness  of NSD 

New  service  development  differs  depending  on  the  innovativeness  of the new service.  The 

grounded  analysis  suggested  and  the  quantitative  analysis  supported  that  for  more  innovative 

NSD projects  (1) iterativeness  was more  important  than NSD process  structure  and  (2)  customer 

engagement  methods  were  more useful  than traditional  market  research.  In addition  a more pro 

active customer orientation may be needed for more innovative  efforts. 

These  are  important  themes  about  new  service  development.  Some  of  them  may  be 

expected  because  of  unique  characteristics  of  services  such  as  the  inseparability  of  production 

and consumption, but they define  new service  development  as a unique  customer-centric  process 

different  than  the  standard  models  of NPD-goods.  These  themes  emerged  from  grounded  study 

and multiple case analyses and were supported by quantitative analysis of two data sets. 


240 

B.  The Culture-Tools-Process Model of NSD Success 

From the grounded study of Chapter Three emerged hypotheses about antecedents of new 

service  development  success.  The  combination  of  those  hypotheses  resulted  in  a  tentative 

grounded  model  shown  in  Chapter  Three  as  Figure  3.2.  From  the  operationalization  of  the 

grounded  model  and preliminary  testing  of  antecedents  a  slightly  revised  model  evolved;  it  is 

shown below as Figure 6.1. This model was tested using data from the 2007 Bank Survey. In this 

model customer orientation leads to more use of customer research methods, especially customer 

engagement (ICE) methods. Both customer orientation and the use of customer research methods 

are direct  antecedents  of NSD  success. The other key  antecedent  is the interaction  of  structure 

and  iterativeness  in  the  innovation  process:  more  structure  is  good  as  long  as  iterativeness 

remains high. 

Figure  6.1: A customer-centric,  culture-tools-process  model of NSD  Success 

Methods 
ICE+GCR 

process 

\M 

Formal +/x I 

erative 

More Innovative 

v 
Methods 

ICE 

process 

ormal +/x  Iterative 

NSD 
Success 

NSD 
Success 


241 

Following  the  "more  iterative"  arrow  in  Figure  6.1, several  shifts  are  predicted  in  the 

model. As the innovativeness  of the NSD project  increases, proactive CO may become a better 

measure of how customer centric the organization is than standard customer orientation; the use 

of ICE research methods should become more important than the use of standard market research 

methods; and the importance of a formal process should decline relative to the importance of an 

iterative process. 

The direct effects  of the antecedents shown as solid arrows in Figure 6.1 were supported 

by tests on the data from the bank survey. The dashed arrow from customer orientation to the use 

of  customer  research  methods  indicates  that  tests  of  that  path  were  inclusive.  Without  that 

intermediate path, the model is a simple three antecedent model. Since the use of ICE methods 

proved  to  be  better  for  more  innovative  and  radical  projects  and  essentially  the  same  as 

traditional methods  for  incremental projects, the direct  form  of model  of Figure  6.2  was tested 

with the bank data. 

Figure 6.2: A general customer-centric model of NSD Success 

JCE 

Customer Research 

Process 

Formal x Iterative 

NSD 
Success 

In linear direct-effect form 

Research (ICE) 

Customer 

Engagement 

Process 
Formal 

X 

Iterative 

"\ 
NSD 
Success 

r Customer 

Orientation I + 

(orP-CO) 


242 

The model  (linear direct-effect)  illustrated  in Figure  6.2 was tested  for  incremental,  more 

innovative,  and  radical  new  service  development  projects,  using  data  from  the  2007  Bank 

Survey.  The tests  were  supportive.  The  simple  direct  version  explained  approximately  a  quarter 

of  the  variance  in  NSD  success  for  incremental,  innovative  and  radical  projects.  This  suggests 

that an organization interested  in new service innovation  should: 

1.  Develop and support  a customer  orientation, 

2.  Make  use  of  methods,  such  as  prototyping  and  1:1  interviews  to  individually 

engage uses in the development  effort,  and 

3.  Bring  structure  and  discipline  to  the  NSD  effort,  especially  in  setting  priorities, 

but only to the extent that the iterativeness  of the process is not inhibited. 

C.  New Measures as Antecedents  of NSD  Success 

A  common  goal  of the  executives  in the  grounded  study  of  new  service  development  in 

service firms  was to find  and use methods to better understand customer needs and problems  and 

to  facilitate  user  collaboration.  Traditional  market  research  tools  were  being  replaced  or 

augmented  with methods that better encouraged  collaboration  and helped uncover  deep or  sticky 

customer  knowledge  and  information.  These  methods  included  one-to-one  interviews,  customer 

visits,  site  visits  by  members  of  the  NSD  group,  identifying  lead  users,  prototyping,  and  field 

experiments. 

From  the  analysis  of  the  grounded  study,  it  seemed  logical  to  group  customer  research 

methods  into  two  categories:  traditional  market  research  techniques  (GCR)  and  methods  for 

individual  customer engagement  (ICE). Derived  from  an important theme of the grounded  study, 

uncovering  sticky  or  tacit  knowledge  or  information,  these  two  categories  were  proposed  as 

constructs  that  would  partially  define  an NSD  process.  EFA  analysis  on two  different  data  sets, 


243 

the CPAS  set from  the PDMA  and the bank  survey performed  for this dissertation in  cooperation 

with  the American  Bankers  Association,  supported  ICE  and  GCR  as  separate  reliable  measures. 

Further  quantitative  analysis  indicated  that  both  constructs  were  antecedents  of  NSD  success, 

although the ICE methods were more important to more innovative NSD. 

Though  most  previous  research  on  corporate  culture  focused  on  market  orientation  or 

innovative  orientation,  the  grounded  study  indicated  that  customer  orientation  would  be the  key 

cultural  measure.  In  addition  due  to  the  importance  of  focusing  on  sticky  knowledge  and 

information,  a  more  proactive  customer  orientation  seemed  useful.  Both  traditional  customer 

orientation  and  a  new  measure,  proactive  customer  orientation,  were  shown  to  be  reliable 

measures  in  an  EFA  analysis  of  the  bank  survey  data.  Both  tested  as  strong  antecedents  of 

success. NSD customer orientation not market orientation should be the key cultural measure. 

The  iterativeness  of  the  NSD  effort  emerged  as  another  success  antecedent.  Again  a 

construct  was  developed,  tested  through  confirmatory  factor  analysis  then  tested  against  a  data 

set  on  service  innovation.  Iterativeness  proved  to  be  an  antecedent  of  NSD  success  alone  and 

later  to be  even  more  effective  as  an  interactive  variable  paired  with  formal  structure,  as  shown 

in Tables 5.39a and 5.39b from  Chapter Five. 

This  dissertation  therefore  makes  significant  suggestions  for  success  antecedents.  First, 

customer  orientation  should  perhaps  replace  market  orientation  as  a  corporate  culture  measure 

when  studying  NSD  success.  Three  new  antecedent  constructs  were  developed  and  tested,  the 

two key ones for predicting NSD  success are (1) ICE, a measure of the use of methods to  engage 

customers  in NSD  collaboration  and  (2) iterativeness  of the NSD  process. These  new  constructs 

may  be  the  most  important  contribution  of  this  dissertation:  the  most  recent  meta-analysis  of 

antecedents  of  NPD  success  found  that  few  of  the  most  used  constructs  were  effective  in 

predicting NPD  success (Henard and Szymanski 2001). 


Offering  a set  of  antecedents  for  NSD  success  —  customer  orientation,  NSD  process 

iterativeness,  and customer  engagement  research  methods  — should  facilitate  future 

success studies for new service  development. 

244 

D.  Questions for Further  Study 

Suggested  ideas  for  future  research  were  shown  at the  end  of  each  of  the  four  empirical 

studies of this dissertation. In this section I discuss four broad but  outside-the-scope-of-this-study 

questions  suggested  by  the  three  chapters.  Since  they  are  fundamental  questions  outside  of  this 

study, only one of them was actually mentioned  in the chapter studies. The four  questions are: 

•  How can structure be introduced to an NSD process?  (Chapter  Three) 

•  Can "professional  organisations" innovate? (Chapter  Three) 

• 

Is NSD for web-based  service simply "extreme programming"?  (Chapter  Four) 

•  Should we try to measure success of an NSD program? (Chapter  Five) 

1.  How can Structure be Introduced to an NSD  Process? 

Most  of  the  executives  were  trying  to  add  some  structure  to  their  NSD  effort. 

They  needed  help  with  prioritizing  projects  initially  and  throughout  development.  They  were 

aware  of the phased  approaches  to NPD  such as  Stage-Gate®  (Cooper  1990) and had tried  some 

version with  limited  success. The  closest that  they had  come to  such  a  system  was to use  stages 

as  a  check  list,  that  they  check  off  themselves.  An  essential  part  of  a  Stage-Gate®  system, 

however,  is  "gates  with  teeth,"  clearly  defined  gatekeepers  independent  of  the  development 

project,  who  represent  the  limited  critical  resources  of  the  firm,  and  have  the  power  to  kill  the 

projects  (Cooper  2008).  Cooper  (2008)  states  clearly  that  a  simple  checklist  without  the 

independent  "teeth" is not a Stage-Gate®  system. 


245 

In  Figure  6.3,  stages  are  shown  in  rectangles,  followed  by  a  corresponding  diamond 

which  represents  the  gate  to  assess that  stage  and  decide whether the project  should continue. 

The stages are performed  by the group responsible for developing the new product, according to 

Cooper  (1990),  ideally  a  multi-function  team.  The  gates  are  staffed  by  executives  who  are 

(1) independent  of the development team, (2) capable of assessing the likelihood of success  for 

that stage of development, and (3) responsible for scarce resources that must be used in the NPD. 

The  fact  that the gatekeepers  are independent  of the project  should  reduce the risk of decision 

biases  such  as  escalation  of commitment  (Schmidt  and  Calantone  2002)  and the  fact  that they 

represent key resources should help set organizational priorities (Cooper 2008). 

As noted in the Chapter Two literature review, a number of studies have suggested that a 

Stage-Gate® process  inhibits more innovative NPD (Benner and Tushman 2003;  Kleinschmidt 

et al. 2007; Tushman  and O Reilly  1999) and may interfere  with corporate learning  (Sethi and 

Iqbal 2008). Cooper (2008) stresses that Stage-Gate® has evolved in practice and need not be a 

linear process. Furthermore he argues that organizations have adopted it to open innovation and 

iterative approaches. 

My representation  of the  Cooper  (2008) updated  Stage-Gate®  was  originally  shown  as 

Figure  2.3  in  Chapter  Two  of  this  dissertation;  it  is  repeated  here  as  Figure  6.3. This  model 

specifically  includes  iterations within  each  stage and  illustrates  customer  involvement  in every 

stage of development (Zahay and Griffin  2004; Zahay et al. 2004). Note that the arrow from gate 

Gl  does not point to a fixed  stage; some of the stages can be done without concern for the order 

performed.  Figure 6.3 shows a decision method for prioritizing new ideas and deciding whether 

to continue investing time, effort  and money into an NSD project.  This process is not the rigid 

linear  process  of the  original  Stage-Gate®  (Cooper  1990)  and  in  fact  can be  adapted  to  work 

with a variety of NPD processes. 


Figure 6.3: Iterative Stage-Gate® 

246 

_  _  _ 

Customer involvement or co-creation 

I 

As  noted,  many  of  the  managers  in  this  study  have  tried  unsuccessfully  to  adapt  their 

NSD  efforts  to any kind of  Stage-Gate®  type approach beyond  a self-scored  checklist.  I  suspect 

from  the  discussions  with  the NSD  managers  that  this  is  because  even  the  looser  Stage-Gate® 

approach  of  Cooper  (2008)  still  may  contain  too  much  structure  for  service  innovation.  Figure 

6.4  is  a  normative  vision  of  a  decision  framework  or  tool  to  aid  in  prioritizing  potential 

innovation  and  to  reach  go/no  go  decisions  for  service  innovation  in  process.  This  decision 

framework  is based on insight  from the grounded study of NSD in Chapter Three. 

This  vision  of  service  co-creation  checkpoints,  is  based  on  the  checklists  used  by  NSD 

managers  in the grounded  study, but  shares  some  features  with  the  advanced  Stage-Gate  model: 

go/no-go decisions are made at established checkpoints, represented by the diamonds  labeled  Cn, 

which  function  much  like  the  gates  in the  Cooper  (2008)  model;  and  the  effort  is  iterative  with 

customer involvement. However there are important  differences: 

1.  Checkpoints may be sequential but most are assumed to be independent  like C\  and Cn-i. 

2.  Checkpoints  are defined;  phases  are not  as defined  (hence dashed boxes)  and may not  be 

linked  to  a  specific  checkpoint.  Note  that  in  Figure  6.4  there  is  a  phase  linked  to 

checkpoint Ci but none tied to C2. Checkpoints  may  not be tied  to any defined  "phase " of 


247 

NSD; they  may be  activated  by the  innovation  team  or the  checkpoint  staff  when they 

deem the effort ready for that assessment. 

3.  Customers,  as  well  as  members  of  the  provider  organization  staff  the  checkpoints; 

customers  are involved  in co-creation,  so customer time  should properly  be  considered 

one of the scarce resources of development. 

4.  The process is truly  iterative:  iterations  are not just within  defined  stages or phases but 

can fundamentally  change the planned service, 

5.  Because  of  #4  above  checkpoints  must  be  able  to  send  a  project  back  to  another 

checkpoint, as illustrated by the upper dotted line from C2 to Ci. 

6.  The checkpoints have "teeth" and are staffed  by key stakeholders -  executives who must 

decide resource allocation and customers who must allocate their co-creation time. 

Figure 6.4: Service co-creation  checkpoints 

Ideation 

""* 

i 
Launch| 

\ > f c V^  Phase l

j *^ 

\i 

Customer involvement  or co-creation 

The "service co-creation checkpoints" of Figure 6.4  is NOT proposed as a grand NPD or 

NSD process  in the manner that  Stage-Gate®  is often  presented  (Cooper 2008; Cooper 2001). 

The large dotted rectangle represents the NSD effort  for  an organization.  Some phases of NSD 

may be  distinct  and  can be  linked to  a checkpoint  but  sometimes  checkpoints  must  simply  be 


248 

activated  by  the  development  team  or  checkpoint  staff  when  a  service  is  ready  for  a  given 

assessment. 

A  service  co-creation  checkpoint  framework  does  not  compete  with  or  override  the 

process that has evolved  within  an organization.  The checkpoint tool is merely a prioritizing  and 

go/no-go  decision  tool  that  should  work  with  whatever  process  has  evolved  in  an  organization 

for  service  development.  It  is  a  "checklist  with  teeth"  that  fully  acknowledges  the  role  of 

customers  in service innovation. Even if an NSD  efforts  has NO  defined  phases, checkpoints  can 

be  activated  when  the  developing  service  meets  specified  criteria.  This  checkpoints  approach 

should  fit the objective  of more  structure without  stifling  iterativeness, an objective  suggested  by 

the three variable model of new service development  success (Figure  6.2). 

2.  How Can "Professional  Organisations" Innovate? 

Total  healthcare  spending,  using  a  broader  definition  (including  prescriptions, 

medical  devices, etc.) than  that used  in producing  Table  3.2, reached  16% of U.S.  GDP  in  2005 

(Borger et al. 2006). That percentage  is conservatively  expected to grow to over 20% by the year 

2050  (Borger  et  al.  2006).  According  to  the  Institute  for  Educational  Studies  of  the  U.S. 

Department  of  Education,  the  U.S. current  spends  2.9% of  its  GDP  on  higher  education,  higher 

than  any  other G-8  country  and  spends  over  $24,000 per year per  student,  more than  double  the 

level  of  any  other  G-8  nation  (DOE  2003).  Given  the  size  and  growth  of healthcare  and  higher 

education,  the  two  propositions  about  innovation  in  "professional  organizations"  should  be  a 

source of concern to industry executives and policy makers: 

P3.29:  Major  segments  of  the  service  economy—healthcare,  higher  education,  and  perhaps 
other  governmental,  social  service  or  "professional  organizations  "—may  be  resistant  to 
innovation  that is focused  on the client  and/or  cuts across  bureaucratic  barriers. 

P3.30:  Healthcare  and  higher  education  organizations  often  treat  their  "doctors"  as  customers 
"technologically 

and  therefore  are  not  "end-user-centric."  As  a  result  they  may  be 
innovative  " but not  "service  innovative. " 


249 

Further  study  of 

innovation 

in  healthcare,  higher  education  and  "professional 

organizations"  (Mintzberg  1989)  should be  a research  follow-up  priority  from  this  dissertation. 

Continuing  research  into  hospitals  known  to  be  innovative,  or  focusing  on  incidents  of 

innovation, the technique  for  selecting the two university participants, could provide  insight  into 

how profession  organizations  can overcome bureaucratic barriers to  innovation. 

3.  Is NSD for Web-based  Service simply "Extreme  Programming"? 

Chapter  Four,  the  multiple-case  study  of  NSD  in  services  that  migrate  to  the 

Internet,  showed  that  the process  of new  service  development  becomes  even  more  iterative  and 

flexible  after  a service migrates to the Internet. Changes were often  made on the fly with the help 

of extensive pre-Beta testing by  involved  users. The NSD process  becomes  evolutionary,  driven 

by  bottom-up 

interactions  with  customers.  Keeping  up  with  the  frequent  changes  and 

documenting  them  for  customer  service  personnel  may  become  a  burden.  In  several  cases, 

including  the  clearing  bank  and  corporate  bank  subjects,  a  focus  of NSD  management  became 

collecting these  frequent  changes into periodic releases. 

In a discussion  of this research one  of my  dissertation  advisors, Professor  Cherian,  made 

an  analogy  to  extreme  programming  and  agile  development  of  software.  Agile  development 

derives  its  name  from  a  manifesto  placed  on  the  internet  by  prominent  programmers  and 

software  developers and researchers that stressed the need to value: 

• 

Individuals and interactions over processes and tools, 

•  Working  software  over comprehensive  documentation, 

•  Customer collaboration over contract negotiation,  and 

•  Responding to change over following  a plan (Beck et al. 2001). 

Agile  software  development  promotes  multiple  development  iterations,  open  collaboration,  and 

adaptability  throughout  the life-cycle  of a development  project  (Highsmith  and  Cockburn  2001). 


250 

Small teams, including users, make  continual  changes  to the  software,  then test  it and  change  it. 

It  is  an  evolutionary  process  whereby  a  series  of  incremental  rapid  changes  can  yield  an 

innovative  new  release.  Extreme  programming  is  a  form  of  agile  development  that  attempts  to 

maximize  stakeholder involvement by, among  other practices,  stressing test-driven  development, 

continuous  design  change  and  improvement,  small  frequent  releases,  and  collective  code 

ownership  (Beck  1999; Beck and Andres 2004). 

Many  of the characteristics  of extreme programming  were observed  in the internet  cases: 

small  frequent  releases,  continuous  change  in  the  development  plan,  customer  collaboration, 

innovation  proceeding  ahead  of  documentation,  and NPD  processes  left  behind.  This  raises  the 

issue  of  whether  migrating  a  service  to  the  Internet  necessarily  makes  it  software-like  and 

therefore  subject  to the  development  processes  of agile  development  and  extreme  programming. 

Although  the Agile  Manifesto  (Beck  et  al.  2001)  was  aimed  at  all  software  development,  agile 

techniques  have  had  highest  acceptance  and  greatest  impact  for  Internet  development  and 

website programming  (Meso and Jain 2006). 

Exploring  the  relationship  between  user-centric  software  development  and  NSD  for 

Internet-based  services  may therefore  be  a fruitful  area for  future  research. As was noted  in both 

the  internet  multi-case  study  and  the  grounded  study  of  service  development,  these  features  of 

NSD  post  Internet  migration  were  not  unique  to  Internet  based  services:  NSD  became  more 

interactive,  more  collaborative,  and  involved  more  testing  and  more  changes  in  concepts  or 

service plans after  migration to the internet, but these all reflect  increases in features  of NSD  that 

were  evident  in the NSD pre-Internet  as well. This  suggests  an even more  fundamental  question: 

does  an agile  development  metaphor  apply  to new service  development? 

An interesting  study would compare practices  in a software  firm  known to follow  "agile" 

and  "extreme"  programming  to  NSD  in  Internet-based  services.  If  that  comparison  was 


251 

promising  a  next  step  might  be  to  compare  NSD  practices  in  "pure"  services.  [Another 

interesting  research  issue,  of  course,  would  be  what  is  a  pure  service  or  what  is  degree  of 

serviceness  -  the  "tangibleness"  measure  is  proving  to  be  unsatisfactory  (Vargo  and  Lusch 

2004b).] 

4.  Does it Make Sense to Measure Success of an Overall NSD Program? 

Grounded  analysis  suggested  that  service  innovation  should  differ  for  more 

innovative  services. In particular,  as a service becomes more  innovative the analysis  suggested 

that 

(1) proactive customer orientation should be more important than standard customer 

orientation,  (2) customer  engagement  tools  should be  relatively  more  effective  than  traditional 

market  research  methods,  and  (3)  iterativeness  should  become  relatively  more  important  than 

formal  structure  in the NSD process. These  differences  were  supported  by quantitative  tests in 

Chapter Five. 

Despite these differences  a single, simple direct model was found to have good prediction 

power  for  all  three  classes  of  innovativeness  of  innovation  among  the  banks.  However, 

differences  were significant  enough to support an argument that an overall NSD program should 

first  be  categorized  by  innovativeness  before  success  studies.  I  would  urge  future  researchers 

investigating NSD success to start with categories of innovativeness  first  and then see what can 

be generalized over all NSD. 

E.  Summary 

As discussed in the introduction and literature reviews in Chapter One and Chapter Two, 

respectively, customer collaboration in new service development is a research area that has been 

understudied,  given the importance  of service in the economy  and the emergence  of  a service-

dominant  logic  of marketing  (Vargo  and  Lusch 2004a).  This  dissertation  has made  significant 


252 

additions  to  knowledge  of  this  important  process.  This  dissertation  comprises  four  empirical 

studies that each contributed new knowledge, theory and new research questions. 

From  a  "big  picture"  point  of  view  this  dissertation  makes  multiple  significant 

contributions  to  our  limited  knowledge  of  service  innovation  and  customer  co-creation  of  new 

services, included but not limited to these seven  contributions: 

1.  A  Model  ofNSD  Success.  A four-construct,  three  factor  model  of NSD  success  emerged 

from  the grounded  study of service  innovation  and was tested with  favorable  results  on a 

single-industry  database 

for 

incremental,  more 

innovative  and 

radical 

service 

development. 

2.  New  Measures  as Antecedents  of NSD  Success.  Two of the new constructs that  emerged 

from  grounded  study  had  favorable  quantitative  tests  and  were  included  in the  model  of 

NSD success: (1) the usage of customer engagement market research methods and (2) the 

iterativeness  of an NSD.  These measures  should be  of continuing  use to researchers  into 

service  innovation. 

3.  A  view  of  service  innovation.  NSD  is  a  customer-centric,  iterative  and  experimental 

process.  It  is  difficult  to  manage,  since  the  constant  testing  and  quick  response  to  user 

feedback  results in on-the-fly  changes to service concepts and plans. 

4.  Insight  into  the  difficulty  of  a formal  process  in  NSD.  A  universal  theme  among  the 

twenty  nine  organizations  that participated  in the  qualitative  studies  was pursuit  of  more 

structure  in  the  NSD  process;  yet  they  had  not  progressed  beyond  a  simple  self-scored 

checklist  of  things  to  do.  The  interactive  process  factor  included  in  the  model  of  NSD 

success  showed  the  importance  of  protecting  the  flexibility  and  iterativeness  of  the 

process from  heavy-handed  control. 

5.  Re-focusing  on  customer-centricism.  The  reason  that  market  orientation  has  had  mixed 

results  as an  antecedent  of NSD  success  might  be  that  it  is too broad  a measure.  One  of 

the  components  of market  orientation,  customer  orientation,  emerged  from  the  grounded 

study  as  an antecedent  and was the  consistently  significant  and  high-effect  antecedent  in 

the quantitative tests on the 2007 Bank  Survey  database. 


253 

6.  Extreme NSD for  Internet service. The migration of a service to the Internet  magnifies 
the  key  aspects  of  the  NSD  efforts.  Testing  is  easier;  feedback  more  instantaneous, 

changes  and  iterations  are  more  frequent.  NSD  is  not  only  evolutionary  but  it  is 

accelerated evolution. Internet NSD resembles extreme programming of software. 

7.  Roadmaps  for  future  NSD  research.  There  is  a  clear  need  to  understand  how 
"professional  bureaucracies"  such  as  universities  and  hospitals  can  better  perform 
innovation  that  is  aimed  at users  and/or  cuts  across  bureaucratic  boundaries.  How  can 
service  organizations  prioritize  innovation  and  decide  what  changes  should  be  funded 
without  imposing  controls  that  inhibit  the  flexibility,  iterativeness,  and  communication 
necessary  to successful  NSD? (I attempted  a speculative  first  step with the "service co-
creation  checkpoint.")  How do incremental,  more  innovative  and radical NSD differ:  is 
there a need for an ambidextrous approach in service innovation? 

F.  Limitations 

New measures as antecedents of NSD success, and a new culture-tools-process model are 

exciting  results  of  this  dissertation.  The  quantitative  results  must  be  replicated  and  ultimately 

tested in a future meta-analysis to increase confidence  in the model and antecedents. In addition, 

since the testing was done on a single-industry  sample, generalization requires testing data  from 

other  industries  besides  banking.  As  noted  in  Chapter  Five,  all  the  concerns  about  single-

respondent surveys must also be weighed when evaluating the quantitative results. 

There is also a need to replicate the qualitative results: a different  group of participants 

may lead to new themes and theory not discovered in these studies; it is possible that a  different 

investigator, as the instrument of research, would have found other results with the same subjects 

of  the  two  qualitative  studies  of  this  dissertation.  There  is  a  need  for  more  theory-making 

research. As noted in the literature review, there has been a recent increase in articles on service 

innovation, so there is reason to hope that others are doing similar investigations. 


REFERENCES 

Adams-Bigelow,  Marjorie  (2004),  "Comparative  Performance  Assessment  Study  (CPAS)," 
Marjorie  Adams-Bigelow  (Ed.): Product Development  & Management  Association  Foundation. 

Adams-Bigelow,  Marjorie  and  Doug  Boike  (2004),  "PDMA  Foundation's  Comparative 
Performance  Assessment,"  Visions. 

Adams-Bigelow,  Marjorie  and  Abbie  Griffin  (2005),  "Product  Development  Cycle  Time  and 
Success:  New  Results  from  PDMA's  Comparative  Performance  Assessment  Study,"  in  Product 
Development  &  Management  Association  Research  Forum,  K.  Sivakumar  (Ed.)  Vol.  2005.  San 
Diego, CA:  PDMA. 

Akamavi,  Raphael  K  (2005),  " A research  agenda  for  investigation  of product  innovation  in  the 
financial  services  sector," The Journal of Services Marketing,  19 (6/7), 359-78. 

Alam,  Ian  (2003),  "Commercial  Innovations  from  Consulting  Engineering  Firms:  An  Empirical 
Exploration  of  a  Novel  Source  of  New  Product  Ideas,"  Journal  of  the  Academy  of  Marketing 
Science, 20 (4), 300-13. 

—  (2002),  "An  Exploratory  Investigation  of  User  Involvement  in New  Service  Development," 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing  Science, 30 (3), 250-61. 

Alam,  Ian  and  Chad  Perry  (2002),  "A  customer-oriented  new  service  development  process," 
Journal of Services Marketing,  16 (6), 515-35. 

Andersen,  Eugene  W.,  Claes  Fornell,  and  Roland  T.  Rust  (1997),  "Customer  Satisfaction, 
Productivity,  and Profitability:  Differences  between  Goods and Services," Marketing  Science,  16 
(2),  129-45. 

Anderson, Chris (2006), The Long Tail. New York:  Hyperion. 

Armstrong,  J.  Scott  (2006),  "How to  Make  Better  Forecasts  and  Decisions:  Avoid  Face-to-Face 
Meetings," Foresight,  5, 3-8. 

— 
(2007),  "Significance 
Forecasting, 23 (2), 321-27. 

tests  harm  progress 

in  forecasting,"  International  Journal  of 

Athanassopoulou,  Peggy  and  Axel  C.  Johne  (2004),  "Effective  communication  with  lead 
customers  in  developing  new  banking  products.,"  International  Journal  of  Bank  Marketing,  22 
(2), 100-25. 

Atuahene-Gima,  Kwaku  (1995),  "An  Exploratory  Analysis  of the  Impact  of Market  Orientation 
on  New  Product  Performance.  A  Contingency  Approach,"  Journal  of  Product  Innovation 
Management,  12, 275-93. 

254 


255 

Atuahene-Gima, Kwaku, Stanley F. Slater, and Eric M. Olson (2005), "The Contingent Value of 
Responsive and Proactive Market Orientations for New Product Program Performance,"  Journal 
of Product Innovation Management, 22 (6), 464-82. 

Avlonitis,  George  J.,  Paulina  G.  Papastathopoulou,  and  Spiros  P.  Gounaris  (2001),  "An 
empirically-based  typology  of  product  innovativeness  for  new  financial  services:  Success  and 
failure scenarios," Journal of Product Innovation Management,  18 (5), 324-42. 

Ballantyne,  David  and  Richard  J  Varey  (2008),  "The  serice-dominant  logic  and  the  future  of 
marketing," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 36 (1), 11-14. 

Barczak, Gloria, Kenneth B. Kahn, and Roberta Moss (2006), "An Exploratory Investigation of 
NPD Practices in Nonprofit  Organizations*," Journal of Product Innovation Management, 23 (6), 
512-27. 

Baumgartner,  Hans  and  Jan-Benedict  E  M  Steenkamp  (2001),  "Response  styles  in  marketing 
research: A cross-national investigation.," Journal of Marketing Research, 38 (2), 143-56. 

Bazeley,  Pat  (2007),  Qualitative  Data  Analysis  with  NVivo.  Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage 
Publishing. 

Beck, Kent (1999), " "Embracing Change with Extreme Programming"," Computer, 32 (10), 70-
77. 

Beck,  Kent  and  Cynthia  Andres  (2004),  Extreme  Programming  Explained:  Embrace  Change 
(2nd ed.). Boston: Addison-Wesley. 

Beck,  Kent,  Mike  Beedle, Arie van  Bennekum,  Alistair  Cockburn,  Ward  Cunningham,  Martin 
Fowler,  Jim  Grenning,  Jim  Highsmith,  Andrew  Hunt,  Ron  Jeffries,  Jon  Kern,  Brian  Marick, 
Robert  C.  Martin,  Steve  Mellor,  Ken  Schwaber,  Jeff  Sutherland,  and  Dave  Thomas  (2001), 
"Manifesto for Agile Software  Development." 

Benner,  Mary  J.  and  Michael  L.  Tushman  (2003),  "Exploitation,  Exploration,  and  Process 
Management:  The  Productivity  Dilemma  Revisited,"  Journal  of  Management  Review,  28  (2), 
238-56. 

Berchicci,  Luca 
Processes In Radical Product Definition," Journal of Product Innovation Management. 

and  Christopher  L.  Tucci  (forthcoming),  "Exploratory  Market  Learning 

Berg, Bruce L. (2004), Qualitative Research Methods for the Social Sciences (Fifth ed.). Boston: 
Pearson. 

Bitner,  Mary  Jo, Bernard  H.  Booms,  and  Mary  S.  Tetreault  (1990),  "The  Service  Encounter: 
Diagnosing Favorable and Unfavorable Incidents," Journal of Marketing, 54 (1), 71-84. 

Bitner,  Mary Jo, Stephen  W. Brown, and Matthew L. Meuter  (2000),  "Technology  Infusion  in 
Service Encounters," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28 (1), 138-49. 


Bollen,  Kenneth  A.  (1989),  Structural  Equations  with  Latent  Variables. New  York:  John  Wiley 
&  Sons. 

Booms,  Bernard  H.  and  Judy  Nyquist  (1981),  "Analyzing  the  Consumer/Firm  Communication 
Component  of the  Service  Marketing  Mix," in Marketing  of  Services, J.  H. Donnelly  and W.  R. 
George, Eds. Chicago: American Marketing  Association. 

256 

Borger,  Christine 
Spending Projections  Through 2015: Changes On The Horizon," Health Affairs,  26 (1),  142-54. 

Smith,  Christopher  Truffer,  and  Sean  Keehan  (2006),  "Health 

,  Sheila 

Byrne,  Barbara  M.  (2001),  Structural  Equation  Modeling  with  AMOS.  Mahwah,  NJ:  Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 

C.  K.  Prahalad,  Venkat  Ramaswamy  (2004),  "Co-creation  experiences:  The  next  practice  in 
value creation," Journal of Interactive Marketing,  18 (3), 5-14. 

Chesbrough,  Henry  W.  (2003),  "The  era  of open  innovation,"  MIT  Sloan  Management  Review, 
44 (3), 35-41. 

Christensen,  Clayton  M.  and  J.  L.  Bower  (1996),  "Customer  Power,  Strategic  Investment,  and 
the Failure of Leading Firms," Strategic Management  Journal,  17 (3), 197-218. 

Churchill,  Gilbert  A.,  Jr.  (1979),  "A  Paradigm  for  Developing  Better  Measures  of  Marketing 
Constructs," Journal of Marketing Research,  16 (1), 64-73. 

Cook,  Colleen,  Fred  Heath,  and  Russel  L.  Thompson  (2000),  "A  Meta-Analysis  of  Response 
Rates  in Web-  or Internet-based  Surveys,"  Educational  and Psychological  Measurement,  60  (6), 
821-36. 

Cooper,  Robert  G.  (1999),  "The  Invisible  Success  Factors  in  Product  Innovation,"  Journal  of 
Product Innovation Management,  16(2), 115-33. 

—  (2008), "Perspective: The Stage-Gate(R)  Idea-to-Launch  Process — Update, What's New,  and 
NexGen  Systems*," Journal of Product Innovation Management, 25 (3), 213-32. 

—  (1990),  "Stage-Gate  systems:  A  new  tool  for  managing  new products,"  Business  Horizons, 
33 (3), 44-54. 

—  (2001), Winning  at New Products (Third ed.). Cambridge, MA: Perseus  Publishing. 

Cooper,  Robert  G.  and  Ulricke  Brentani  (1991),  "New  Industrial  Financial  Services:  What 
Distinguishes the Winners," Journal of Product Innovation Management,  8 (2), 75-90. 

Cooper,  Robert  G.,  Christopher  J.  Easingwood,  Scott  Edgett,  Elko  J.  Kleinschmidt,  and  Chris 
Storey  (1994),  "What  Distinguishes  the  Top  Performing  New  Products  in  Financial  Services," 
Journal of Product Innovation Management,  11 (4), 281-99. 


257 

Cooper,  Robert  G.  and  Scott  J.  Edgett  (1996),  "Critical  success  factors  for  new  financial 
services.," Marketing Management,  5 (3), 26-37. 

Creswell,  J.W.  (1998),  Qualitative  inquiry  and  research  design:  Choosing  among  the  five 
traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Dahan,  Ely  and  V.  Srinivasan  (2000),  "The  predictive  power  of  internet-based  product  concept 
testing  using  visual  depiction  and  animation,"  Journal  of  Product  Innovation  Management,  17 
(2), 99-109. 

de  Brentani,  Ulrike  (1995),  "New  industrial  service  development:  Scenarios  for  success  and 
failure," Journal of Business Research, 32 (2), 93-103. 

—  (1993),  "The  new  product  strategy  in  financial  services:  strategy  for  success,"  International 
Journal of Bank Marketing,  11 (3), 15-22. 

de Brentani, Ulrike and Robert  G. Cooper (1992), "Developing  successful  new financial  services 
for businesses," Industrial Marketing Management, 21 (3), 231-41. 

de  Brentani,  Ulrike  and  Elko  J.  Kleinschmidt  (2004),  "Corporate  Culture  and  Commitment: 
Impact  on  Performance  of  International  New  Product  Development  Programs,"  Journal  of 
Product Innovation Management, 21 (5), 309-33. 

Diehl, M.  and W.  Stroebe  (1987),  "Productivity  loss  in brainstorming  groups: Toward  a  solution 
of a riddle," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,  53, 497-509. 

Dillman, Don A. (2000), Mail and Internet Surveys  (Second Edition ed.). New York:  Wiley. 

DOE  (2003),  "Education  Indicators:  An  International  Perspective,"  U.S.  Department  of 
Education Institute for Education  Services (Ed.). Washington D.C. 

Drucker,  Peter  F.  (1992),  Managing  the Non-Profit  Organization:  Principles  and  Practices  New 
York:  Collins. 

Dunnette,  Marvin  D.,  John  Campbell,  and  Kay  Jaastad  (1963),  "The  Effect  of  Group 
Participation  on  Brainstorming  Effectiveness  for  Two  Industrial  Samples,"  Journal  of  Applied 
Psychology, 47 (January), 30-37. 

Dyer  Jr.,  W.  Gibb  and  Alan  L.  Wilkins  (1991),  "Better  Stories,  Not  Better  Constructs,  To 
Generate  Better  Theory:  A  Rejoiner  to  Eisenhardt,"  Academy  of  Management  Review,  16  (3), 
613-19. 

Easingwood,  Christopher  J.  (1986),  "New  Product  Development  For  Service  Companies," 
Journal of Product Innovation Management,  3 (4), 264-75. 

Edvardsson,  Bo,  Anders  Gustafsson,  Michael  D.  Johnson,  and  Bodil  Sanden  (2000),  New 
Service  Development  and  Innovation  in  the  New  Economy  (USA  2002  ed.).  Lund,  Sweden: 
Studentitteratur. 


258 

Edvardsson,  Bo, Lars Haglund,  and Jan Mattsson  (1995), "Analysis, planning,  improvisation  and 
control  in  the  development  of  new  services,"  International  Journal  of  Service  Industry 
Management,  6 (2), 24-35. 

Eisenhardt,  Kathleen  M.  (1989),  "Building  Theories  from  Case  Study  Research.,"  Academy  of 
Management  Review,  14 (4), 532-48. 

Eisenhardt,  Kathleen  M.  and  Benham  N.  Tabrizi  (1995),  "Acceleration  Adaptive  Processes: 
Product  Innovation  in the Global  Computer  Industry,"  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  40 (1), 
84-110. 

Ennew,  Christine  T.  (1996),  "Good  and  bad  customers:  the  benefits  of  participating  in  the 
banking relationship.," International Journal of Bank Marketing,  14 (2), 5-13. 

Fern,  Edward  F.  (1982),  "The  Use  of  Focus  Groups  for  Idea  Generation:  The  Effects  of  Group 
Size,  Acquaintanceship,  and  Moderator  on  Response  Quantity  and  Quality,"  Journal  of 
Marketing Research,  19 (1),  1-13. 

Flint, Daniel J. (2002), "Compressing  new product  success-to-success  cycle time: Deep  customer 
value understanding  and idea generation," Industrial Marketing Management,  31 (4), 305-15. 

Fogg,  B. J.  (2008),  "What  Stanford  learned  building  Facebook  apps," in Web  based.  Palo  Alto, 
CA. 

Froehle,  Craig  M 
Roth,  Richard  B  Chase,  and  Christopher  A  Voss  (2000), 
"Antecedents  of new service development effectiveness:  An exploratory  examination of  strategic 
operations choices," Journal of Service Research, 3 (1), 3-17. 

,  Aleda  V 

Garcia,  Rosanna  and  Roger  Calantone  (2002),  "A  critical  look  at  technological  innovation 
typology  and  innovativeness  terminology:  a  literature  review,"  Journal  of  Product  Innovation 
Management,  19 (2),  110-32. 

Glaser,  Barney  G.  (1992),  Basics  of  grounded  theory  analysis:  Emergence  vs.  forcing.  Mill 
Valley, CA: Sociology Press. 

—  (1998), Doing Grounded Theory: Issues and Discussions. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press. 

Glaser,  Barney  G. and Anselm L.  Strauss  (1967), The Discovery  of Grounded  Theory:  strategies 
for qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine  Publishing. 

Gleason,  Kimberly  C,  Ike Mathur,  and Roy A. Wiggins, III (2003),  "Evidence  of value  creation 
in  the  financial  services  industries  through  the  use  of  joint  ventures  and  strategic  alliances," 
Financial Review, 38 (2), 213-34. 

Glense, J.  P. and A.  Peshkin  (1992), Becoming  Qualitative  Researchers: An  introduction.  White 
Plains, NY:  Longman. 


259 

Griffin,  Abbie  (1997a),  "Drivers  of  NPD  Success:  The  1997  PDMA  Report,"  Product 
Development Management Association. 

—  (1996), "Obtaining Customer Needs for Product Development," in The PDMA Handbook of 
New Product Development, Milton D. Rosenau Jr., Ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 

—  (1997b),  "PDMA  Research  on New Product  Development  Practices: Updating  Trends  and 
Benchmarking Best Practices," Journal of Product Innovation Management,  14 (6), 429-58. 

Griffin,  Abbie and John R. Hauser (1993), "The Voice of the Customer," Marketing  Science, 12 
(1),  1-20. 

Griffin,  Abbie and Albert L. Page (1993), "An interim report on measuring product development 
success and failure," Journal of Product Innovation Management,  10 (4), 291-308. 

—  (1996),  "PDMA  Success  Measurement  Project:  Recommended  Measures  for  Product 
Development Success and Failure," Journal of Product Innovation Management,  13 (6), 478-96. 

Gronroos, C. (1990), Service Management  and Marketing: Managing the Moments  of Truth in 
Service Competition. New York: Lexington Books. 

Grove,  Stephen  J.  and  Raymond  P. Fisk  (1983),  "The  Dramaturgy  of  Services  Exchange:  An 
Analytical  Framework  for  Services  Marketing,"  in  Emerging  Perspectives  on  Services 
Marketing, Leonard Berry and G. Lynn Shostack and Gregory D. Upah, Eds. Chicago: AMA. 

Henard,  David  H.  and  David  M.  Szymanski  (2001),  "Why  Some  New  Products  Are  More 
Successful Than Others.," Journal of Marketing Research (JMR), 38 (3), 362-80. 

Highsmith, Jim and Alistair Cockburn (2001), ""Agile  Software  Development:  The Business of 
Innovation" " Computer, 34 (9), 120-22. 

Holliday,  Adrian  (2002),  Doing  and  Writing  Qualitative  Research.  Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage 
Publications. 

Holstein,  James  A.  and  Jaber  F. Gubrium  (1995), The Active Interview.  Thousand  Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications. 

House,  Robert,  P.  Hanges,  M.  Javidan,  Peter  Dorfman,  and  Vipin  Gupta  (2004),  Culture, 
Leadership  and  Organizations:  The  GLOBE  study  of  62  societies.  Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage 
Publications. 

Howcroft,  Barry  and  Mark  Durkin  (2003),  "Editorial:  Effective  Marketing  Management  in 
Financial  Services  Contexts.,"  in  Journal  of  Marketing  Management  Vol.  19:  Westburn 
Publishers Limited. 

Hubbard,  Raymond  and  J.  Scott  Armstrong  (2006),  "Why  We  Don't  Really  Know  What 
Statistical  Significance  Means:  Implications  for  Educators.  ,  28(2),  114-120,"  Journal  of 
Marketing Education, 28 (2), 114-20. 


260 

Hull,  Frank  M.  (2004),  "Innovation  Strategy  and  the  Impact  of  a  Composite  Model  of  Service 
Product Development  on Performance,"  Journal of Service Research, 7 (2), 167-80. 

Hyman, Michael R (2008), "Thesis in Pieces," ELMAR  (web page). 

Hyman,  Michael  R.  (2000),  "Mail  Surveys  of  Faculty  and  Acquaintances-of-the-Researcher 
Bias," Journal of Social Psychology,  140 (2), 255-57. 

Jaworski,  Bernard  J.  and  Ajay  K.  Kohli  (1993),  "Market  orientation:  Antecedents  and 
consequences," Journal of Marketing, 57 (3), 53. 

Jaworski,  Bernie  and  Ajay  K.  Kohli  (2006),  "Co-Creating  the  Voice  of  the  Customer,"  in  The 
Service-Dominant  Logic  of  Marketing,  Robert  F.  Lusch  and  Stephen  L.  Vargo,  Eds.  Armonk, 
NY: M. E.  Sharpe. 

Johne,  Axel  and  Paul  Harborne  (2003),  "One  leader  is  not  enough  for  major  new  service 
development:  Results of a consumer banking  study,"  Service Industries Journal, 23 (3), 22-37. 

Johne, Axel  and Chris  Storey  (1998),  "New  Service  Development:  a review  of the  literature  and 
annotated bibliography," European Journal of Marketing, 32 (3/4),  184-251. 

Johne,  F.  Axel  and  M.  Panos  Pavlidis  (1996),  "How  Banks  Apply  Marketing  Expertise  to 
Develop New Derivatives," Journal of Product Innovation Management,  13 (5), 440-52. 

Kaplowitz,  Michael  D., Timothy  D. Hadlock,  and Ralph Levine  (2004),  "A Comparison  of  Web 
and Mail  Survey Response Rates," Public Opinion, 68 (1), 94-101. 

Karas,  Michelle  M.  (2004),  "NEW  AND  IMPROVED!  Creating  Products,"  ABA  Bank 
Marketing, 36 (3), 32-34. 

Kelly,  David  and  Chris  Storey  (2000),  "New  service  development:  initiation  strategies," 
International Journal of Service Industry Management,  11 (1), 45-62. 

Kleinschmidt,  Elko J., Ulrike  de Brentani, and  Soren  Salomo  (2005),  "The NPD  Process  and the 
Behavioral  Environment  of  the  Firm:  Interrelationships  and  Impacts  on  Global  New  Product 
Development  Performance,"  in  Product  Development  &  Management  Association  Research 
Forum, K.  Sivakumar (Ed.). San Diego, CA: PDMA. 

—  (2007),  "Performance  of  Global  New  Product  Development  Programs:  A  Resource-Based 
View," Journal of Product Innovation Management, 24 (5), 419-41. 

Kline,  Rex  B.  (2004),  Beyond  Significance  Testing:  Reforming  Data  Analysis  Methods  in 
Behavioral Research. Washington, DC: American Psychological  Association. 

—  (1998), Structural Equation Modeling. New York: The Guilford  Press. 


261 

Koen,  Peter  A.,  Elko  J.  Kleinschmidt,  Richard  Reilly,  and  Ken  Lauer  (2005),  "Importance  of 
Senior  Managment  Involvement  and  Climate  to  Predevelopment  Innovation  Outcome:  An 
Exploratory  Study," in Product Development  & Management Association  Research Forum 2005, 
K.  Sivakumar (Ed.). San Diego PDMA. 

Kohli,  Ajay  K.  and  Bernard  J.  Jaworski  (1990),  "Market  Orientation:  The  Construct,  Research 
Propositions," Journal of Marketing, 54 (2),  1-18. 

Kotler,  Philip  (2000), Marketing  Management  (Millenium  Edition  ed.). Upper  Saddle  River,  NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 

Kristensson,  Per, Peter R.  Magnusson,  and Jonas Matthing  (2002),  "Users as a Hidden  Resource 
for  Creativity:  Findings  from  an  Experimental  Study  on  User  Involvement,"  Creativity  &  Inn 
Man,  11(1),  55-61. 

Krosnick,  J. (1999), "Survey Research," Annual Review of Psychology,  50, 537-67. 

Lakhani,  Karim  R.  (2003),  "Community,  joining,  and  specialization  in  open  source  software 
innovation: a case study " Research Policy 32 (7),  1217-41. 

Lakhani,  Karim  R.  and  Eric  von  Hippel  (2002),  "How  open  software  works:  "free"  user  to  user 
assistance," Research Policy, 1451. 

Lievens, Annouk,  Rudy  K.  Moenaert,  and  Rosette  S.  Jegers  (1999),  "Linking  communication  to 
innovation  success in the financial  services industry: a case study analysis," International  Journal 
of Service Industry Management,  10 (1), 23-48. 

Lilien,  Gary,  Pamela  D. Morrison,  Kathleen  Searls, Mary  Sonnack,  and Eric von Hippel  (2002), 
"Performance  Assessment  of  the  Lead  User  Idea-Generation  Process  for  New  Product 
Development," Management  Science, 48 (8),  1042-59. 

Lofland,  John  and  Lyn  H.  Lofland  (1995),  Analyzing  Social  Situations  (Third  ed.).  Bellmont, 
CA: Wadsworth Publishing  Company. 

Lovelock, Christopher and Jochen Wirtz (2004), Services Marketing  (International  - Fifth  edition 
ed.). Upper  Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Lukas,  Bryan  A.  and  O.  C.  Ferrell  (2000a),  "The  Effect  of  Market  Orientation  on  Product 
Innovation," Journal of the Academy of Marketing  Science 28, no. 2, 28 (2), 239-47. 

—  (2000b), "The Effect  of Market  Orientation  on Product Innovation," Journal  of the  Academy 
of Marketing  Science, 28 (2), 239-47. 

Lusch,  Robert  F.  and  Stephen  L.  Vargo  (2006),  "Service-dominant  logic:  reactions,  reflections 
and refinements,"  Marketing  Theory, 6 (3), 281-88. 


262 

Lusch,  Robert  F.,  Stephen  L.  Vargo,  and  Alan  J.  Malter  (2006),  "Marketing  as  Service-
Exchange::  Taking  a  Leadership  Role  in  Global  Marketing  Management,"  Organizational 
Dynamics, 35 (3), 264-78. 

Luther,  Dennis  and  Erick  Oh  (2008),  "Recent  Trends  in  U.S.  Services  Trade:  2007  Annual 
Report,"  Richard  W.  Brown  (Ed.)  Vol.  Investigation  No.  332-345.  Washington,  DC:  U.S. 
International Trade Commission. 

Lynn,  Gary  S.  and  Joseph  G.  Morone  (1996),  "Marketing  and  discontinuous  innovation:  The 
probe and learn process," California Management Review, 38 (3), 8-37. 

Lynn,  Gary  S.,  Richard  B.  Skov,  and  Kate  D.  Abel  (1999),  "Practices  that  Support  Team 
Learning and Their Impact on Speed to Market and New Product  Success," Journal  of Product 
Innovation Management,  16 (5), 439-54. 

Magnusson,  Peter  R.  (2003),  "Benefits  of  involving  users  in  service  innovation,"  European 
Journal of Innovation Management, 6 (4), 228-38. 

Martin,  Claude  R.,  Jr.  and  David  A.  Home  (1993),  "Services  Innovation:  Successful  versus 
Unsuccessful  Firms," International Journal of Service Industry Management, 4 (1), 49-65. 

Mascitelli,  Ronald  (2000),  "From  Experience:  Harnessing  Tacit  Knowledge  to  Achieve 
Breakthrough Innovation," Journal of Product Innovation Management,  17 (3), 179-93. 

McCracken, Grant (1988), The Long Interview. Newbury Park: Sage Publications. 

McDermott, Christopher M. and Gina Colarelli O'Connor (2002), "Managing radical innovation: 
an overview  of emergent  strategy  issues," Journal  of  Product  Innovation  Management,  19 (6), 
424-38. 

McQuarrie,  Edward  F.  (1991),  "The  customer  visit:  Qualitative  research  business-to-business 
marketers," Journal of Marketing Research, 3 (2), 121-35. 

—  (1998), Customer Visits (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage. 

Meso, Peter and Radhika Jain (2006), "Agile Software Development: adaptive systems principles 
and best practices," Information  Systems Management, 23 (3), 19-30. 

Miller, W. L. and B. F. Crabtree  (1992), "Primary  care research:  A multimethod  typology  and 
qualitative  road  map,"  in  Doing  Qualitative  Research,  B.F.  Crabtree  and  W.  L.  Miller,  Eds. 
Newberry Park, CA: Sage Publications. 

Mintzberg, Henry (1989), Mintzberg on Management. NY, NY: The Free Press. 

—  (1979), The Structuring of Organizations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Morgan, David L. (1996), "Focus Groups," Annual Review of Sociology, 22 (1), 129-52. 


263 

Morse,  Janice  M.  and  Lyn  Richards  (2002),  Readme  First:  a  User's  Guide  to  Qualitative 
Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Narver,  John  C.  and  Stanley  F.  Slater  (1990),  "The  effect  of  a  market  orientation  on  business 
profitability,"  Journal of Marketing,  54 (4), 20-33. 

Narver,  John  C,  Stanley  F.  Slater,  and  Douglas  L.  MacLachlan  (2004),  "Responsive  and 
Proactive  Market  Orientation  and  New-Product  Success*,"  Journal  of  Product  Innovation 
Management, 21 (5), 334-47. 

O'Connor,  Gina  Colarelli  (1998),  "Market  Learning  and  Radical  Innovation:  A  Cross  Case 
Comparison  of  Eight  Radical  Innovation  Projects,"  Journal  of Product  Innovation  Management, 
15(2),  151-66. 

O'Reilly,  Charles  A.,  Ill  and  Michael  L.  Tushman  (2004),  "The  Ambidextrous  Organization," 
Harvard Business Review,  82 (4), 74-81. 

Ozer,  Muammer  (2004),  "The  role  of  the  Internet  in  new  product  performance:  A  conceptual 
investigation," Industrial Marketing Management,  33 (5), 355-69. 

Page,  Albert  L.  (1993),  "Assessing  New  Product  Development  Practices  and  Performance: 
Establishing  Crucial Norms," Journal of Product Innovation Management,  10 (4), 273-90. 

Page, Albert L. and Gary R.  Schirr  (2008), "Growth  and Development  of a Body  of  Knowledge: 
Sixteen  Years  of  New  Product  Development  Research  1989-2004,"  Journal  of  Product 
Innovation Management, 25 (3), 233-48. 

Parasuraman, A. and George M. Zinkhan  (2002), "Marketing to and Serving Customers  Through 
the  Internet:  An  Overview  and  Research  Agenda,"  Journal  of  the  Academy  of  Marketing 
Science, 30 (4), 286-95. 

Payne, Adrian  F., Kaj  Storbacka,  and Pennie Frow  (2008),  "Managing the co-creation  of value," 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing  Science, 36 (1), 83-96. 

Peter,  J.  Paul  (1981),  "Construct  Validity:  A  Review  of  Basic  Issues  and  Marketing  Practices," 
Journal of Marketing Research,  18 (2), 133-45. 

Prahalad, C. K. and Venkatram Ramaswamy  (2000), "Co-opting  customer competence,"  Harvard 
Business Review, 78 (1), 79-87. 

Putnam,  Robert  D.  (2003),  Better  Together:  Restoring  the  American  Community.  New  York: 
Simon and  Schuster. 

Regan, William J. (1963), "The Services Revolution," Journal of Marketing, 47 (3), 57-62. 

Rice,  Mark,  Donna  Kelley,  Lois  Peters,  and  Gina  Colarelli  O'Connor  (2001),  "Radical 
innovation: 
R &D 
Management, 31 (4), 409-28. 

recognition  and  evaluation.," 

initiation  of  opportunity 

triggering 


264 

Richards, Lyn (2005), Handling Qualitative Data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

Richards, Lyn and Janice M. Morse (2007), Readme First: a User's Guide to Qualitative  Methods 
(Second ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Rodie,  Amy  Risch  and  Susan  Schultz  Kleine  (2000),  "Customer  Participation  in  Services 
Production  and  Delivery,"  in  Handbook  of  Services  Marketing  and  Management,  Teresa  A. 
Schwartz and Dawn Iacobucci, Eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

Sarasvathy,  Saras  D.  (2001),  "Causation  and  Effectuation:  Toward  a  Theoretical  Shift  from 
Economic  Inevitability  to  Entrepreneurial  Contingency,"  Academy  of  Management  Review,  26 
(2), 243-69. 

—  (2004),  "Making  It  Happen:  Beyond  Theories  of  the  Firm  to  Theories  of  Firm  Design," 
Entrepreneurship  Theory  & Practice, 28 (6), 519-31. 

Sawyer,  Alan  G.  and  A.  Dwayne  Ball  (1981),  "Statistical  Power  and  Effect  Size  in  Marketing 
Research," Journal of Marketing Research,  18 (4), 275-90. 

Schirr,  Gary  R.  and  Albert  L.  Page  (2007),  "Customer  Input  for  New  Product  Development: 
Active  Customer  Engagement  ACEs  Traditional  Passive  Approaches,"  in  PDMA  Annual 
Research  Conference  2007,  Joseph  Cherian  and  Albert  L.  Page  (Eds.).  Orlando,  FL:  Product 
Development  Management  Association. 

Schmidt,  Jeffrey  B.  and  Roger  J.  Calantone  (2002),  "Escalation  of  commitment  during  new 
product  development.  Academy  of  Marketing  Science.  Journal,  30(2),  103,"  Journal  of  the 
Academy of Marketing  Science, 30 (2), 103-18. 

Scott,  G.  M.  (1999),  "Top  Priority  Management  Concerns  about  New  Product  Development," 
Academy of Management Executive,  13 (3), 77-84. 

Sethi,  Rajesh  and  Zafar  Iqbal  (2008),  "Stage-Gate  Controls,  Learning  Failure,  and  Adverse 
Effect  on Novel New Products," Journal of Marketing, 72 (1), 118-34. 

—  (2004),  "Stage  Gate™  Process  For  New  Product  Development,  Project  Inflexibility,  and 
Learning  Failure," in Product Development  & Management  Association  Research  Forum,  Albert 
L. Page (Ed.). Chicago, IL: PDMA. 

Shirky,  Clay  (2008),  Here  Comes  Everybody:  The  Power  of  Organizing  Without  Organizations 
NY: Penguin Press. 

Shostack,  G.  Lynn  (1977),  "Breaking  Free  From  Product  Marketing,"  Journal  of  Marketing,  41 
(2), 73-80. 

—  (1984), "Designing  Services that Deliver," Harvard Business Review, 62 (1), 133-39. 

Simon, H. A. (1996), The sciences of the artificial.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 


265 

Slater,  Stanley  F. 
organization," Journal of Marketing,  59 (3), 63-82. 

and  John  C.  Narver  (1995),  "Market  orientation  and  the  learning 

Slater,  Stanley  F.  and  John  C.  Narver  (1998),  "Customer-led  and  market-oriented:  Let's  not 
confuse  the two," Strategic Management  Journal,  19 (10),  1001-06. 

Spradley, J. P. (1979), The ethnographic interview. New York: Holt, Rinehart  & Winston. 

Stake, Robert E. (1995), The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA:  Sage Publishing. 

-— (2006), Multiple Case Study Analysis. New York, NY: Guilford  Press. 

Storey,  Chris  D.  and  Christopher  J.  Easingwood  (1996),  "Determinants  of  new  product 
performance,"  International Journal of Service Industry Management,  7 (1), 32-55. 

Strauss,  Anselm  L.  and  Juliet  Corbin  (1998),  Basics  of  Qualitative  Research  (Second  ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Summers,  John  O.  (2001),  "Guidelines  for  Conducting  Research  and  Publishing  in  Marketing: 
From  Conceptualization  Through  the  Review  Process,"  Journal  of  the  Academy  of  Marketing 
Science, 29 (4), 405-15. 

Szulanski, Gabriel (2003), Sticky Knowledge. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 

Taylor,  Donald  W.,  Paul  C.  Berry,  and  Clifford  H.  Block  (1958),  "Does  Group  Participation, 
When  Using  Brainstorming,  Facilitate  or  Inhibit  Creative  Thinking?,"  Administrative  Science 
Quarterly, 3 (2), 23-47. 

Tellis, Gerard J.,  Jaideep  C. Prabhu, and Rajesh  K.  Chandy  (2007),  "Innovation  in Firms  Across 
Nations:  New  Metrics  and  Drivers  of  Radical  Innovation,"  Working  Paper  -  USC  Marshall 
School of Business. 

Tesch, R. (1990), Qualitative Research: Analysis types and software  tools. Bristol, PA:  Farmer. 

Thomke, Stefan  (2003), Experimentation  Matters. Boston, MA: Harvard Business  School Press. 

Thomke,  Stefan  H.  (1998),  "Managing  experimentation  in  the  design  of  new  products.," 
Management  Science, 44 (6), 743-62. 

Thomke,  Stefan  H.  and  Eric  von  Hippel  (2002),  "Customers  as  Innovators:  A  New  Way  to 
Create Value," Harvard Business Review,  80 (4), 74-81. 

Thompson,  Leigh (2003), "Improving the creativity of organizational  work groups," Academy  of 
Management  Executive,  17 (1), 96-111. 

Tidd,  Joe  and  Frank  M.  Hull  (2003),  Service  Innovation  (2nd  ed.).  London:  Imperial  College 
Press. 


266 

Tushman, Michael L. and Charles A. O Reilly, III (1999), "Building ambidextrous  organizations: 
Forming your own "skunk works"," Health Forum Journal, 42 (2), 20-24. 

UN  (1998),  "Environmental  Management  in  the  Service  Industries  "  Industry  and  Economics 
Review, 21 (3), 67-68. 

Urban,  Glen  L.  and  John  R.  Hauser  (2004),  ""Listening  In"  to  Find  and  Explore  New 
Combinations of Customer Needs.," Journal of Marketing, 68 (2), 72-87. 

Urban,  Glen  and  Eric  von  Hippel  (1988),  "Lead  User  Analysis  For  the  Development  of  New 
Industrial Products," Management  Science, 34 (5), 569-82. 

Van  de  Ven,  A.  H.  and  G.  P.  Huber  (1990),  "Longitudinal  field  research  methods  for  studying 
processes of organisational  change," Organisational  Science,  1 (3), 213-19. 

Vargo,  Stephen  L.  and  Robert  F.  Lusch  (2004a),  "Evolving  to  a  New  Dominant  Logic  for 
Marketing.," Journal of Marketing, 68 (1),  1-17. 

—  (2004b),  "The  Four  Service  Marketing  Myths:  Remnants  of a  Goods-Based,  Manufacturing 
Model," Journal of Service Research, 6 (4), 324-35. 

—  (2006),  "Service-Dominant  Logic:  What  it  is,  What  it  is  not,  What  it  might  be,"  in  The 
Service-Dominant  Logic  of  Marketing,  Robert  F.  Lusch  and  Stephen  L.  Vargo,  Eds.  Armonk, 
NY: M. E.  Sharpe. 

Veldhuizen,  Erik,  Erik  Jan  Hultink,  and  Abbie  Griffin  (2006),  "Modeling  market  information 
processing  in  new  product  development:  An  empirical  analysis,"  Journal  of  Engineering  and 
Technology Management, 23 (4), 353-73. 

Vermeulen,  Patrick  and  Wietz  van  der  Aa  (2003),  "Organizing  Innovation  in  Services,"  in 
Service  Innovation,  Joe Tidd  and Frank  M. Hull, Eds. 2nd  ed. Vol.  9. London:  Imperial  College 
Press. 

von  Hippel,  Eric  (1977a),  "The  Dominant  Role  of  the  User  in  Semiconductor  and  Electronic 
Subassembly  process  Innovation,"  IEEE  Transaction  on  Engineering  Management,  24  (2),  60-
71. 

—  (1976),  "The  Dominant  Role  of  Users  in  the  Scientific  Instrument  Innovation  Process," 
Research Policy, 5 (3), 212-39. 

(1998),  "Economics  of  product  development  by  users:  The  impact  of 

— 
information.,"  Management  Science, 44 (5), 629-44. 

sticky'  local 

—  (1977b),  "Has  a  Customer  Already  Developed  Your  Next  Product?,"  Sloan  Management 
Review,  18(2), 73-74. 


—  (1986),  "Lead  Users:  A  Source  of Novel  Product  Concepts,"  Management  Science,  32  (7), 
791-805. 

—  (1988), The Sources of Innovation. New York: Oxford  University  Press. 

267 

(1994), 

— 
Innovation.," Management  Science, 40 (4), 429-39. 

'"Sticky  Information'  and  the  Locus  of  Problem  Solving:  Implications 

for 

—  (1978),  "Successful  Industrial  Products  from  Customer  Ideas," Journal  of Marketing, 42  (1), 
39-50. 

—  (2001),  "User  toolkits  for  innovation,"  Journal  of  Product  Innovation  Management,  18  (4), 
247-57. 

von  Hippel,  Eric  and  Ralph  Katz  (2002),  "Shifting  Innovation  to  Users  via  Toolkits," 
Management  Science, 48 (7), 821-33. 

Voss, Christopher A. (1985),  "The Role of Users  in the Development  of Applications  Software," 
Journal of Product Innovation Management, 2 (2),  113-21. 

Wolcott, Harry F. (1994), Transforming  qualitative data: Description, analysis and  interpretation. 
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publishing. 

—  (1990), Writing Up Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publishing. 

Woodruff,  R.  B.  and  D.  J.  Flint  (2006),  "Marketing's  service-dominant  logic  and  customer 
value,"  in  The  serice  dominant  logic  of  marketing:  Dialog,  debate  and  directions,  Robert  F. 
Lusch and Stephen L. Vargo, Eds. Armonk, NY: M. E.  Sharpe. 

Workman  Jr.,  John  P.  (1993),  "Marketing's  Limited  Role  in New  Product  Development  in  One 
Computer Systems Firm," Journal of Marketing Research, 30 (4), 405-21. 

Yin,  Robert  K.  (1981),  "The  Case  Study  Crisis:  Some  Answers,"  Administrative  Science 
Quarterly, 26 (1), 58-65. 

—  (2003), Case Study Research (Third ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE  Publications. 

Zahay,  Debra  and  Abbie  Griffin  (2004),  "Customer  Learning  Processes,  Strategy  Selection,  and 
Performance  in Business-to-Business  Service Firms*," Decision Sciences, 35 (2), 169-203. 

Zahay,  Debra,  Abbie  Griffin,  and Elisa  Fredericks  (2004),  "Sources, uses, and  forms  of data  in 
the new product  development process," Industrial Marketing Management,  33 (7), 657-66. 

Zeithaml,  Valarie  A.  (1991),  "How  Consumer  Evaluation  Processes  Differ  Between  Goods  and 
Services," in AMA Conference  Proceedings. 

Zeithaml,  Valarie  A.,  A.  Parasuraman,  and  Leonard  Berry  (1985),  "Problems  and  Strategies  in 
Services Marketing," Journal of Marketing, 49 (1), 33-46. 


APPENDICES 

APPENDIX A:  Study  1 Questionnaire  Outline 

Part I: General  Information 

(Collected  pre-interview) 

Company 
Address 

Subject 
Title 
Phone 
Email 

Name  Company  or  anonymous? 
Name  subject  or  anonymous? 

Primary  duties 
Involvement  in  NSD 
How  many NSD  projects 
How  long with  company 
How  many years  in  NSD 

Primary  services  subject  is involved  in: 

NSD  orNPD  at previous  firms? 

Secondary 

information? 

Suggested  second  subject 
Title 
Phone 
Email 

268 


APPENDIX A  (continued) 

(I, II and possibly III) Open Ended—General  Questions 

269 

You have  read  the IRB  summary  that I sent you?  You are aware  that you  are being  recorded? 

I.. 

II. 

Please describe some recent innovative new services you were involved with. 

I would  like  to  start  by  hearing  your  memory  of  how  a novel,  really  new,  or  innovative 
new  service  or  "new  platform"  came  into  being.  Which  of 
would  you  select? 

Please discuss how the new service emerged  from the idea to being offered  to customers. 

(For part II ask about a "relative failure" and/or an "incremental" or  extension.) 

Let  the interviewee  tell story,  listen  if interviewee  covers: 

III.  When did you first hear about the idea? 
IV.  Where did the idea originate?  HOW? 

V. 

V. 

How was the idea evaluated and prioritized versus other  ideas? 

How was the progress  monitored? 

VII.  Who was the project  leader? Was there a project  champion outside the project  team?  Was 

there a point that the project  seemed that it might be cancelled.  Describe. 

VIII.  When  was  the  service  first  tested  by  customers  or  potential  users?  Were  there  multiple 

iterations and testing? How many times? 

IX.  Was  a  multi-functional  team  involved  in  the  development  process?  What  phases?  How 

much of the time? What functions  were  represented. 

X. 

Describe collaboration with suppliers in the NSD. (how extensive, long, many  phases) 

XL 

Describe collaboration with customers or potential users (same  details) 

XII.  Describe  collaboration  with  other  outsiders  (same  details).  Did  the  project  use  patents, 

copyrights, IP or information  from  other firms  or individuals?  Describe. 

XIII.  How did the service perform relative to expectations  for 

• 
• 
• 

Sales 
Performance 
Profitability 

• 
• 
• 

Innovativeness 
Market  Share 
Customer  Satisfaction 

VI. 

Describe  points  where  go/no  go  decisions  were  made  on  the  project.  Who  made  the 
decision? What was the  analysis? 


Part 2: General Process  Questions 

APPENDIX A  (continued) 

II. 

Please describe how new service development happens at your  firm. 

270 

III. 

Do  you  have  a written  procedure/process  for  NSD?  Is  it widely  disseminated?  Can  I 
have a copy? 

a.  (If  I.  no)  Is  there  a  formal  process  for  new  service  development?  Describe  in 

detail 

IV. 

Are  there  scheduled  reviews  by  neutral  parties?  Do  they  have  go/no  go  decisions? 
How is a project  stopped 

V. 

(Possible if time and willing) Are you familiar  with (I describe): 

Stage-Gate®  development  process  (I  describe)  Do  you  use  it?  Did  you  in  A,  B, 

D. 
C? what phases? Have you considered deploying  such a process? 

Voice  of  the  Customer  (I  describe)  Do  you  use?  A,  B,  C?  Describe?  How 

• 
extensive? Do you use surveys, ethnography,  1:1  interviews, focus  groups?  Describe? 

• 

Open Innovation  and  User  Toolkits 

Ambidextrous  Organizations  or dual  track  NPD?  (I describe)  Do you  use it?  Did 

• 
you in A, B, C? what phases? Have you considered deploying  such a process? 

Fast  Prototyping  (I  describe)  Do  you  use  it?  Did  you  in  A,  B,  C?  what  phases? 

• 
Have you considered deploying  such a process?  Experimentation 

VI. 

How would you like to change your NSD  processes? 

VII.  Do you look deliberately  search for ideas from customers, competitors, and  suppliers? 

HOW? Are such ideas often  useful? 

VIII.  How does your firm  select ideas to develop? Portfolio  or  one-off?? 

IX. 

How useful  is marketing research? How do you use it? 


271 

Information  Sheet from multiple case study (Chapter Four) 

APPENDIX B 

Subject Information  Sheet: Study of Business Innovation 

The  principal  investigator,  Gary  Schirr,  a  Ph.D.  candidate  in  Marketing  at  the  University  of 
Illinois at Chicago, has asked you and up to 10 other subjects to participate in a research study of 
how  innovation  and new product  or service development  occurs within your  organization.  The 
initial  interview will  last  about  90 minutes. The interview  will be recorded  and transcribed,  as 
will be a 30-45 minute follow-up  interview. There will be follow-up  questions and  clarifications 
by phone and email. 

The transcription will include pseudonyms for both you and the company you work for. As noted 
the transcript will use pseudonyms, only the principal investigator will know the individual and 
company names and have access to the actual voice recordings. 

Collected  transcripts  will  be  compared  and  analyzed  for  common  and  unique  elements.  The 
resulting  data  will  be  used  in the  dissertation  of  Gary  Schirr  and  will  be  included  in  articles 
submitted to academic and practitioner journals. 

Neither your name nor the name of your organization will be included in the data or the analysis 
included in the dissertation or articles. 

Your help in this research is greatly appreciated. The study results should advance management 
theory  and  practice  in product  and  service  innovation.  I will  send you  a  copy  of the  working 
paper from the section of the project you assisted to double-check that I "got it right" and will try 
to contact you and to offer you access to any resulting articles. 

Mr. Schirr (gschirl @uic.edu) can be reached at 847-732-8856; Albert Page, his faculty  advisor 
can  be  reached  at  alp3@uic.edu  or  312-996-6233.  If  you  have  any  questions  about  being  a 
research  subject,  you may  also  call the  UIC  Office  for  the  Protection  of  Research  Subjects  at 
312-996-1711. 

Thanks, 

Gary R. Schirr 
Ph.D. Candidate, University of Illinois at Chicago 


APPENDIX  C 

272 

OUTLINE  OF QUESTIONS -Session  1 (multiple-case  study; Chapter  Four) 

I.  Review information  sheet 

a.  Stress: (1) voluntary, (2) research, and (3) can stop any time 

b.  Acknowledge that subjects knows that conversation  is recorded 

c.  Go over info  sheet and leave it with the  subject 

II.  Double-check  Qualifications 

a.  Your services are being offered  to customers over the  Internet? 

b.  How long have you been involved  in developing these  services? 

c.  When did the services migrate to the  Internet? 

III. Recent New  Service 

a.  Describe a recent new service that you are offering  your  customers. 

b.  How did this service come into being? 

IV. A pre-Internet New  Service  Example 

a.  Describe a new service that you were involved with before  it was  internet-based. 

b.  How did that service come into being? 

V.  Changes in how a service  emerges 

a.  Note some differences  in III and IV -  does subject  agree? 

b.  How has the way a new service comes into being changed  since migration? 

c.  Incremental new  services? 

d.  Really new or Radical  (define)? 

e.  (IF  it hasn't  already  come  up,  ask  about  involvement  of  customer,  suppliers  and 

other  outsiders) 


APPENDIX  D 

Constructs used in Quantitative  Studies -  Chapter  Five 

Constructs: MR Methods—ICE  and  GCR 

From  the first section  of Chapter  5, tested on the PDMA  CPAS database  and from  a  paper 
delivered  at the 2007 PDMA  conference  (Schirr  and Page  2007). 

NSD PROGRAM: To what extent was this method  used in new service  development? 
_Never  _ 2 5% of the time _ 5 0%  of the time _ 7 5% of the time  _Always 

PROJECT: Was this method used in the development  of this new  service? 

No  Yes, but to a small degree  Yes  Yes-extensively) 

GCR: Group or Constrained  Research 

Focus  groups 
Moderated creativity  brainstorming 
Test  markets 
Concept  testing 
Trade-off  analysis 
Web-based market  research 

ICE: Individual Customer  Engagement 
Voice of the customer:  1:1  interviews 
Lead user  methods 
User toolkit 
Ethnography 
Field  experiments 
Customer site visits 
Prototyping 
Direct user interaction with NSD 
Web  lab 
Alpha testing 
Beta testing 

FIRM VALUES AND  CULTURE 

Customer  Orientation  (Lukas and Ferrell 2000a; Narver and Slater  1990) 

In comparison  with our competitors:  (1-7, not at all /  to an extreme  extent) 

1.  We constantly monitor our level of commitment and orientation to serving  customers' 

needs. 

2.  Our business objectives  are driven primarily by customer  satisfaction. 
3.  Our strategy for competitive advantage is based on our understanding  of customer  needs 
4.  Our business  strategies are driven by our beliefs  about how we can create greater value 

for  customers 

5.  We measure customer satisfaction  systematically  and  frequently 
6.  We give close attention to after-sale  service 


Proactive Market Orientation  (Narver et al. 2004) 

APPENDIX D  (continued) 

1.  We help our customers anticipate developments in their markets. 
2.  We continuously try to discover additional needs of our customers of which they are 

3.  We incorporate solutions to unarticulated customer needs in our new products and services. 
4.  We brainstorm on how customers use our products and services. 
5.  We innovate even at the risk of making our own products obsolete. 
6.  We search for opportunities in areas where customers have a difficult time expressing their 

unaware. 

needs. 

7.  We work closely with lead users who try to recognize customer needs months or even years 

before the majority of the market may recognize them. 

8.  We extrapolate key trends to gain insight into what users in a current market will need in the 

future. 

[Bold items in new construct: Proactive  CO. This seems consistent with Narver  (1990)] 

Innovation  Culture 

Entrepreneurial  Climate  (Koen et al. 2005) 

(1-7, strongly dis- / strongly  agree) 

1.  Most people in our organization discuss and consider opposing opinions and a diversity 

of viewpoints 

2.  People in our organization feel as though they can go out on a limb and be the first to put 

an idea forward.  They tolerate uncertainty  and  ambiguity. 

3.  Most people in our organization are not punished (no harm in terms of promotion, pay, 

merit evaluations)  for championing  failed  projects 

4.  We actively encourage people to champion new ideas. 

Innovation  Culture  (de Brentani  and Kleinschmidt  2004; Kleinschmidt  et al.  2005) 

Management  has created  an open and  innovative  corporate  culture for  our NPD programs  by: 
(1-7) 

1.  Recognizing and strongly rewarding  entrepreneurship 
2.  Actively encouraging employees to submit new product  ideas 
3.  Ensuring that project  leaders are not punished if new products fail or are cancelled 

Combined  and  adapted 

Our management  and  organizational  culture:  (1-7, strongly dis- / strongly  agree) 

1.  Recognize and strongly reward  entrepreneurship 
2.  Actively encourage employees to submit new product ideas 
3.  Ensure that project  leaders or idea champions are not punished (pay, promotion,  review, 

etc.) if new products fail or are  cancelled 

4.  Encourage open discussions with opposing opinions and a diversity of viewpoints. 


275 

APPENDIX D (continued) 

Process measures 

Formal Process (Kleinschmidt et al. 2005) 

(1-7,  strongly dis- to strongly agree) 

1.  The firm has a formal NPD process in place 
2.  The firm lists or defines specific stage activities 
3.  The has defined gates 
4.  The firm has defined  gatekeepers 

Experimental/Iterative process (1-7, strongly dis- / strongly agree) 

During the concept development or design of a new service or product we typically: 

1.  Maintain a working model or prototype of a new service or product for customers and 

others throughout the new service development process. 

2.  Tweak or change our working model or prototype of a new service throughout 

development to experiment with alternatives and elicit user feedback. 

3.  Break new services into multiple small projects to enable faster changes and more testing. 


APPENDIX D  (continued) 

276 

ConstructS-NPD  Success  OUTCOME 

Market  Performance  (Atuahene-Gima  1995) 

To what  extent  has the new service  been successful  in meeting  its: (1-7, not successful  / very 
successful) 

1.  Market  Share  Objectives 
2.  Sales and Customer Use  Objectives 
3.  Sales and Customer Use growth  objectives 
4.  Profit  Objectives 

Success for  incremental,  innovative  or radical  NSD 

Percent  Successful  CPAS (Adams-Bigelow  2004) 

•  Based on your business unit's definition  of a successful  new product, about what % of 

new products were successful  the past 5 years? 

•  What percentage of all new products would you estimate were successful  in terms of their 

profitability  to the business  unit? 

2-item measure was used for radical, innovative and incremental  projects 

Innovativeness 

Definitions: 

• 

• 

Incremental  new  services:  the  repositioning  or  incremental  improvement  of  existing 
services. 
Innovative  new  services:  new  to  the  bank,  and  may  be  additions  to  product  lines  or 
service offerings  or major  revisions/next-generation  advances of current  offerings. 

•  Radical  or  breakthrough  services/products:  new  to  the  bank  and  new  to  the  market 

served. 


Correlation of single-value terms used in model tests 

APPENDIX E 

277 

Incremental Success 

Innovative Success 

Correlations 
RadS 
.623(**) 

InnS 
.712(") 

IncrS 

1 

P-CO 
.366(**) 

CO 

ICE 

.396(**) 

.264(**) 

F xl 
.408(**) 

.712(**) 

1 

.750D 

.432(**) 

.352(**) 

.312(**) 

.396(") 

Radical Success 

.623(**) 

.750(**) 

1 

.444(**) 

.323(**) 

.355(**) 

.292(*) 

Proactive CO 

.366(**) 

.432(**) 

.444(**) 

1 

.689(**) 

.516(**) 

.323(**) 

CustomerOrientation 

.396(**) 

.352(**) 

.323(**) 

.689(") 

1 

.450(**) 

.391(**) 

Use of ICE methods 

.264(**) 

.312(") 

.355(**) 

.516(**) 

.450(**) 

1 

.350(**) 

Formal X Iterative 

.408(**) 

.396(**) 

.292(*) 

.323(**) 

.391 (**) 

.350(**) 

1 

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). 

All independent Variables 

Proactive CO 

Customer Orient. 

Innovative Orient. 

CO 

P-CO 
.689(") 

1 

Correlations 
InnO 
.424(**) 

ICE 

.516(**) 

GCR 
.455(**) 

F xl 
.323(") 

Formal 
.417(**) 

Iterative 
.406(**) 

.689(") 

1 

.519(**) 

.450(**) 

.443(**) 

.391 (") 

.410(**) 

.356(**) 

.424(**) 

.519(") 

1 

.327(**) 

.292(**) 

.196(*) 

.356(**) 

.448(**) 

use of ICE methods 

.516(") 

.450(**) 

.327(**) 

1 

.781 (**) 

.350(") 

.301 (**) 

.414(") 

use of GCR methods 

.455(") 

.443(**) 

.292(**) 

.781 (**) 

1 

.369(**) 

.345(**) 

.348(**) 

Formal X Iterative 

.323(**) 

.391 (**) 

.196(*) 

.350(**) 

.369(**) 

1 

.763(**) 

.436(**) 

Formal process 

Iterative process 

.417(**) 

.41 Of*) 

.356(**) 

.301 (**) 

.345(**) 

.763(") 

1 

.521 (**) 

.406(**) 

.356(**) 

.448(**) 

.414(**) 

.348(**) 

.436(**) 

.521 (**) 

1 

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). 


278 

APPENDIX F 

U N I V E R S I TY  OF 

I L L I N O IS 

AT  C H I C A GO 

Office for the Protection of Research Subjects (OPRS) 
Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research (MC 672) 
203 Administrative Office Building 
1737 West Polk Street 
Chicago, Illinois 60612-7227 

Exemption  Granted 

March 20, 2006 

Gary  Schirr, MS 
Managerial  Studies 
601 S Morga  St. UH 22nd Fl 
Chicago, IL 60612 
Phone: (847) 732-8856 / Fax: (847) 376-1004 

RE: 

Research Protocol # 2006-0118 
"Customer  Collaboration  in New Service  Development" 

Dear Mr.  Schirr: 

Your Claim of Exemption was reviewed on March  18, 2006 and it was determined that you research 
meets the criteria for exemption. You may now begin your  research. 

Your research may be conducted at UIC. 

The specific  exemption  category under 45 CFR 46.101(b) is: 

2 Research involving the use of educational tests (cognitive, diagnostic, aptitude, achievement), survey procedures, 
interview procedures or observation of public behavior, unless: 
(i)  information  obtained  is recorded  in such  a manner  that  human  subjects  can be identified,  directly  or through 
identifiers linked to the subjects; and (ii) any disclosure of the human subjects' responses outside the research could 
reasonably place the subjects at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' financial  standing, 
employability, or reputation. 

Please note the Review History of this submission: 
Receipt Date 
02/22/2006 
03/15/2006 

Submission Type 
Initial Review 
Response To Modifications 

Review Process 
Exempt 
Exempt 

Review Date 
03/02/2006 
03/18/2006 

Review Action 
Modifications Required 
Approved 

You are reminded that investigators whose research involving human subjects  is determined to be exempt 
from  the federal  regulations for the protection of human  subjects  still have responsibilities for the ethical 
conduct of the research under  state law and UIC policy.  Please be aware of the following  UIC policies 
and responsibilities  for investigators: 


279 

APPENDIX F (continued) 

1.  Amendments  You are responsible  for reporting any amendments to your research protocol  that 
may affect  the determination  of the exemption  and may result in your research no longer being 
eligible for the exemption that has been  granted. 

2.  Record Keeping You are responsible  for maintaining a copy all research related records in a 
secure location in the event future  verification  is necessary, at a minimum these  documents 
include: the research protocol, the claim of exemption  application, all questionnaires,  survey 
instruments, interview questions and/or data collection  instruments associated with this  research 
protocol, recruiting or advertising materials, any consent  forms  or information  sheets given to 
subjects, or any other pertinent  documents. 

3.  Final Report When you have completed work  on your research protocol, you should  submit a  final 

report to the Office  for Protection  of Research  Subjects  (OPRS). 

4. 

Information  for  Human  Subjects  UIC Policy requires investigators to provide  information  about 
the research protocol to subjects  and to obtain their permission prior to their participating in the 
research. The information  about the research protocol  should be presented to subjects  in writing or 
orally from  a written script.  When appropriate, the following  information  must be provided to all 
research  subjects participating in exempt  studies: 

a.  The researchers affiliation;  UIC, JBVMAC or other  institutions, 
b.  The purpose of the research, 
c.  The extent  of the subject's  involvement  and  an explanation  of the procedures  to be  followed, 
d.  Whether the information  being collected will be used for any purposes  other than the proposed 

research, 

e.  A description  of the procedures to protect the privacy of subjects  and the confidentiality  of the 

research information  and data, 

f.  Description  of any reasonable  foreseeable  risks, 
g.  Description of anticipated  benefit, 
h.  A statement that participation is voluntary and subjects  can refuse  to participate  or can stop at 

any time, 

i.  A statement that the researcher is available to answer any questions that the subject may  have 

and which includes the name and phone number of the  investigator(s). 

j.  A statement that the UIC IRB/OPRS or JBVMAC Patient Advocate Office  is available  if there 

are questions about subject's  rights, which includes the appropriate phone numbers. 

Please be  sure to: -^  Use your research protocol number (2006-0118) on any documents  or 
correspondence with the IRB concerning your research protocol. 

We wish you the best as you conduct your research. If you have any questions or need further  help, please 
contact the OPRS  office  at (312) 996-1711  or me at (312) 413-2053.  Please send any  correspondence 
about this protocol to OPRS at 203 AOB, M/C 672. 

Sincerely, 

Sophia L. Radlowski,  M.Ed 
IRB Coordinator, IRB # 2 
Office  for the Protection  of Research  Subjects 

cc: 

Abagail L. McWilliams, Managerial Studies, M/C 243 
Albert L. Page, Managerial Studies, M/C 243 


APPENDIX F  (continued) 

U N I V E R S I TY  OF 

I L L I N O IS 

AT  C H I C A GO 

Office  for the Protection of Research Subjects (OPRS) 
Office of the Vice Chancellor  for Research (MC 672) 
203 Administrative  Office  Building 
1737 West Polk Street 
Chicago. Illinois 60612-7227 

Approval  Notice 

Continuing  Review 

July 21,  2008 

Gary  Schirr,  MS 
Managerial  Studies 
850 South Jefferson  Forest  Lane 
Blacksburg, VA  24060 
Phone: (540)  808-6630 

RE: 

Protocol #  2007-0467 
"Dissertation: New Service Development  (Study3)" 

Dear Mr.  Schirr: 

Your Continuing  Review application was reviewed and approved by the Expedited  review 
process on July  10, 2008.  You may continue your  research. 

Please note the following  information  about your approved research protocol: 

Protocol Approval Period; 
July  16, 2008 - July  15, 2009 
Approved  Subject Enrollment  #: 
500  (limited to analysis of data for 211  subjects) 
Additional Determinations  for Research Involving Minors; These determinations have not 
been made for this study since it has not been approved  for enrollment  of minors. 
Performance  Site: 
Sponsor; 
Research  Protocol: 

UIC 
None 

a)  New  Service Development: User Collaboration  in a Unique  Process 

Recruitment  Material: 

a)  N/A -  Research is limited to data analysis  only 

Informed  Consent; 

a)  N/A -  Research is limited to data analysis  only 

Your research continues to meet the criteria for expedited review as defined  in 45  CFR 
46.110(b)(1) under the following  specific  category: 


APPENDIX F  (continued) 

281 

(7)  Research on individual or group characteristics  or behavior (including but not limited to 
research on perception, cognition, motivation, identity, language, communication,  cultural 
beliefs  or practices and social behavior) or research employing  survey, interview, oral history, 
focus  group, program evaluation, human factors  evaluation, or quality assurance  methodologies. 

Please note the Review History of this  submission: 
Receipt Date 
07/07/2008 

Review Process 
Expedited 

Submission Type 
Continuing 
Review 

Review Date 
07/10/2008 

Review Action 
Approved 

Please remember to: 

-> Use your research protocol number (2007-0467) on any documents or correspondence  with 
the IRB concerning your research protocol. 

->  Review and comply with all requirements  on the enclosure, 
"UIC Investigator Responsibilities, Protection  of Human Research  Subjects" 

Please note that the UIC IRB has the prerogative and authority to ask further  questions, 
seek additional  information, require further  modifications,  or monitor the conduct of your 
research and the consent process. 

Please be aware that if the scope of work in the grant/project changes, the protocol must be 
amended  and approved by the UIC IRB before the initiation of the change. 

We wish you the best as you conduct your research. If you have any questions or need  further 
help, please contact OPRS at (312) 996-1711 or me at (312) 996-9299.  Please send any 
correspondence about this protocol to OPRS at 203 AOB, M/C 672. 

Sincerely, 

Marissa Benni, M.S. 
IRB Coordinator, IRB # 2 
Office  for the Protection of Research 

Subjects 

Enclosure:  UIC Investigator Responsibilities, Protection  of Human Research  Subjects 

cc:  Mark Shanley, Managerial  Studies, M/C  243 
Albert L. Page, Managerial Studies, M/C  243 


VITA 

GARY R.  SCHIRR 

Assistant Professor,  Radford  University  Email  gschirr@radford. edu 

Doctoral Candidate, University of Illinois at Chicago 

RESEARCH  INTERESTS 

My  primary  research  interests  comprise  new  service  &  product  development  and  innovation, 
entrepreneurship,  and  sales  management.  My  primary  focus  is  on  B2B  markets;  secondary 
research interests include financial  services marketing and international  marketing. 

EDUCATION 

•  Ph.D. Candidate, Managerial  Studies (Marketing)- University of Illinois at Chicago 
•  M.S. Finance -  Carnegie Mellon University  (Pittsburgh,  PA) 
•  B. S. Mathematics -  Miami University  (Oxford,  OH) 

JOURNAL  ARTICLES 

Growth  and  Development  of  a  Body  of  Knowledge:  Sixteen  Years  of  New  Product 
Development  Research,  1989 - 2004  - with Albert L. Page 

(2008) Journal  of Product  Innovation  Management  -  May 2008 

This  article  is  a  content  review  of  new product  and  service  development  articles  in  leading 
management,  marketing  and  R&D journals.  It  notes  a shortage  of  research  on  new  service 
development  and a lack of progress  on research  shortcomings  noted  in past  meta-analyses  of 
success  variables  in new product  development. 

CONFERENCE  PAPERS: Refereed  Conferences 

Accepted  and Presented  (& published  in summary form  in conference  proceedings): 

Individual  Customer Engagement  as Market Research 
A study of market research tools to engage customers in new product  development. 

PDMA  2007 

Authors & Universities Producing NPD Research 
A review of the authors of NPD articles  1989-2004. 

PDMA  2007 

User Collaboration in B2B web-based  services 
A case study  of user  involvement  in new service  development  at three  leading  banks. 

AMA  Summer  2006 

International Marketing & a Civilization Paradigm  SMA Fall 2006 
Conceptual:  International  Marketing  and  the  "Clash  of Civilizations  " 

Experiential Recognition 
Babson (BKERC)  2005 
Empirical  evidence  of the importance  of trial and  error  in newly  launched  firms. 

282 


Content Analysis of the NPD Literature 
A content  review  of new product  and service  development  articles. 

PDMA Conference  2005 

Dearth of Research on the Salesperson 

AMA  Summer  2005 

Conceptual paper  arguing  that the sales function  receives  insufficient  research  attention. 

Opportunity  Recognition  and Experience 

UIC  Symposium  2004 

ONGOING  RESEARCH 
Three-Paper  Dissertation: 

•  A Grounded  Study of New Service Development in Diverse  Organizations 
•  The NSD process as a B2B Financial Service migrates to the Web: a case study 
• 

Iterative, Cooperative, Experimental NSD in banks: a survey and Test 

Working  papers: 

Individual Customer Engagement  as Market  Research 

• 
•  Authors & Universities Producing NPD  Research 
•  User Collaboration in B2B web-based  services 
•  Developing A grounded Model of NSD  Success 

JOURNAL AND CONFERENCE  REVIEWS 

Due  to my background  in  finance  & marketing,  I have  been asked  to review  submissions: 

• 
• 
• 

Journal of Product Innovation Management 
Journal  of Financial  Services  Marketing 
JAMS  -  Special issue on intersection of finance  and marketing (33:4) 

2007-2008 
2004-2006 
Fall 2005 

Reviewing  conference  submissions: 

• 

• 

2008 Product Development  Management  Association 

2007 Product Development  Management  Association 

SELECTIVE DOCTORAL CONSORTIUMS  (2006) 

•  American Marketing Association  Sheth Foundation Doctoral  Consortium 
•  Babson College Entrepreneurship  Research Conference  Doctoral  Consortium 
•  AMA  SERVSIG Liam Glynn Award—Consortium  at Frontiers of Service  (Brisbane) 


284 

SELECTIVE  WORKSHOPS 

• 
• 

2007 ISBM Doctoral B2B  Workshop 
2003 Case Western Reserve  seminar on Entrepreneurship  research 

DISSERTATION: Defense  date  in July  2008 

New Service Development:  User Collaboration  in a  Unique  Process 
The  research  questions  are:  How  are  new  services  developed?  What  is  the  role  of  customer 
collaboration  in new service  development?  How  do internet  communication  and  the migration  of 
services  to web-delivery  affect  customer  collaboration  in new service  development? 

Committee  Members: 

Dr. Albert L. Page  (chair) 
Dr. Abbie  Griffin 
Dr. Gerald  Hills 
Dr. Joseph  Cherian 
Dr. Benet  DeBerry-Spence 

University of Illinois at Chicago,  Marketing 
University of Utah,  Marketing 
University of Illinois at Chicago,  Entrepreneurship 
University  of Illinois at Chicago, Marketing 
University of Illinois at Chicago,  Marketing 

INDUSTRY  ACTIVITIES 

•  White Paper for the American Bankers Association 
•  Conducted webinar for the American Bankers Association 

2008 
2008 

TEACHING EXPERIENCE: All  are  undergraduate,  upper-level  courses,  unless  noted: 

•  Entrepreneurship 
•  Global  Marketing 
•  Personal  Sales 
•  Sales  Management 
•  Finance ~  Risk  Management* 

* exec-MBA course 

I have  received  a commendation  from  the Dean  of the College  of Business  after  each course  for 
very strong  student  evaluations. 


285 

BUSINESS EXPERIENCE -  Product Development, Marketing  and Sales  Management 

2001 -2003 

1999-2001 

President, Market  Solutions. 
Consulting  to new  ventures.  I provided  initial  business  development,  new  product 
assessment,  market  research  and/or  initial  sales  efforts  and  strategies  for  new 
online  financial  service  and  risk-management  ventures.  Extensive  engagements 
with clients  in Singapore,  New  York and  Berkeley. 

VP—New Products and First VP—New Product  Development 
/  ran product  development  as  well  as  marketing  for  two  online  new  ventures.  In 
the  first  venture  I  was  the  leader  of  an  effort  that  brought  an  innovative  new 
product  to  market  in  six  months  time.  In  the  second  venture  I  helped  guide  the 
efforts  of  100  engineers.  I  also  made  initial  sales  of  new products  and  arranged 
key  alliances. 

1993-1999 

CEO, Prudential Bache Futures  and Fixed Income—Asia  Pacific 
I  ran PBFF-AP's  institutional  business,  including floor  trading  on  the  Singapore 
exchange  and  regional 
income  and  derivatives  sales  and 
trading.  Since  PBFF-AP  served  customers  from  Sydney  to  Shanghai,  I  hired, 
trained  and managed  a multi-national,  multi-cultural  sales  force. 

institutional  fixed 

I  served  on  the  new products  committee  of  the  Singapore  Exchange.  (Earlier  in 
my career  I had served  on  the new products  committee  of the  Chicago  Mercantile 
Exchange.) 

Prior to  1993  Prudential, Chicago Mercantile Exchange  & Metropolitan  Insurance 

•  Marketing  and education for  financial  futures  and  risk  management. 
•  Staff  member  of new product  committee  of the  CME. 
• 

Investment  Analysis for  private  funding. 

REFERENCES 

Professor  Albert L. Page 

University of Illinois at Chicago 

alp3@uic.edu 

Professor  Abbie Griffin 

University  of Utah 

abbie.griffin@business.utah.edu 

Professor  Gerald E. Hills 

University of Illinois at Chicago 

gehills@uic.edu 

Other  references  are available  by  request 

