J PROD INNOV MANAG 2014;31(3):535–551
© 2014 Product Development & Management Association
DOI: 10.1111/jpim.12112

How Should Customers Be Integrated for Effective
Interorganizational NPD Teams? An Input–Process–Output
Perspective*
Ruth Maria Stock

Interorganizational new product development (NPD) teams with business customers are rapidly becoming more
prevalent; yet the drivers of such cooperations at the team level remain unclear to practitioners and researchers alike.
This study proposes an input–process–output model in which various characteristics of interorganizational teams affect
NPD team effectiveness through the mediating construct of NPD team cooperation. Furthermore, various moderators,
reﬂecting the supplier’s dependence on the customers (customer power and customer participation) and the supplier’s
environmental uncertainty (market dynamism and technological turbulence), affect the strength of the underlying
relationships. The results show that customer power positively affects the relationship between intrapersonal team
characteristics and team cooperation. In addition, a negative moderation occurs in interpersonal characteristics.
Customer participation exhibits opposing moderating effects. Regarding the supplier’s environmental uncertainty,
market dynamism and technological turbulence strengthen the relationships under consideration.

N ew product success is driven largely by activi-

ties that occur at the boundary between the ﬁrm
and the customer, and sources of innovation
exist not just within ﬁrms but also in the context of
cooperations with customer organizations. Therefore,
“interorganizational collaboration is also an important
means of supplementing the internal innovative activities
of organizations” (Lawson, Peterson, Cousins, and
Handﬁeld, 2009, p. 158). Firms thus continue to search
for ways to integrate customers into their new product
development (NPD) processes, such as team-based struc-
tures in business-to-business relationships (e.g., Boston
and Keller, 2002; Hart, 2010; Perry, Pearce, and Sims,
1999; Thomke and von Hippel, 2002).

Companies such as Ford, General Motors, Procter &
Gamble, and Toyota increasingly integrate customers into
interorganizational teams to generate product innova-
tions, providing several advantages. First, suppliers can
discover which innovations are really meaningful to cus-
tomers, which in turn encourages the successful launch of
innovative products (Chan, Yim, and Lam, 2010; Hauser,
Tellis, and Grifﬁn, 2006). Second, customer expertise

Address correspondence to: Ruth Maria Stock, Darmstadt University of
Technology, Hochschulstr. 1, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany. E-mail: rsh@
stock-homburg.de. Tel: +49-6151-16-7322. Fax: +49-6151-16-7320.

* The author

thanks Ajay Kohli, Florian Totzauer, and Nicolas

Zacharias for their helpful comments on a prior draft of the paper.

with products might help suppliers uncover more creative
product ideas (Matthing, Sandén, and Edvardsson, 2004).
Third, whereas information that customers provide in
response to explicit questions about their needs is limited
(e.g., Christensen and Bower, 1996; Hamel and Prahalad,
1994),
teams with customers can
provide meaningful insights into underlying customer
needs (Lawson et al., 2009).

interorganizational

Yet companies also face a dilemma: They recognize
the beneﬁts of interorganizational NPD teams but also
realize that those teams often fail or suffer signiﬁcant
conﬂict as a result of misunderstandings, different inter-
pretations of the cooperation’s goals, or misjudgments of
human factors (Fong and Lung, 2007; Hutt, Stafford,
Walker, and Reingen, 2000). Furthermore, the peculiari-
ties of interorganizational teams mean that they demand
extensive coordination and management, and if they are
treated as intraﬁrm teams, important dependencies might
get overlooked (Lawson et al., 2009). For example,
Bstieler and Hemmert (2010, p. 485) highlight the difﬁ-
culties “when partners from different corporate cultures
and thought worlds must coordinate and depend on one
another.” Companies instead “must learn from and col-
laborate with customers to create values that meet their
individual and dynamic needs” (Chan et al., 2010, p. 48).
Although prior research similarly emphasizes the
importance of cooperation between suppliers and
customers (e.g., Fang, 2008; Hoffman, Kopalle, and
Novak, 2010), customer integration best practices for


536

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

R. M. STOCK

NPD teams often seem contained in a black box. Few
studies have investigated interorganizational NPD teams
that comprise both supplier and customer company
employees
(Bstieler and Hemmert, 2010; Lawson
et al., 2009; Stock, 2006), and none have assessed
cooperation mechanisms and interdependencies between
suppliers and customers. Regarding knowledge on inter-
organizational NPD teams with customers, Bstieler and
Hemmert (2010, p. 485) assert
that “the processes,
mechanisms, or dynamics that leverage performance in
interorganizational (I-O) product development teams are
not well understood.”

In response, a major objective of the current study is to
explore how ﬁrms can integrate customers for effective
interorganizational NPD teams. These teams contain
employees of both the supplier and the customer
company and perform NPD tasks. To achieve this objec-
tive, this study concentrates on three research questions
that address customer integration. The ﬁrst research ques-
tion investigates interorganizational NPD teams as an
important mode of customer integration to generate more
innovative products. It strives to understand the function-
ing of
interorganizational NPD teams, which ﬁrms
assemble for the purpose of integrating customers at the
team level.

RQ1: What are
inter-
organizational NPD teams as means to integrate custom-
ers into the NPD process?

the drivers of

effective

The second research question refers to the extent to
which customer integration is an important contingency
factor. The motive to examine contingency factors is con-
sistent with resource dependence theory (Pfeffer, 1982)
and extant research that emphasizes that the cooperation
in an interorganizational NPD team depends heavily on
contingency factors (Bstieler and Hemmert, 2010; Stock,
2006). By relying on resource dependence theory
(Pfeffer, 1982), this study considers the role of the sup-

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Dr. Ruth Maria Stock is professor of marketing and human resource
management at Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany. She holds a
master’s degree in psychology from the University of Hagen, Germany,
a Ph.D. in marketing from the University of Mannheim, Germany, and a
habilitation degree from the University of the Federal Armed Forces
Hamburg, Germany. Currently, she is a Visiting Scholar at the Sloan
School of Management at MIT Cambridge. She has published in various
forums including the Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
Journal of Product Innovation Management, and Psychology & Market-
ing. Her primary research areas are innovation management, customer
relationship management, and business-to-business marketing.

plier’s dependence on the customer. That is, the greater
the supplier’s dependence on the customer, the greater is
the customer’s inﬂuence because of its intensive integra-
tion into the NPD process (Berné, 1963). The supplier’s
dependence on the customer is captured by customer
power and customer participation (Stock, 2006).

RQ2: How does the supplier’s dependence on the cus-
tomer (customer power and customer participation)
affect the functioning of interorganizational NPD teams?

The third research question focuses on environmental
uncertainty, which is another important situational factor
in resource dependence theory (Pfeffer and Salancik,
1978). Environmental uncertainty should be particularly
high in an organization that strives to gain access to
another organization’s resources (Pfeffer, 1982). Thus,
this study explores how the supplier’s uncertainty affects
the functioning of interorganizational NPD teams. In this
study, market dynamism and technological turbulence
capture the supplier’s uncertainty (Homburg, Krohmer,
and Workman, 1999; Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Slater
and Narver, 1994).

RQ3: How does the supplier’s environmental uncertainty
(market dynamism and technological
turbulence) af-
fect the functioning of interorganizational NPD teams?

Literature Review

Interorganizational NPD teams consist of boundary-
spanning members of different partnering organizations,
such that they represent “parent organizations and com-
munity constituencies, who meet periodically to make
decisions relevant to their common concerns, and whose
behavior is regulated by a common set of expectations”
(Schopler, 1987, p. 703). The team members thus remain
constantly aware of their status as delegates, and even as
they work as a group, they remain connected to their
employing organizations (Li and Hambrick, 2005). Most
research on interorganizational NPD teams focuses on
ways to integrate a supplier into different stages of the
NPD process or examines the supplier’s inﬂuence on
product speed, quality, and costs (e.g., Handﬁeld, Ragatz,
Petersen, and Monczka, 1999; Petersen, Handﬁeld, and
Ragatz, 2003, 2005; Ragatz, Handﬁeld, and Petersen,
2002).

In contrast,

interorganizational NPD teams with
customers aim to gain insight into customers’ needs
to increase the meaningfulness of new products
(Drach-Zahavy, 2011; Takeishi, 2001). Despite their
importance however, few studies have investigated the


CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN NPD TEAMS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

537

antecedents of the effective functioning of interorganiza-
tional teams. Important antecedents are cultural aspects,
such as caring behavior, psychological safety (Bstieler
and Hemmert, 2010), and knowledge sharing (Lawson
et al., 2009). Furthermore, boundary spanning has been
shown to affect the effectiveness of interorganizational
teams (Drach-Zahavy, 2011). Extant research also indi-
cates that the functioning of interorganizational teams
largely depends on environmental factors. Stock (2006)
surveys multiple members of 245 selling and NPD teams
and ﬁnds that interorganizational teams only matter when
uncertainty (environmental and company-related) is high.
Yet the mechanisms underlying cooperation with custom-
ers in interorganizational NPD teams are still unclear.

Conceptual Background

The conceptual basis for this study derives from resource
dependence theory (Pfeffer, 1982) and the input–
process–output model of team effectiveness (McGrath,
1964). Consistent with the input–process–output model,
the framework proposes a causal chain, running from

team characteristics

various
to team effectiveness,
mediated by team cooperation (Ancona and Caldwell,
1992). The input variables include both intrapersonal
and interpersonal characteristics (McGrath, 1964). This
study applies this model to speciﬁc characteristics of
interorganizational
Intrapersonal
team characteristics include the supplier employees’
innovative work behavior, expertise, openness, and cus-
tomer orientation.
team characteristics
instead entail the attributes that compose the team (Perry
et al., 1999; Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). They include
innovation norms,
and decision-making
autonomy.

Interpersonal

(Figure 1).

cohesion,

teams

The dependent variable of the framework is NPD team
effectiveness (i.e., the extent to which the team achieves
its goals, such as generating innovations; Hackman,
1987). The mediating variable—team cooperation—
implies that team members work together interdepen-
dently and share information, which is important in the
context of NPD teams (Eppler and Sukowski, 2000;
Montoya-Weiss, Massey,
and Song, 2001; Song,
Montoya-Weiss, and Schmidt, 1997).

Intrapersonal Team 

Characteristics of Supplier 

Employees 

  − Innovative work behavior 
− Expertise 
− Openness 
− Customer orientation 

Suppliers‘ Dependence on the Customer 

Customer 

power 

Customer  
participation 

+ 

- 

- 

+ 

Team 

cooperation 

NPD team 

effectiveness 

Interpersonal Team  

Characteristics 

 − Innovation norms 
− Cohesion 
− Decision-making  
   autonomy 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

Market 

dynamism 

Technological 

turbulence 

Suppliers‘ Environmental Uncertainty 

Team Member  
Perspective 

Figure 1. Conceptual Framework of the Study

Team Leader 
Perspective 


538

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

R. M. STOCK

Furthermore, it is proposed that companies are not
internally self-sufﬁcient in gaining resources from their
customers during the development of new products (see
also Pfeffer, 1982). Thus, the framework of this study
also incorporates the supplier’s dependence on the cus-
tomer (customer power and customer participation) and
the supplier’s environmental uncertainty (market dyna-
mism and technological turbulence).

Finally, the framework includes several control vari-
ables that should affect the independent variables—team
characteristics—as well as the dependent variable, team
effectiveness. These variables include team size (e.g.,
Barczak, 2010; McNamara, Luce, and Tompson, 2002),
team longevity (i.e., length of time a team’s members
have worked together; Deeter-Schmelz and Ramsey,
2003), and company size.

From a theoretical perspective, this study relies on
resource dependence theory (Pfeffer, 1982) and the
input–process–output model of
team performance
(McGrath, 1964). A ﬁrst prediction of resource depen-
dence theory is that organizations depend on their envi-
ronment for critical resource inputs and the disposal of
outputs (Pfeffer, 1982). In the NPD process, information
from customers is an important resource input for suppli-
ers that stimulates innovation and helps suppliers meet
customer needs more effectively (Laursen and Salter,
2006; Prahalad and Ramaswamy, 2003; Sanchez and
Elola, 1991).

A second premise of resource dependence theory is
that suppliers can establish formal or semiformal links
with other organizations, such as their customers, to
reduce environmental uncertainty (Pfeffer, 1982). These
links have been referred to as “bridging strategies”
(Pfeffer, 1982). In this study, the interorganizational NPD
team represents an important mechanism for a supplier
company to bridge the boundary with its customers (see
also de Jong, de Ruyter, and Lemmink, 2004; Stock,
2006). The supplier’s customer-contact employees, the
so-called boundary spanners, play an important role
because they “are encouraged to build close relationships
directly with prospective customers” (Souder, Sherman,
and Davies-Cooper, 1998, p. 521; see also de Jong et al.,
2004; Lysonski, 1985). As the supplier’s employee char-
acteristics are more likely to be inﬂuenced by the supplier
company than the customer characteristics (Mills, Chase,
and Margulies, 1983; Mills and Morris, 1986), this study
focuses on supplier employees’ characteristics.

Besides these intrapersonal team characteristics, the
input–process–output model of team effectiveness con-
siders interpersonal team characteristics to be important
for
the team (McGrath, 1964).

the functioning of

Research indicates that interorganizational teams may be
fraught with greater tension because of conﬂicting goals
of the supplier and customer (Oliver and Roos, 2002;
Stock, 2006). These tensions may hurt the functioning of
the team (Bstieler and Hemmert, 2010; Lysonski, 1985;
Thompson, 1967). Thus, this study is particularly inter-
ested in interpersonal characteristics that help reduce the
tension among the members of the interorganizational
team.

Resource dependence theory also predicts that orga-
nizations are not internally self-sufﬁcient with respect to
their critical
resources (Pfeffer, 1982; Pfeffer and
Salancik, 1978). This lack of self-sufﬁciency creates
potential dependencies on the parties from which the
focal
resources are obtained (Pfeffer, 1982). Prior
research suggests that the number of team members from
the two organizations and the power they exert inﬂuence
the supplier’s
relationship dependence (see Berné,
1963; Lysonski, 1985; Venkatesh and Wilemon, 1976;
Wheeler, Mansﬁeld, and Todd, 1980). Thus, the frame-
work also incorporates customer power and customer
participation to capture the supplier’s dependence on the
customers.

Furthermore, the lack of self-sufﬁciency introduces
environmental uncertainty because the resource ﬂows are
not subject to the companies’ control and may be difﬁcult
to predict. Environmental uncertainty is an important
situational variable in terms of buyer–seller relationships
in general (e.g., Homburg et al., 1999; Jaworski and
Kohli, 1993) and NPD projects in particular (Mumin and
Elbanna, 2011). By relying on extant research,
the
framework incorporates market dynamism and techno-
logical turbulence to capture environmental uncertainty
(Homburg et al., 1999; Slater and Narver, 1994).

Hypotheses Development

Mediating Effects

The ﬁrst research question referred to relevant drivers of
effective interorganizational NPD teams as means to inte-
grate customers into the NPD process. A ﬁrst step to
answer this question is to understand the antecedents of
the cooperation in interorganizational NPD teams,
captured by the ﬁrst set of hypotheses. Regarding ante-
cedents of NPD team cooperation, this study distin-
guishes between intrapersonal and interpersonal team
characteristics.
Intrapersonal

team
members’ innovative work behavior (Akgün, Keskin, and
Byrne, 2010; Denison, Hart, and Kahn, 1996; Vissers and

team characteristics

include


CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN NPD TEAMS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

539

Dankbaar, 2002), expertise (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992;
Ellemers, De Gilder, and Van den Heuvel, 1998; Mumin
and Elbanna, 2011), openness (e.g., Aronson, Reilly, and
Lynn, 2006; George and Zhou, 2001), and customer
orientation (Akgün et al., 2010).

Innovative work behavior (Oldham and Cummings,
1996; Scott and Bruce, 1994) refers to the “intentional
generation, promotion and realization of new ideas within
a work role, work group or organization” (Janssen, 2003,
p. 348). The greater the supplier employees’ innovative
work behavior, the more they are searching new ideas and
engage in realizing those ideas together with other
members of the team.

Expertise is “the presence of knowledge and the ability
to fulﬁll a task” (Stock and Hoyer, 2005, p. 552). Supplier
employees with high expertise tend to be competent in
solving problems and have knowledge of the supplier’s
offer. Thus, employees with high expertise can particu-
larly contribute to team cooperation.

Openness “refers to whether people accept new expe-
riences, are interested in unusual thought processes, and
possess creative tendencies” (de Jong, Song, and Song,
2011, p. 5; see also McCrae and John, 1992). Open
employees from the supplier are able and willing to share
ideas about new products with the customer’s employees.
This, in turn, contributes to the cooperation within the
team.

Customer orientation refers to the supplier employees’
ability to help customers to identify and meet their needs
and interests (Homburg, Müller, and Klarmann, 2011;
Saxe and Weitz, 1982). Customer-oriented employees
are likely to have particular knowledge about customers’
needs and high interest in fulﬁlling these needs. They
are thus willing to cooperate with customer employees
to fulﬁll their needs through the development of new
products.

In sum, supplier employees with these characteristics
tend to be more competent
in generating ideas and
solving problems and have greater knowledge of the sup-
plier’s offer and buyers’ needs. These skilled boundary
spanners thus can generate better ideas for promising new
products and contribute to cooperation among the NPD
team.

The input–process–output model (McGrath, 1964)
further proposes that cooperation among the members
should enhance team effectiveness. In interorganizational
NPD teams, strong cooperation means that the supplier
employees can comfortably share relevant information
with the customer employees. Because “each person can
do something for the other which that person cannot do
for (or by) himself” (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959, p. 59),

intensive cooperation in the interorganizational
team
makes it easier to achieve its objectives in developing
new products. Thus:

H1: Intrapersonal NPD team characteristics of the sup-
plier employees—(a) innovation behavior, (b) expertise,
(c) openness, and (d) customer orientation—positively
affect NPD team effectiveness through the mediating
construct of team cooperation.

Interorganizational NPD teams are likely to suffer
from tensions arising from different organizational objec-
tives of the supplier and the customer company (Bstieler
and Hemmert, 2010; Lysonski, 1985; Thompson, 1967).
Thus, this study is particularly interested in the charac-
teristics that help reduce the tension among the members
of the interorganizational team. Important for reducing
tension and increasing the cooperation in the team are
innovation norms as important facets of innovation
culture (e.g., Cohen and Bailey, 1997; Jehn, 1997). Inno-
vation norms are standards that regulate behavior among
the members of the NPD team. They generate a common
understanding about the purpose of the team, that is, to
develop new products (Lau and Ngo, 2004; Miron, Erez,
and Naveh, 2004). Innovation norms should shape the
team’s behaviors and therefore allow for better predic-
tions of other boundary spanners’ behaviors. Thus, coop-
eration between members of both organizations becomes
easier (Denison et al., 1996).

Furthermore, the cooperation between the boundary
spanners of different organizations requires a certain
amount of cohesion to overcome tensions and to create an
open atmosphere in the team (Adams, 1976). Cohesion
refers to the “group members’ afﬁnity for one another and
their desire to remain part of the group” (Kidwell,
Mossholder, and Bennett, 1997, p. 778). It helps supplier
employees to better understand these customers’ needs
and wants (Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995; Jespersen,
2010). Furthermore, the interactions among members of a
highly cohesive NPD team should generate social
rewards for the members. Such cohesion is likely to
enhance the team readiness to cooperate with other
members of the team (George and Bettenhausen, 1990;
Kidwell et al., 1997; Seers, Petty, and Cashman, 1995).
Boundary-spanning literature further predicts that the
boundary spanners from different organizations need a
certain amount of decision-making autonomy to comply
with the interests of both organizations (Adams, 1976).
Decision-making autonomy as the extent to which team
members believe that
they can determine their own
work procedures, goals, and priorities is important
for the effective functioning of teams (Kim and Lee,


540

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

R. M. STOCK

1995; Liden, Wayne, and Bradway, 1997). It gives the
supplier’s employees the freedom to cooperate with the
customer’s employees by relying on their knowledge and
experience rather than the goal pressure from their own
organization and thus, contributes to team cooperation.
Thus:

H2: Interpersonal NPD team characteristics—(a) inno-
vation norms, (b) cohesion, and (c) decision-making
autonomy—positively affect NPD team effectiveness
through the mediating construct of team cooperation.

Moderating Effects

The second research question referred to how the suppli-
er’s dependence on customers (customer power and
customer participation) affects the strength of the rela-
tionships between NPD team characteristics and NPD
team cooperation. Customer power is the customer’s
ability to inﬂuence the decisions of the supplier ﬁrm
(Grégoire, Laufer, and Tripp, 2010). Powerful customer
employees might try to exploit their position to inﬂuence
team decisions (Christensen and Bower, 1996; von
Hippel, 1988). This, in turn, creates uncertainty for a
supplier in terms of the customer’s resources according to
resource dependence theory (Pfeffer, 1982). The more
powerful the customer is in the interorganizational team,
the more skills the supplier’s boundary spanners need to
secure its interests during the NPD process.

Highly innovative supplier employees constantly
strive for the generation, promotion, and realization of
new ideas in the team (Janssen, 2000); highly experi-
enced and customer-oriented boundary spanners might
have a better conception of the strengths and weaknesses
of the involved companies’ products than less experi-
enced boundary spanners (Akgün et al., 2010; Mumin
and Elbanna, 2011; Stock and Hoyer, 2005). Further-
more, openness of the supplier company’s employees is
particularly important in the NPD process (Akgün et al.,
2010; Aronson et al., 2006; Vissers and Dankbaar, 2002).
these abilities make it relatively easy for the
supplier company’s employees to contribute to team
cooperation (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959), which is particu-
larly important if the team’s attention is distracted by
customers who inﬂuence the team processes to a great
extent. Speciﬁcally, innovative, experienced, open, and
customer-oriented boundary spanners help mitigate the
risk that team members’ attention will shift away from
cooperation and NPD because decisions are dominated
by customers. Therefore, the positive effect of these
intrapersonal characteristics on cooperation becomes par-
ticularly important at higher levels of customer power.

All

In contrast, interpersonal team characteristics might
lose their inﬂuence when the customers strongly inﬂu-
ence the processes in the team, especially when there are
conﬂicting goals of supplier and customer employees in
the team (Oliver and Roos, 2002). For example, Menon
and Bansal (2006) investigate how customers perceive
social power in services and ﬁnd that powerful customers
believe they can direct any situation to their advantage.
Supplier employees in the interorganizational NPD team
may favor developing a product that will appeal to all or
most of its customers; in contrast, customer employees
may prefer to develop a product that is best suited for
their individual requirements (Christensen and Bower,
1996). Gassmann, Kausch, and Enkel (2010, p. 54) even
warn that “Customers often agree to the integration only
because they expect a personal beneﬁt. If they, correctly
or not, perceive a clash of interests between the company
and themselves, they will most likely act in their own best
interest.”

Customers who strongly inﬂuence the team’s deci-
sions are likely to disrupt the positive effect of interper-
sonal team characteristics on team cooperation. That is,
they might put their own advantage ﬁrst and ignore infor-
mal team structures and norms. Thus:

H3a: The positive link between intrapersonal team char-
acteristics from the supplier employees (innovative work
behavior, expertise, openness, and customer orientation)
and team cooperation is stronger when customer power
is greater in the interorganizational NPD team.

H3b: The positive link between interpersonal team char-
acteristics (innovation norms, cohesion, and decision-
making autonomy) and team cooperation is weaker when
customer power is greater in the interorganizational
NPD team.

Customer participation refers to the percentage of
NPD team members who are employed by the customer.
Higher customer participation means that the NPD team
is structurally dominated by customer employees. This
may create resource constraints in the sense that the
supplier has fewer employees functioning in the team
(Berné, 1963). In this case, it is more difﬁcult for the
supplier’s employees to introduce their innovation behav-
iors, expertise, openness, and customer orientation, and
they are less likely to gain valuable insights into customer
information and customer needs through cooperation.
Thus, customer participation weakens the positive impact
of supplier employees’ innovation behavior and expertise
on team cooperation.

In contrast, structuring elements in interorganizational
NPD teams clarify what team members should expect


CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN NPD TEAMS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

541

and what is expected of them during their cooperation.
According to resource dependence theory, dominance by
customer employees, which occurs with higher customer
participation, generates uncertainty for the team members
(e.g., Adams, 1976; Aldrich and Herker, 1977). Such
uncertainty obfuscates expectations within the team
setting, which makes interpersonal team characteristics
increasingly important for ensuring cooperation. Thus:

H4a: The positive link between intrapersonal team char-
acteristics from the supplier employees (innovative work
behavior, expertise, openness, and customer orientation)
and team cooperation is weaker when customer partici-
pation is higher in the interorganizational NPD team.

(innovation

H4b: The positive link between interpersonal
team
characteristics
cohesion,
and
decision-making autonomy) and team cooperation is
stronger when customer participation is higher in the
interorganizational NPD team.

norms,

The third research question refers to how environ-
mental uncertainty affects the functioning of interor-
ganizational NPD teams. Environmental uncertainty has
frequently been captured through market dynamism and
technological
turbulence (e.g., Homburg et al., 1999;
Jaworski and Kohli, 1993).

Market dynamism refers to the frequency of major
market-related changes, which include changes in the
composition of customers and their preferences and
changes in competitors’ offers (Homburg et al., 1999).
According to resource dependence theory, market dyna-
mism increases a supplier’s uncertainty in the customer’s
resources. Speciﬁcally, windows of opportunity shorten
with changes in customer preferences or aggressive com-
petitor behavior, resulting in insufﬁcient time to develop
highly innovative products (Calantone, Garcia, and
Dröge, 2003). Thus, market dynamism increases environ-
mental uncertainty (Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Stock,
2006).

To cope with this market dynamism, suppliers need to
understand both the customer requirements and the
potential for rapid market changes (Paladino, 2008).
Thus, team characteristics that contribute to team coop-
eration and also make a team more effective become
particularly important under conditions of high market
dynamism.
intra-
personal team characteristics that contribute to team pro-
cesses according to the input–process–output model
(McGrath, 1964) become valuable under conditions of
high market dynamism (Mumin and Elbanna, 2011;
Stock, 2006). Furthermore,
team characteristics that
structure the work of an interorganizational NPD team

In particular, supplier employees’

are particularly important in terms of team cooperation
under conditions of high market dynamism. Thus:

H5a: The positive link between intrapersonal team char-
acteristics from the supplier employees (innovative work
behavior, expertise, openness, and customer orientation)
and team cooperation is stronger when market dynamism
is higher.

H5b: The positive link between interpersonal team char-
acteristics (innovation norms, cohesion, and decision-
making autonomy) and team cooperation is stronger
when market dynamism is higher.

Technological turbulence is the rate of technological
change in the industry in which the company competes
(Jaworski and Kohli, 1993). Technological turbulence
offers a variety of particularly attractive and potentially
rewarding opportunities in the NPD team process (see
Ahuja and Lampert, 2001; Atuahene-Gima, Slater, and
Olson, 2005). To take advantage of these opportunities,
customer input as resource becomes particularly impor-
tant for the supplier company (Stock, 2006). Thus, tech-
nological turbulence increases environmental uncertainty
(Jaworski and Kohli, 1993; Stock, 2006). The team char-
acteristics that contribute to team cooperation and, in
turn, make a team more effective become particularly
important under conditions of high technological turbu-
lence. Thus, both intrapersonal and interpersonal team
characteristics are likely to enhance team cooperation
under conditions of high technological turbulence. Thus:

H6a: The positive link between intrapersonal team char-
acteristics from the supplier employees (innovative work
behavior, expertise, openness, and customer orientation)
and team cooperation is stronger when technological
turbulence is higher.

H6b: The positive link between interpersonal team char-
acteristics (innovation norms, cohesion, and decision-
making autonomy) and team cooperation is stronger
when technological turbulence is higher.

Method

Collection of Multisource Data

The data collection focused on team members and team
leaders, with the goal of gathering at least two indepen-
dent team member assessments and one team leader
evaluation per team. In the ﬁrst step of data collection, 72
managers in different companies were contacted initially
by mail and then by telephone and asked to participate.
The telephone conversations also featured open questions


542

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

R. M. STOCK

about the ﬁrms’ possible participation in the study. In
some cases, personal visits to the companies helped con-
vince the target respondents to participate.

If they agreed to participate, the managers were asked
to identify interorganizational NPD teams from their
company, along with at least three individual members
and the team leader of each team. If the company was
large enough, the identiﬁed NPD teams were to belong to
different strategic business units (SBUs). Each of the
participating companies was offered a report that com-
pared its teams with industry averages, as well as the
opportunity to participate in a one-day, in-house work-
shop addressing techniques for increasing team effective-
ness (e.g., communication, conﬂict solving) conducted
by an academic specialized in team research.

In the second step, team members and team leaders
were contacted for an Internet-based survey. Of these,
602 members from 134 teams from different SBUs ulti-
mately responded, representing response rates of 63% at
the individual level and 81% at the team level. Fourteen
single responses from different teams were eliminated.
Thus, the ﬁnal sample consisted of 120 teams, each with
at least two team member evaluations and one team
leader evaluation. The 588 total respondents indicated an
average of 4.9 respondents per team. These teams repre-
sented all four manufacturing industries: electronics
(37%), mechanical machinery (11%), automotive supply
(30%), and consumer goods (22%).

The team members rated the intrapersonal and inter-
personal team characteristics and team cooperation; the
team leaders provided the responses pertaining to NPD
team effectiveness. Therefore, common method bias
should not be a threat to the validity of the study ﬁndings.

Measure Development and Assessment

The multi-item scales were drawn from existing scales
and used to measure the relevant constructs (see the
Appendix). Initial guidance on the selection of the scales,
as well as the study participants, came from interviews
with 24 research and development and marketing team
members and leaders who were responsible for generat-
ing new products. They validated the major constructs of
the conceptual framework and provided further qualita-
tive feedback about the clarity and appropriateness of the
survey items. They suggested adding and rewording
several items. Furthermore, the scale development related
to the control variables was generally consistent with
extant research that has mostly used single-item measures
for the control variables in strategic management settings
(Boyd, Gove, and Hitt, 2005).

The quantitative puriﬁcation of the survey items con-
sisted of three steps. First, the test of the reliability and
validity of the measures followed standard procedures as
recommended by Gerbing and Anderson (1988). Second,
an exploratory factor analysis of each construct indicated
the unidimensionality and underlying factor structure.
Third, the conﬁrmatory factor analyses used LISREL
VIII (Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1982); this is superior to
more traditional criteria (e.g., Cronbach’s alpha) in the
context of scale validation because of its less restrictive
assumptions (Bagozzi and Yi, 1988). As the Appendix
shows, the coefﬁcient alpha values clearly exceeded the
threshold value of .7 recommended by Nunnally (1978).
The composite reliability of the study factors, which rep-
resents the shared variance of a set of observed variables
measuring an underlying construct (Fornell and Larcker,
1981), consistently exceeded the desirable .6 level
(Bagozzi and Yi, 1988). The average variance extracted
values also provided satisfactory results. Finally,
the
average variances extracted for each construct were sig-
niﬁcantly greater than the squared correlation between
the constructs (Table 1). This ﬁnding satisﬁes Fornell and
Larcker’s (1981) criterion for discriminant validity.

The measures of the control variables were consistent
with those used in prior research. Team longevity repre-
sented the number of months the team had worked
together, according to the team leader respondents.
Company size and team size (as the number of members
in the team) were gathered from team leaders.

Finally, any study that uses multiple informants must
determine whether the responses of different informants
from the same team are consistent enough to aggregate
them for further analysis. To assess the acceptability of
data aggregation, this study used two methods. First, an
analysis of variance tested whether the variance across
teams was greater than the variance within them (e.g.,
George and Bettenhausen, 1990). Second, the estimate of
within-group interrater reliability, suggested by James,
Demaree, and Wolf (1981, 1993), tested for consistency
within groups. The results from both tests supported
aggregating the data obtained from respondents in a spe-
ciﬁc team.

Further Measure Validation through
Secondary Data

Because the assessments of NPD effectiveness based on
subjective data from team leaders can be problematic,
an additional data collection ensured that
the NPD
effectiveness measure is a good indicator for product
innovativeness. The data collection entailed obtaining


CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN NPD TEAMS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

543

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics, Reliabilities, and Intercorrelations of Reﬁned Measures

M

S

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

Factors

1 Innovative work behavior
2 Expertise
3 Openness
4 Customer orientation
5 Innovation norms
6 Cohesion
7 Decision-making

3.76
2.94
3.13
2.97
3.10
2.92
3.68

.79
.68
.98
.62
.78
.72
.84

(.91)
.42*
.53*
.18*
.30*
.46*
.23*

(.85)
.18*
.21*
.37*
.53*
.15

(.89)
.29*
.10
.12
.08

autonomy

(.81)
.04
.09
.05

(.89)
.20*
.38*

(.85)
.37*

(.74)

8 Team cooperation
9 Team effectiveness
10 Customer power
11 Customer participation
12 Market dynamism
13 Technological turbulence
* p < .05. Notes: M = mean value; S = standard deviation. Reliabilities are in parentheses. N = 120.

.49*
.56*
.11
−.06
.21*
.23*

.25*
.06
−.02
.01
.03
.07

.19*
.12
−.04
.04
.01
.03

.67*
.47*
.01
−.03
.07
.00

.31*
.27*
.06
−.02
−.05
−.02

.39*
.33*
.03
.01
.03
.01

3.36
2.58
4.71
.35
3.79
3.42

.98
.94
.74
.23
.74
.92

.36*
.32*
−.08
−.03
.07
−.07

(.72)
.47*
−.08
.05
.02
.02

(.71)
(.70)
.05
−.06
.04
.19* −.08
.17
.18*

(—)
−.07
.02

(.84)
.62*

(.89)

information on new product frequency as an important
indicator for a company’s product innovativeness (e.g.,
Bart, 1991; Chaney, Devinney, and Winer, 1991; Katila,
2002; Smith, Collins, and Clark, 2005; Zahra and
Nielsen, 2002), calculated as the number of new products
introduced by the business unit. The information was
gathered from the companies’ Internet descriptions of
their new products, business and product reports, and
comments in specialized technical journals. This proce-
dure provided secondary data on the number of newly
introduced products for 81 SBUs.

I then correlated the product frequency values with
team leaders’ initial evaluations of NPD effectiveness
(i.e., the perceptual items used in the study). The corre-
lation of .46 (p < .01) indicates that NPD effectiveness is
a good indicator for product innovativeness.

Results

The structural equation modeling (SEM) with latent
interactions to test the hypotheses relied on MPLUS 5.21
(Muthén and Muthén, 2007). This methodology is rela-
tively new to innovation research; it is based on ordinary
SEM but offers a more advanced test of the moderated
effects
than multigroup SEM. Speciﬁcally, unlike
multigroup SEM, which splits the data into subsamples
and thus exploits only some of the variance available in
the data set, SEM with latent interactions avoids infor-
mation loss by building casewise interactions (Marsh,
Wen, and Hau, 2006). The analytical procedure follows a
logic similar to that which underlies hierarchical moder-
ated regression analysis (Aiken and West, 1991). There-

fore, the ﬁrst model included all basic effects and control
variables, as well as the direct effects of the moderator
variables on the dependent variables, to avoid confound-
ing the main and interaction effects
(Irwin and
McClelland, 2001). Subsequent models included a latent
interaction between one of the four moderators (customer
power, customer participation, market dynamism, and
technological turbulence) and the independent variables
(intrapersonal and interpersonal team characteristics).

Mediating Effects

The basic model (without any interaction terms) pro-
duced global ﬁt statistics that indicated an acceptable ﬁt
of the model to the data (root mean square error of
approximation = .05; χ2/df = 2.49;
standardized root
mean square residual = .06). The completely standard-
ized path coefﬁcients of this basic model appear in
Figure 2.

through

on NPD team effectiveness

The proposed mediation effect in H1 involved a posi-
tive inﬂuence of the intrapersonal NPD team characteris-
tics
team
cooperation. The results revealed that innovative work
(γ11 = .23, p < .05) and expertise (γ12 = .29,
behavior
p < .05) positively affected team cooperation, which in
turn inﬂuenced NPD team effectiveness (β21 = .57,
p < .05), in support of H1a and H1b. The positive effect of
openness (γ13 = .15, p < .10) and customer orientation
(γ14 = .14, p < .10), as suggested in H1c and H1d,
received support only at the 10% level. However, team
members’ cognitive skills, such as innovation behavior
and expertise, contributed more strongly to team


544

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

R. M. STOCK

Intrapersonal Team 

Characteristics of Supplier

Employees

Innovative work behavior (ξ1)

Expertise (ξ2)

Openness (ξ3)

Customer orientation (ξ4)

Interpersonal Team 

Characteristics

Innovation norms (ξ5)

Cohesion (ξ6)

Decision-making 

autonomy (ξ7)

Control Variables

Team Size (ξ8)

Team Longevity (ξ9)

Company Size (ξ10)

.23*

.29*

.15

.14

.41*

.22*

.26* 

.10 

.02 

.05 

Suppliers‘ Dependence on the Customer

Customer 
power (ξ11)
- γ1(1x11) = .29*
- γ1(2x11) = .17
- γ1(3x11) = .23*
- γ1(4x11) = .13

- γ1(5x11) = -.12
- γ1(6x11) = -.24*
- γ1(7x11) = -.31*

Customer 
participation (ξ12)
- γ1(1x12) = -.20*
- γ1(2x12) = -.25*
- γ1(3x12) = -.29*
- γ1(4x12) = -.20*

- γ1(5x12) = .23*
- γ1(6x12) = .37*
- γ1(7x12) = .18*

Team 

cooperation (η1)

.57*

NPD team 

effectiveness (η2)

Market
dynamism (ξ13)
- γ1(1x13) = .26*
- γ1(2x13) = .14
- γ1(3x13) = .21*
- γ1(4x13) = .28*

- γ1(5x13) = .10
- γ1(6x13) = .31*
- γ1(7x13) = .27*

Technological
turbulence (ξ14)
- γ1(1x14) = .18*
- γ1(2x14) = .29*
- γ1(3x14) = .17
- γ1(4x14) = .09

- γ1(5x14) = .21*
- γ1(6x14) = .29*
- γ1(7x14) = .23*

Suppliers‘ Environmental Uncertainty

Figure 2. Results of the Structural Equation Modeling (SEM). *p < .05; standardized parameter estimates are reported

Team Member Perspective

Team Leader Perspective

cooperation and thus to NPD team effectiveness than did
personal characteristics and behaviors, such as openness
and customer orientation.

Through an indirect effect, interpersonal NPD team
characteristics also may affect NPD team effectiveness,
with team cooperation as the mediating construct.
Innovation norms (γ15 = .41, p < .05), cohesion (γ16 = .22,
p < .05), and decision-making autonomy (γ17 = .26,
p < .05) all positively affected team cooperation,
in
support of H2a–c.

The results remained robust even with the inclusion of
several control variables. That is, the control variables
that might affect the dependent variable of team effec-
tiveness were all nonsigniﬁcant (team size γ28 = .10, ns;
team longevity γ29 = .02, ns; company size γ2 10 = .05, ns).
However, a further test of the stability of the ﬁndings
revealed the direct effects of intrapersonal and inter-
personal NPD team characteristics on NPD team effec-
tiveness. Regarding the former, innovative work behavior

(γ21 = .12, p < .10) and expertise (γ22 = .16, p < .05) posi-
tively enhance NPD team effectiveness, but these effects
are weaker than those on NPD team cooperation. Of the
interpersonal NPD team characteristics, only innovation
norms inﬂuenced NPD team effectiveness (γ25 = .28,
p < .05). The hypothesized framework (Figure 1) results
remained stable, in further support of the prediction that
NPD team cooperation serves as important transmitter of
intrapersonal and interpersonal NPD team characteristics
and NPD team effectiveness.

Moderating Effects

The test for moderated effects included the latent inter-
actions between each respective moderator and the inde-
pendent variables (intrapersonal and interpersonal NPD
team characteristics). A stepwise approach to estimate a
separate model for each interaction term allows for the
speciﬁcation of the interaction terms by multiplying the


CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN NPD TEAMS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

545

item values (Marsh et al., 2006) after mean-centering all
the indicators (Algina and Moulder, 2001). This approach
produced highly reliable results (Marsh et al., 2006). The
results of the moderator analysis appear in Figure 2.

and

environmental

the intrapersonal

In relation to the moderating effects of a supplier’s
uncertainty, H3a
dependence
predicted an interaction of
team
characteristics—innovation behavior (ξ1), expertise (ξ2),
openness (ξ3), and customer orientation (ξ4)—with cus-
tomer power (ξ11). Similar to the logic in a hierarchical
moderated regression analysis, H3a would receive
support if the path coefﬁcients of the links from innova-
tion behavior γ1(1×11), expertise γ1(2×11), openness γ1(3×11),
and customer orientation γ1(4×11) to the interaction terms
(ξ1 × ξ11, ξ2 × ξ11, ξ3 × ξ11, and ξ4 × ξ11) and team coop-
eration (η1) were positive and signiﬁcant at the 5% level.
The analysis conﬁrmed a moderating effect of customer
power on the effects of both innovative work behavior
(γ1(1×11) = .29,
(γ1(3×11) = .23,
p < .05) on team cooperation. Its moderating effect on the
effect of expertise (γ1(2×11) = .17, p < .10) and customer
orientation (γ1(4×11) = .13, p < .10) was signiﬁcant only at
the 10% level. For expertise and customer orientation, the
results conﬁrmed the proposed direction of the moderat-
ing effect.

p < .05)

openness

and

Yet H3b received support, because the interpersonal
team characteristics—innovation norms (ξ5), cohesion
(ξ6), and decision-making autonomy (ξ7)—were less
strongly associated with team cooperation when cus-
tomer power was high. The results revealed negative
interactions for all three interpersonal team characteris-
tics (innovation norms γ1(5×11) = −.12, p < .10; cohesion
γ1(6×11) = −.24,
autonomy
γ1(7×11) = −.31, p < .05) with team cooperation. For
innovation norms, the results conﬁrmed the proposed
direction of the moderating effect; however, the path
coefﬁcient was only signiﬁcant at the 10% level.

decision-making

p < .05;

Regarding the interaction between intrapersonal team
characteristics and customer participation (ξ12), H4a
would receive statistical support if the path coefﬁcients
from the interaction terms for innovation behavior (ξ1),
expertise (ξ2), openness (ξ3), and customer orientation
(ξ4) to team cooperation were negative and signiﬁcant.
The analyses conﬁrmed the effects of innovation behav-
(γ1(1×12) = −.20, p < .05), expertise (γ1(2×12) = −.25,
ior
p < .05), openness (γ1(3×12) = −.29, p < .05), and customer
orientation (γ1(4×12) = −.20, p < .05), such that the positive
relationship of intrapersonal team characteristics with
cooperation weakened with higher customer participa-
tion. Moreover, regarding the link between interpersonal
team characteristics and team cooperation when cus-

tomer participation is high, the results revealed positive
innovation norms (γ1(5×12) = .23, p < .05),
interactions:
cohesion (γ1(6×12) = .37, p < .05), and decision-making
autonomy (γ1(7×12) = .18, p < .05). Thus, the data conﬁrm
both H4a and H4b.

In statistical support of

the interaction between
intrapersonal team characteristics and market dynamism
(ξ
13), the path coefﬁcients that link the interaction terms
for innovation behavior (γ1(1×13) = .26, p < .05), expertise
(γ1(2×13) = .14, p < .10), openness (γ1(3×13) = .21, p < .05),
and customer orientation (γ1(4×13) = .28, p < .05) con-
ﬁrmed that the positive relationship of intrapersonal team
characteristics with cooperation is stronger for high
market dynamism, in support of H5a. Consistent with
H5b, which proposed a stronger link between interper-
sonal team characteristics and team cooperation when
market dynamism was high, the results revealed positive
interactions for only two of the three interpersonal team
(γ1(5×13) = .10, ns),
characteristics:
cohesion (γ1(6×13) = .31, p < .05), and decision-making
autonomy (γ1(7×13) = .27, p < .05). Thus, the data only
partly conﬁrm H5b.

innovation norms

With respect to the interaction between intrapersonal
team characteristics and technological turbulence (ξ 14),
H6a received statistical support from the path coefﬁcients
that linked the interaction terms for innovative work
behavior (γ1(1×14) = .18, p < .05), expertise (γ1(2×14) = .29,
p < .05), openness (γ1(3×14) = .17, p < .10), and customer
orientation (γ1(4×14) = .09, ns). The hypothesis that the
positive relationship of intrapersonal team characteristics
with cooperation becomes stronger with high technologi-
cal turbulence could only be partly conﬁrmed. In addi-
tion, H6b proposed a stronger link between interpersonal
team characteristics and team cooperation when techno-
logical turbulence is high. The results revealed positive
interactions for all three interpersonal team characteris-
tics: innovation norms (γ1(5×14) = .21, p < .05), cohesion
(γ1(6×14) = .29, p < .05), and decision-making autonomy
(γ1(7×14) = .23, p < .05), in support of H6b.

Discussion

In the last decade, customer integration into the develop-
ment of new products has attracted increased attention
from academics and practitioners (Fang, 2008; Hamel
and Prahalad, 1994). Customers provide important
insights about
their wants, which helps suppliers to
become more innovative (Hauser et al., 2006). Despite
this, customer integration into the NPD process on the
team level has scarcely been addressed in extant research.
This study extends our knowledge about pathways for


546

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

R. M. STOCK

suppliers to gain valuable information about new product
ideas and customer needs for their NPD processes. It
provides several
insights for research and
managerial practice.

important

Research Implications

First, this study considers a speciﬁc mode of customer
integration—namely, the integration of customers into
interorganizational NPD teams that include members of
both supplier and customer companies. Still, knowledge
about the antecedents of the effective functioning of
interorganizational NPD teams is scarce. In particular,
contingency factors which affect
the functioning of
interorganizational NPD teams are underresearched.

importance for

Second, this study reveals that different intrapersonal
and interpersonal NPD team characteristics vary in
their
the effective functioning of
interorganizational NPD teams. Intrapersonal character-
istics vary in their implications for team cooperation;
innovative work behavior and expertise are most impor-
tant in this respect. Although openness and customer
orientation exhibit positive effects on cooperation, the
effect is only signiﬁcant at the 10% level. Thus, for coop-
eration in NPD teams, cognitive characteristics appear
more important than personal characteristics. Further-
more, interpersonal team characteristics, which serve as
structuring elements in the interorganizational team, are
more important
for NPD team cooperation than
intrapersonal team characteristics.

Third, relying on the input–process–output model of
team effectiveness (McGrath, 1964), this study identiﬁes
team cooperation as an important mechanism that deﬁnes
how well the interorganizational NPD team functions.
Through cooperation between team members from sup-
plier and customer companies, a supplier company can
gain valuable insights into customer needs and ideas for
new products. Even if team members retain some differ-
ences in their interests (Lawson et al., 2009), team coop-
eration is a promising pathway for achieving NPD goals
and, thus, for increasing product innovativeness. Further
research might expand on this ﬁnding to delineate the
effects of formal versus informal cooperation mecha-
nisms in interorganizational NPD teams.

integration affect

Fourth, the ﬁndings with regard to customer power and
customer participation indicate that different modes
of customer
inter-
organizational NPD teams differently. When customers
have greater power, the supplier employees’ innovation
behavior and expertise are critical for ensuring team
cooperation;
the

if customers participate extensively,

the work of

team requires certain structures, supported by innovation
norms, cohesion, and decision-making autonomy. The
results thus partly conﬁrm the frequently emphasized
importance of boundary spanners’ personal characteris-
tics; they further reveal the importance of team structures
when the team is dominated by a customer company’s
employees. Additional research might use these ﬁndings
to investigate knowledge generation mechanisms that
rely on different customer integration modes, perhaps
according to organizational
learning theory (Grant,
1996). For example, do customer power and customer
participation affect the generation of explicit and tacit
knowledge differently?

Limitations and Avenues for Future Research

Despite these contributions, this study has several limita-
tions that also suggest directions for further research.
First, though the direction of the effects suggested in the
hypotheses could be supported by the data, some of the
effects were only signiﬁcant at the 10% level, such as
those for openness and customer orientation on NPD
team cooperation. A possible reason for this low signiﬁ-
cance could be the relatively small sample size.

Second, this study only investigated interorganiza-
tional NPD teams. Consistent with extant research, this
study implicitly assumes that such teams differ from NPD
teams comprised of members from a single ﬁrm (e.g.,
Bstieler and Hemmert, 2010; Lawson et al., 2009).
However, the exact similarities and differences between
these two types of teams have not yet been studied.
Additional
research thus might determine whether
intrapersonal and interpersonal team characteristics con-
tribute to innovativeness across both interorganizational
and intraorganizational teams.

Third, the dependent variables in this study were team
effectiveness and product innovativeness. However, inno-
vation management literature increasingly emphasizes
the importance of customers’ acceptance of innovative
products
further
research should investigate the customer-related out-
comes of NPD team activities, such as customer adoption
of new products.

et al., 2006). Therefore,

(Hauser

Fourth, this study focused on selected intrapersonal
team characteristics—innovation behavior, expertise,
openness, and customer orientation—that are likely
to be particularly relevant
the cooperation in
interorganizational NPD teams. Further research could
investigate other intrapersonal characteristics identiﬁed
in extant innovation research, such as creativity, early
adoption, and lead usage.

for


CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN NPD TEAMS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

547

Fifth, the study focused on intrapersonal team charac-
teristics of the supplier employees because these are more
likely to be inﬂuenced by the supplier company. Further
research could explore how intrapersonal team character-
istics of the customer employees affect the functioning of
the team.

Sixth, the measures of team characteristics and team
cooperation exclusively came from the team members
employed by the supplier company. Thus, no insights
could be obtained on the potential perceptual differences
between supplier and customer employees
in the
interorganizational NPD team. Whether and how these
perception differences might alter the effectiveness of
NPD teams represents a worthwhile avenue for further
research.

Finally,

this study investigated an input–process–
output model of how customer integration affects the
functioning of interorganizational NPD teams and also
relied on linear relationships. However, several
team
characteristics are likely to have both positive and
negative effects on team cooperation. For example,
innovation norms contribute to team cooperation, but
beyond a certain level, they are likely to overregulate the
team members’ behaviors and draw too much attention
to details,
impeding the NPD team’s effectiveness.
Thus, further research should also examine nonlinear
relationships to better understand the functioning of
interorganizational NPD teams.

Managerial Implications

Second, managers learn that

This study also provides managerial implications. First,
managers responsible for interorganizational NPD teams
that include customer ﬁrms should realize that team
cooperation drives the effective work of their teams. To
ensure that these teams are successful, managers should
emphasize the common goals of the interorganizational
NPD team and support the cooperation within the team.
in interorganizational
NPD teams, interpersonal team characteristics are more
important
these teams than
intrapersonal characteristics. Thus, team-building activi-
ties, focusing on the development of innovation norms or
cohesion within the team, should be conducted for these
teams. Furthermore, managers engaged in interorganiza-
tional NPD teams should make sure that the team has
sufﬁcient decision-making autonomy to avoid the team
becoming ineffective.

the functioning of

for

Third, different modes of customer integration affect
the work of interorganizational teams differently; there-
fore, managers should be aware that teams need to be

shaped in accordance with the integration conditions.
When the customer employees of the teams are powerful,
the supplier partner should invest in improving the per-
sonal skills of its employees. Instead, if the customer
engages in high levels of participation, the team struc-
tures should emphasize innovation norms, cohesion, and
decision-making autonomy.

References

Adams, J. S. 1976. The structure and dynamics of behavior in organiza-
tional boundary roles. In Handbook of industrial and organizational
psychology, ed. M. Dunnette, 1175–99. Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Ahuja, G., and C. M. Lampert. 2001. Entrepreneurship in the large corpo-
ration: A longitudinal study of how established ﬁrms create break-
through inventions. Strategic Management Journal 22 (6/7): 521–43.
Aiken, L. S., and S. G. West. 1991. Multiple regression: Testing and

interpreting interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Akgün, A. E., H. Keskin, and J. C. Byrne. 2010. Procedural justice climate
in new product development teams: Antecedents and consequences.
Journal of Product Innovation Management 27 (7): 1096–111.

Aldrich, H. E., and D. Herker. 1977. Boundary spanning roles and organi-

zational structure. Academy of Management Journal 2 (2): 217–30.

Algina, J., and B. C. Moulder. 2001. A note on estimating the Jöreskog-
Yang model for latent interactions using LISREL 8.3. Structural Equa-
tion Modeling 8 (1): 40–52.

Ancona, D. G., and D. F. Caldwell. 1992. Bridging the boundary: External
teams. Administrative

activity and performance in organizational
Science Quarterly 37 (4): 634–65.

Aronson, Z. H., R. R. Reilly, and G. S. Lynn. 2006. The impact of leader
personality on new product development teamwork and performance:
The moderating role of uncertainty. Journal of Engineering and Tech-
nology Management 23 (3): 221–47.

Atuahene-Gima, K., S. F. Slater, and E. M. Olson. 2005. The contingent
value of responsive and proactive market orientation for new product
program performance. Journal of Product Innovation Management 22
(6): 464–82.

Bagozzi, R. P., and Y. Yi. 1988. On the evaluation of structural equation
models. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 16 (1): 74–95.
Barczak, G. 2010. Innovation teams. In Encyclopedia of technology and
innovation management, ed. V. K. Narayanan and C. G. O’Connor,
225–29. Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Bart, C. 1991. Controlling new products in large diversiﬁed ﬁrms: A presi-
dential perspective. Journal of Product Innovation Management 8 (1):
4–17.

Berné, E. M. 1963. The structure and dynamics of organizations and

groups. New York: Grove.

Bettencourt, L. A., and S. W. Brown. 2003. Role stressors and customer-
in service organizations.

oriented boundary-spanning behaviors
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 31 (4): 394–408.

Boston, L., and C. W. Keller. 2002. Using teams in customer-supplier

relationships. Journal for Quality & Participation 25 (3): 5–8.

Boyd, B. K., S. Gove, and M. A. Hitt. 2005. Construct measurement in
strategic management research: Illusion or reality? Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 26 (3): 239–57.

Brown, S. L., and K. M. Eisenhardt. 1995. Product development: Past
research, present ﬁndings, and future directions. Academy of Manage-
ment Review 20 (2): 343–78.

Bstieler, L., and M. Hemmert. 2010. Increasing learning and time efﬁciency
in interorganizational new product development teams. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 27 (4): 485–99.


548

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

R. M. STOCK

Calantone, R. J., R. Garcia, and C. Dröge. 2003. The effects of environ-
mental turbulence on new product development strategy planning.
Journal of Product Innovation Management 20 (2): 90–103.

Hackman, J. R. 1987. The design of work teams. In Handbook of organi-
zational behavior, ed. J. W. Lorsch, 315–42. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.

Chan, K. W., D. K. Yim, and S. S. Lam. 2010. Is customer participation in
value creation a double-edged sword? Evidence from professional
ﬁnancial services across cultures. Journal of Marketing 74 (3): 48–64.
Chaney, P. K., T. M. Devinney, and R. S. Winer. 1991. The impact of new
product introductions on the market value of ﬁrms. The Journal of
Business 64 (4): 573–610.

Christensen, C. M., and J. L. Bower. 1996. Customer power, strategic
investment, and the failure of leading ﬁrms. Strategic Management
Journal 17 (3): 197–218.

Cohen, S., and L. Bailey. 1997. What makes teams work: Group effective-
ness research from the shop ﬂoor to the executive suite. Journal of
Management 23 (3): 239–90.

Deeter-Schmelz, D. R., and R. Ramsey. 2003. An investigation of team
information processing in service teams: Exploring the link between
teams and customers. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
31 (4): 409–24.

de Jong, A., K. de Ruyter, and J. Lemmink. 2004. Antecedents and conse-
quences of service climate in boundary-spanning self-managing service
teams. Journal of Marketing 68 (2): 18–35.

de Jong, A., M. Song, and L. Song. 2011. How lead founder personality
affects new venture performance: The mediating role of team conﬂict.
Journal of Management, doi:10.1177/0149206311407509.

Denison, D. R., S. L. Hart, and J. A. Kahn. 1996. From chimneys to
cross-functional teams: Developing and validating a diagnostic model.
Academy of Management Journal 39 (4): 1005–23.

Doney, P. M., and J. P. Cannon. 1997. An examination of the nature of trust

in buyer-seller relationships. Journal of Marketing 61 (2): 35–51.

Drach-Zahavy, A. 2011. Interorganizational teams as boundary spanners:
The role of team diversity, boundedness, and extrateam links. European
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 20 (1): 89–118.

Ellemers, N., D. De Gilder, and H. Van den Heuvel. 1998. Career-oriented
versus team-oriented commitment and behavior at work. Journal of
Applied Psychology 83 (5): 717–30.

Eppler, M. J., and O. Sukowski. 2000. Managing team knowledge: Core
processes, tools and enabling factors. European Management Journal
18 (3): 334–41.

Fang, E. 2008. Customer participation and the trade-off between new
product innovativeness and speed to market. Journal of Marketing 72
(4): 90–104.

Fong, P. S., and B. W. Lung. 2007. Interorganizational teamwork in the
construction industry. Journal of Construction Engineering and
Management 133 (2): 157–68.

Fornell, C., and D. F. Larcker. 1981. Structural equation models with
unobservable variables and measurement error: Algebra and statistics.
Journal of Marketing Research 18 (3): 382–88.

Gassmann, O., C. Kausch, and E. Enkel. 2010. Negative side effects of
customer integration. International Journal of Technology Manage-
ment 50 (1): 43–63.

George, J. M., and K. Bettenhausen. 1990. Understanding prosocial behav-
ior, sales, performance, and turnover: A group-level analysis in a
service context. Journal of Applied Psychology 75 (2): 698–709.

George, J. M., and J. Zhou. 2001. When openness to experience and
conscientiousness are related to creative behavior: An interactional
approach. Journal of Applied Psychology 86 (3): 513–24.

Gerbing, D. W., and J. C. Anderson. 1988. An updated paradigm for scale
incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment.

development
Journal of Marketing Research 25 (2): 186–92.

Grant, R. M. 1996. Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic

Management Journal 17 (7): 109–22.

Grégoire, Y., D. Laufer, and T. Tripp. 2010. A comprehensive model
of customer direct and indirect revenge: Understanding the effects of
perceived greed and customer power. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 38 (6): 738–58.

Hamel, G., and C. K. Prahalad. 1994. Competing for the future. Boston,

MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Handﬁeld, R. B., G. L. Ragatz, K. J. Petersen, and R. M. Monczka. 1999.
Involving suppliers in new product development. California Manage-
ment Review 42 (1): 59–82.

Hart, O. A. 2010. Democratizing the new product development process: A
new dimension of value creation and marketing concept. International
Business Research 3 (2): 49–59.

Hauser, J., G. J. Tellis, and A. Grifﬁn. 2006. Research on innovation: A
review and agenda for marketing science. Marketing Science 26 (6):
687–717.

Hoffman, D. L., P. K. Kopalle, and T. P. Novak. 2010. The “right” consum-
ers for better concepts: Identifying consumers high in emergent nature
to develop new product concepts. Journal of Marketing Research 47
(5): 854–65.

Homburg, C., H. Krohmer, and J. P. Workman. 1999. Strategic consensus
and performance: The role of strategy type and market-related dyna-
mism. Strategic Management Journal 20 (4): 339–57.

Homburg, C., M. Müller, and M. Klarmann. 2011. When should the cus-
tomer really be the king? On the optimum level of salesperson customer
orientation in sales encounters. Journal of Marketing 75 (2): 55–74.

Hutt, M. D., E. R. Stafford, B. A. Walker, and P. H. Reingen. 2000. Deﬁning
the social network of a strategic alliance. Sloan Management Review 41
(2): 51–62.

Irwin, J. R., and G. H. McClelland. 2001. Misleading heuristics and mod-
erated multiple regression models. Journal of Marketing Research 38
(1): 100–9.

James, L. R., R. G. Demaree, and G. Wolf. 1981. Estimating within–group
interrater reliability within and without response bias. Journal of
Applied Psychology 69 (1): 85–98.

James, L. R., R. G. Demaree, and G. Wolf. 1993. rwg: An assessment of
within-group interrater agreement. Journal of Applied Psychology 78
(2): 306–9.

Janssen, O. 2000. Job demands, perceptions of effort-reward fairness and
innovative work behaviour. Journal of Occupational and Organiza-
tional Behavior 73 (3): 287–302.

Janssen, O. 2001. Fairness perceptions as a moderator in the curvilinear
relationships between job demands, and job performance and job sat-
isfaction. Academy of Management Journal 44 (5): 1039–50.

Janssen, O. 2003. Innovative behaviour and job involvement at the price of
conﬂict and less satisfactory relations with co-workers. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology 76 (3): 347–64.

Jaworski, B. J., and A. K. Kohli. 1993. Market orientation: Antecedents and

consequences. Journal of Marketing 57 (3): 53–70.

Jehn, K. 1997. Affective and cognitive conﬂict in work groups: Increasing
performance through value-based intragroup conﬂict. In Using conﬂicts
in organizations, ed. C. Dreu and E. Van de Vliert, 87–100. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.

Jespersen, K. R. 2010. User-involvement and open innovation: The case
of decision-maker openness. International Journal of Innovation
Management 14 (3): 471–89.

Jöreskog, K. G., and D. Sörbom. 1982. Recent developments in structural

equation modeling. Journal of Marketing Research 19 (4): 404–16.

Katila, R. 2002. New product search over time: Past ideas in their prime?

Academy of Management Journal 45 (5): 995–1010.

Kidwell, R. E., K. W. Mossholder, and N. Bennett. 1997. Cohesiveness and
organizational citizenship behavior: A multilevel analysis using work
groups and individuals. Journal of Management 23 (6): 775–93.

Kim, Y., and B. Lee. 1995. R&D project team climate and team perfor-
mance in Korea: A multidimensional approach. R&D Management
25 (2): 179–96.


CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN NPD TEAMS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

549

Langfred, C. W. 2007. The downside of self-management: A longitudinal
study of the effects of conﬂict on trust, autonomy, and task interdepen-
dence in self-managing teams. Academy of Management Journal
50 (4): 885–900.

Lau, C.-M., and H.-Y. Ngo. 2004. The HR system, organizational culture,
and product innovation. International Business Review 13 (6): 685–
703.

Laursen, K., and A. Salter. 2006. Open for innovation: The role of openness
in explaining innovation performance among U.K. manufacturing
ﬁrms. Strategic Management Journal 27 (2): 131–50.

Lawson, B., K. J. Peterson, P. D. Cousins, and R. B. Handﬁeld. 2009.
Knowledge sharing in interorganizational product development teams:
The effect of formal and informal socialization mechanisms. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 26 (2): 156–72.

Li, J., and D. C. Hambrick. 2005. Factional groups: A new vantage on
demographic faultlines, conﬂict, and disintegration in work teams.
Academy of Management Journal 48 (5): 794–813.

Liden, R., S. Wayne, and L. Bradway. 1997. Task interdependence as a
moderator of the relation between group control and performance.
Human Relations 50 (2): 169–82.

Lysonski, S. 1985. A boundary theory investigation of the product manag-

er’s role. Journal of Marketing Winter: 26–40.

Marsh, H. W., Z. Wen, and K.-T. Hau. 2006. Structural equation models of
latent interaction and quadratic effects. In Structural equation model-
ing: A second course, ed. G. Hancock and R. O. Mueller, 225–65.
Greenwich: IAP.

Matthing, J., B. Sandén, and B. Edvardsson. 2004. New service develop-
ment learning from and with customers. International Journal of
Service Industry Management 15 (5): 479–98.

McCrae, R. R., P. T. Costa Jr., and T. A. Martin. 2005. The NEO–PI–3: A
more readable revised NEO personality inventory. Journal of Person-
ality Assessment 84 (3): 261–70.

McCrae, R. R., and O. P. John. 1992. An introduction to the ﬁve-factor

model and its applications. Journal of Personality 62 (2): 175–215.

McGrath, J. E. 1964. Groups: Interaction and performance. Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

McNamara, G. M., R. A. Luce, and G. H. Tompson. 2002. Examining the
effect of complexity in strategic group knowledge structures on ﬁrm
performance. Strategic Management Journal 23 (2): 153–70.

Menon, K., and H. Bansal. 2006. Exploring consumer experience of social
power during service consumption. International Journal of Service
Industry Management 18 (1): 89–104.

Mills, P. K., R. B. Chase, and N. Margulies. 1983. Motivating the client/
employee system as a service production strategy. Academy of Man-
agement Review 8 (2): 301–10.

Mills, P. K., and J. H. Morris. 1986. Client as “partial” employees of service
organizations: Role development in client participation. Academy of
Management Review 11 (4): 726–35.

Miron, E., M. Erez, and E. Naveh. 2004. Do personal characteristics and
cultural values that promote innovation, quality, and efﬁciency compete
or complement each other? Journal of Organizational Behavior 25 (2):
175–99.

Montoya-Weiss, M. M., A. P. Massey, and M. Song. 2001. Getting it
together: Temporal coordination and conﬂict management in global
virtual teams. Academy of Management Journal 44 (6): 1251–62.

Mumin, D., and S. Elbanna. 2011. Antecedents of team intuition and its
impact on the success of new product development projects. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 28 (S1): 159–74.

Muthén, L. K., and B. O. Muthén. 2007. Mplus user’s guide (5th ed.). Los

Angeles, CA: Muthén & Muthén.

Nunnally, J. C. 1978. Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York:

McGraw-Hill.

Oldham, G. R., and A. Cummings. 1996. Employee creativity: Personal and
contextual factors at work. Academy of Management Journal 39 (3):
607–34.

Oliver, D., and J. Roos. 2002. Dealing with surprises: Collaborating in an
alliance team. In Cooperative strategies and alliances, ed. F. J.
Contractor and P. Lorange, 849–76. Boston, MA: Pergamon.

Paladino, A. 2008. Analyzing the effects of market and resource orienta-
tions on innovative outcomes in times of turbulence. Journal of Product
Innovation Management 25 (6): 577–92.

Perry, M. L., C. L. Pearce, and H. P. Sims Jr. 1999. Empowered selling
teams: How shared leadership can contribute to selling team outcomes.
Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 14 (3): 35–51.

Petersen, K. J., R. B. Handﬁeld, and G. L. Ragatz. 2003. A model of
supplier integration into new product development. Journal of Product
Innovation Management 20 (4): 284–300.

Petersen, K. J., R. B. Handﬁeld, and G. L. Ragatz. 2005. Supplier integra-
tion into new product development: Coordinating product, process and
supply chain design. Journal of Operations Management 23 (3-4):
371–88.

Pfeffer, J. 1982. Organizations and organization theory. Marshﬁeld, MA:

Pitman.

Pfeffer, J., and G. R. Salancik. 1978. The external control of organizations:

A resource dependence perspective. New York: Harper & Row.

Prahalad, C. K., and V. Ramaswamy. 2003. The new frontier of experience

innovation. MIT Sloan Management Review 44 (Summer): 12–18.

Ragatz, G. L., R. B. Handﬁeld, and K. J. Petersen. 2002. Beneﬁts associated
with supplier integration into new product development under condi-
tions of technology uncertainty. Journal of Business Research 55 (5):
389–400.

Sanchez, A. M., and L. N. Elola. 1991. Product innovation management in

Spain. Journal of Product Innovation Management 8 (1): 49–56.

Saxe, R., and B. Weitz. 1982. The SOCO Scale: A measure of the customer
orientation of salespeople. Journal of Marketing Research 19 (3): 343–
51.

Schopler, J. H. 1987. Interorganizational groups: Origins, structure, and

outcomes. Academy of Management Review 12 (4): 702–13.

Scott, S. G., and R. A. Bruce. 1994. Determinants of innovative behavior: A
path model of individual innovation in the workplace. Academy of
Management Journal 37 (3): 580–607.

Seers, A., M. Petty, and J. F. Cashman. 1995. Team-member exchange
under team and traditional management: A naturally occurring quasi-
experiment. Group & Organization Management 20 (1): 18–38.

Slater, S. F., and J. C. Narver. 1994. Does competitive environment mod-
erate the market orientation-performance relationship? Journal of Mar-
keting 58 (1): 46–55.

Smith, K. G., C. J. Collins, and K. D. Clark. 2005. Existing knowledge
creation capability, and the rate of new product in introduction in
high-technology ﬁrms. Academy of Management Journal 48 (2): 346–
57.

Song, X. M., M. M. Montoya-Weiss, and J. B. Schmidt. 1997. Antecedents
and consequences of cross-functional cooperation: A comparison of
R&D, manufacturing, and marketing perspectives. Journal of Produc-
tion Innovation Management 14 (1): 35–47.

Souder, W. E., J. D. Sherman, and R. Davies-Cooper. 1998. Environmental
uncertainty, organizational integration, and new product development
effectiveness: A test of contingency theory. Journal of Product Inno-
vation Management 15 (6): 520–33.

Stock, R. M. 2006. Interorganizational

teams as boundary spanners
between supplier and customer companies. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 31 (4): 558–99.

Stock, R. M., and W. Hoyer. 2005. An attitude-behavior model of sales-
people’s customer orientation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science 33 (4): 536–52.

Takeishi, A. 2001. Bridging inter- and intra-ﬁrm boundaries: Management
of supplier involvement in automobile product development. Strategic
Management Journal 22 (5): 403–33.

Thibaut, J. W., and H. H. Kelley. 1959. The social psychology of groups.

New York: John Wiley.


550

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

R. M. STOCK

Thomke, S., and E. von Hippel. 2002. Customers as innovators: A new way

to create value. Harvard Business Review 80 (4): 74–81.

Thompson, J. D. 1967. Organizations in action. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Venkatesh, A., and D. L. Wilemon. 1976. Interpersonal inﬂuence in product

management. Journal of Marketing 40 (4): 33–40.

Vissers, G., and B. Dankbaar. 2002. Creativity in multidisciplinary new
product development teams. Creativity & Innovation Management
11 (1): 31–43.

von Hippel, E. 1988. Lead user analyses for the development of new

industrial products. Management Science 34 (5): 569–82.

Wheeler, J. S., R. Mansﬁeld, and D. Todd. 1980. Structural implications of
organizational dependence upon customers and owners: Similarities
and differences. Organizational Studies 1 (4): 327–48.

Zahra, S. A., and A. P. Nielsen. 2002. Sources of capabilities, integration
and technology commercialization. Strategic Management Journal
23 (5): 377–98.

Appendix. Measures and Items

BASIC EFFECTS
NPD team effectiveness* (Stock, 2006).1 (CR = .80;
AVE = .57).
Please refer to the following statements. The team . . .
. . . mostly achieves the team goals.
. . . performs very well.
. . . overall is very successful in developing new products.

Intrapersonal Team Characteristics of Supplier
Employees2
Innovative work behavior* (reduced scale of Janssen,
2000, 2001, 2003) (CR = .91; AVE = .79).
The members of our team . . .
. . . engage in creating new ideas for difﬁcult issues.
. . . support innovative ideas.
. . . transform innovative ideas into useful applications.

Expertise* (expanded from Doney and Cannon, 1997).
(CR = .86; AVE = .61).
The members of our team . . .
. . . know their company’s product range very well.
. . . are typically very well informed.
. . . are very knowledgeable.
. . . know about the newest developments (new products,
new technologies etc.).
. . . know the competitors’ product/services range very
well.

Openness* (McCrae, Costa, and Martin, 2005; McCrae
and John, 1992). (CR = .90; AVE = .78).
The members of our team . . .
. . . believe variety is the spice of life.
. . . sometimes make changes just
different.
. . . have creative tendencies.

to try something

Customer orientation* (Stock and Hoyer, 2005).
(CR = .82; AVE = .63).
The members of our team . . .
. . . are very customer oriented.
. . . always have the customers’ best interest in mind.
. . . enjoy interacting with customers.

Interpersonal NPD Team Characteristics2
Innovation norms* (adapted from Denison et al., 1996).
(CR = .91; AVE = .77).
In our team . . .
. . . it is clear what is acceptable behavior for innovation
generation and what is not acceptable.
. . . it is clear what members are expected to do in terms
of generating innovations and they do it.
. . . we have clear standards for the innovation behavior of
the team members.

(CR = .86;

Cohesion* (adapted from Jehn, 1997).
AVE = .67). In our team . . .
. . . members generally like the other members.
. . . members like to stay in this team.
. . . there is a high team spirit.
. . . members appreciate each other personally.
. . . members enjoy being a member of this work unit.

Decision-making autonomy* (adapted from Langfred,
2007, to the team-level). (CR = .75; AVE = .50). Our
team . . .
. . . is able to choose the way to go about the work in the
team.
. . . decides autonomously how to fulﬁll its tasks.
. . . deﬁnes our tasks independently.
. . . deﬁnes the required activities and methods to fulﬁll
our tasks autonomously.
. . . deﬁnes the order of task completion autonomously.

MEDIATOR VARIABLE

Team cooperation* (expanded from Bettencourt and
Brown, 2003). (CR = 74; AVE = .50). The members of
our team . . .
. . . work intensively together during the development of
new products.
. . . provide advice to other members.
. . . help other team members with heavy work load.

MODERATOR VARIABLES
Suppliers’ Dependence on the Customer2
(CR = .83;
2006).
Customer
AVE = .66). Please evaluate the extent to which the fol-

power**

(Stock,


CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN NPD TEAMS

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2014;31(3):535–551

551

lowing decisions are inﬂuenced by customer members in
your team. Decisions on . . .
. . . deﬁnition of team goals.
. . . selection of activities and methods employed in order
to fulﬁll the team tasks.
. . . the use of resources in order to fulﬁll the team tasks.
. . . distribution of tasks within the team.
Customer participation. (CR = –; AVE = –).
Fraction (percentage) of NPD team members employed
by a customer.

Suppliers’ Environmental Uncertainty2
Market dynamism* (adapted from Homburg et al., 1999).
(CR = .85; AVE = .68).
In our industry . . .
. . . products/services
frequently.
. . . sales strategies by our competitors change frequently.
. . . customer preferences in product features change
frequently.

competitors

change

our

of

. . . customer preferences in price/performance features
change frequently.
. . . competitors change frequently.

Technological turbulence* (Jaworski and Kohli, 1993).
(CR = .89; AVE = .73).
In our industry . . .
. . . the technology is changing rapidly.
. . . technological changes provide big opportunities in
our industry.
. . . a large number of new product ideas have been made
possible through technological breakthroughs in our
industry.

*Seven-point Likert-type scale, anchored by “strongly
agree” and “strongly disagree.”
**Seven-point scale, anchored by 1 = “decision is totally
under the control of team members from our company”
and 7 = “decision is totally under the control of custom-
ers members in the team.”
(1) team leader data; (2) team member data.

