INFORMATION TO USERS

This  manuscript  has been reproduced from  the microfilm master.  UMI 
films the text directly from the  original  or copy submitted.  Thus,  some 
thesis and  dissertation copies are in typewriter face,  while others  may be 
from any type of computer printer.

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the 
copy  submitted.  Broken  or  indistinct  print,  colored  or  poor  quality 
illustrations  and  photographs,  print  bleedthrough,  substandard  margins, 
and improper alignment can adversely afreet reproduction.

In  the  unlikely  event  that  the  author  did  not  send  UMI  a  complete 
manuscript  and  there  are  missing  pages,  these  will  be  noted.  Also,  if 
unauthorized copyright material  had to  be removed,  a note will  indicate 
the deletion.

Oversize  materials  (e.g.,  maps,  drawings,  charts)  are  reproduced  by 
sectioning  the  original,  beginning  at  the  upper  left-hand  comer  and 
continuing from left to right in equal sections with  small overlaps.  Each 
original is also photographed in  one exposure and  is included in reduced 
form at the back of the book.

Photographs  included  in  the  original  manuscript  have  been  ieproduced 
xerographically  in  this  copy.  Higher  quality  6” x  9” black  and  white 
photographic  prints  are  available  for  any  photographs  or  illustrations 
appearing in this copy for an additional charge.  Contact UMI directly to 
order.

UMI

A Bell & Howell Information Company 

300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor  MI  48106-1346 USA 

313/761-4700 

800/521-0600

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Reproduced with  permission  of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without permission.


ADAPTATION TO ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE: A STUDY OF 

MIDDLE MANAGERS*  COPING STYLES AND THEIR CORRELATES

by

CYNTHIA STAEHLE MOODY

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements 

for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy

Thesis Advisor:  Dr. Eric Neilsen

Department of Organizational Behavior 

CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY 

May,  1998

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


UMI Number:  9833917

Copyright 199 8 by 

Staehle Moody,  Cynthia Marie

All rights reserved.

UMI Microform 9833917 

Copyright 1998, by UMI Company.  All rights reserved.

This microform edition is protected against unauthorized 

copying under Title 17, United States Code.

UMI

300 North Zeeb Road 
Ann Arbor,  MI 48103

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Copyright c (1998) by Cynthia Staehle Moody

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY 

SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES

We  hereby approve  the  thesis/dissertation of

candidate for the  P U   “Q ______________________ degree.*

(signed)_

lLl  R

(chair of committee)

/Z / 7~>«J±

& ____

(date)  ___________ / .?dT.

*We  also  certify that written approval has been obtained for 
any proprietary material  contained therein.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


I grant to  Case Western Reserve  University the right to use 
this work,  irrespective of any copyright,  for the University’s 
own purposes without cost to the University or to its students, 
agents and employees.  I further agree  that the University 
may reproduce and provide single copies of the work,  in any 
format other than in or from microforms,  to  the public for 
the  cost of reproduction.

(sign)

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


ADAPTATION TO ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE: A STUDY OF MIDDLE 

MANAGERS’  COPING STYLES .AND THEIR CORRELATES

Abstract

by

CYNTHIA STAEHLE MOODY

This  dissertation addresses  how middle  managers cope  with organizational change, 

specifically focusing on encouraging proactive coping styles.  This is an important topic  for 

research given the amount and rate of change in today's organizational life. The literature on 

coping  suggests  that  we  arrive  at  our  workplaces  with  particular coping  styles  which  are 

relatively stable.  How can managers of organizational change understand coping styles well 

enough  to  prepare  people  for  major  organizational  change  and foster proactivity?  This 

dissertation  looks at coping style correlates  in  organizational  life:  how one  has  dealt  with 

role conflicts  in  the  past,  one's experience  of current  role conflict,  the  extent  to  which  one 

feels  valued  by  the  organization  (organization-based  self-esteem  [OBSE]),  one's  positive 

and negative job affect, one’s status in the organization, how well one’s individual needs are 

met  going  through  the  change  process,  whether  or  not  one  perceives  the  organization’s 

culture as encouraging proactivity, and the way in which organizational change is  managed. 

Forty  middle  managers  (foremen  and  engineers)  working  in  a  medium-sized,  non-union. 

Midwest  manufacturing  plant  participated  in  this  research study,  representing about  half of 

the supervisory group in the plant at the time of the research.  Participants  were interviewed 

in  the Fall of  1996 prior to plant redesign, and in  the Spring of  1997 entering into redesign. 

Information  from  the  first  interviews  was  used  to  develop  an  extensive  follow-up  survey 

which participants filled out in December of 1996. Along with the survey, participants filled

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.

ii


out the OBSE  measure, a role conflict measure, a job affect measure, and responded to four 

role  conflict  scenarios  (“Think  of a  time  when  .  .  .  How  did  you  respond?").  From  the 

survey,  a subset  of items  was  extracted  and  used  to  develop  a  measure  of “Propensity  for 

ProactivityL astly, a thematic analysis of OBSE items was done.

Results of the research show support for the stability of coping styles over time, and 

consistency  across  measures:  participants’  proactivity  ratings 

from 

the 

interviews. 

Propensity  for  Proactivity  scores,  and  responses  to  role  conflict  scenarios  were  all 

significantly intercorrelated.  One of the  most significant  findings related to the  importance 

of OBSE in coping styles:  the higher the OBSE, the more proactive the coping style.  Also, 

while  most  of  the  participants’  coping  styles  were  consistent  over  the  course  of  the 

interviews,  for  those  people  whose  coping  styles  did  change,  changes  were  attributed  to 

OBSE-related management cues.  Results also highlight the significant  negative correlation 

between  the  amount  of role  conflict  present  in  one’s job  and  their  OBSE,  Propensity  for 

Proactivity,  general job  satisfaction,  and job  affect.  Clearly,  role  conflict  has  a deleterious 

impact on these variables.

Study  limitations  and  implications  for  managing  major  organizational  change  are 

discussed.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.

i i i


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The nature of the task of completing a dissertation  in some  ways  feels very solitary. 
It  requires  one  to  spend  prolonged,  intense  periods  of time  both  in  waking  and  sleeping 
hours  integrating what one reads about and what one experiences of one’s dissertation topic. 
Therefore,  successful completion of a  dissertation  project  requires  mental,  emotional,  and 
physical  perseverance  beyond  what  seems  humanly  possible at  times.  As  I  begin  to  write 
up this project,  it is  with  humility  and deep appreciation  that I express  my  gratitude  to  the 
many  people  who  have guided  and encouraged  me  over the years.  Through countless  gifts 
of  love  expressed  to  me  through  academic  and  intellectual,  financial,  emotional  and 
spiritual forms of support I am prepared to graduate.

My quest began over fourteen years ago when  I started applying to graduate schools 
at  the  age  of  twenty.  My  advisor  at  the  University  of  Maryland's  Department  of 
Psychology,  Dr.  Benjamin Schneider, told me that  my Graduate  Record  Exam scores were 
probably  not  high  enough  to  get  me  into  any  Ph.D.  programs  in  Industrial/Organizational 
Psychology or Organizational  Behavior.  Although he wrote a wonderfully supportive  letter 
of recommendation  ,  I received  letters of rejection  from all  seven of the  Ph.D.  programs  to 
which  I applied that Spring of  1985,  including the one  from which  I am  being graduated. 
Indeed, every cloud has a silver lining.  I was accepted  into two Masters Degree programs. 
Off to Stevens Institute of Technology’s  Applied Psychology program I went, determined to 
prove  my scholastic capability  at  the  graduate  level.  After completing  a Master of Science 
degree,  I  was  accepted  into  their Ph.D.  program,  in  which  I spent  more  than  a year taking 
courses,  wishing  for the opportunity  to  focus  more  on  the  group  and  organization  level  of 
analysis, and international  issues in organization development.  I reapplied to Case Western 
Reserve University's Department of Organizational  Behavior and began again.  Armed with 
four more years  of experience and  travels  in  India and Latin America,  I  put on  my  boldest 
business attire and went to an  interview.  My sincere gratitude to Dr. J.  Myron Johnson,  my 
advisor  at  Stevens  Institute  of Technology,  and  Dr.  Karl  Springob,  director  of the  Career 
Center, for their support and encouragement through that year of transition.

Heartfelt thanks to everyone on my dissertation committee:

Dr.  Eric  Neilsen.  Department  of  Organizational  Behavior,  dissertation  committee 
chair:  for  mentoring  me  through  both  qualifying  and  dissertation  phases  of  this  degree 
program. 
I  am  deeply  grateful  to  you  for  the  many  things  I  have  learned  about  life  in 
organizations  and  developing  models  for  understanding  organizational  dynamics.  Your 
enduring  encouragement has  helped  me  through  several  hurdles  which  have  threatened  to 
prevent  me  from  finishing  this  degree.  Muchisimas gracias -  que  Dios  le  bendiga ahora y 
para siempre.

Dr.  Donald  Wolfe.  Department  of Organizational  Behavior:  for  your  support  and 
encouragement over the years,  and your willingness to serve on  this dissertation committee.
I thank you for being available over the years as a guide and friend. Muito obrigada.

iv

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Dr.  Vanessa Druskat, Department of Organizational Behavior:  for your support and 
encouragement throughout this dissertation  process.  I  thank you  for all  of the  help  you've 
given  me:  especially  in  encouraging  me  to  find  those  ‘gems'  in  doing  the  research  and  to 
mine them.

Dr.  Dale  Flowers,  Department  of  Operations  Research:  for  your  willingness  to 
serve on this dissertation committee:  for lending your ideas and technical expertise,  and for 
your support and encouragement throughout this dissertation process.

Thanks  to  Dr.  Thomas  Love,  Department  of Operations  Research:  for  all  of your 
support  with  the  statistical  analyses:  and  Retta Holdorf and  Dan  Kowall  for making sure  I 
had  access  to  the  hardware  and  software  I  needed  to  complete  the  analyses  in  a  timely 
fashion.

Heartfelt  thanks  to  the  forty  research  participants  and  others  from  the  company 
whom  I  can  not  name  publicly  (you  know  who  you  are!)  for  sharing  your  work  life 
perspectives and making this  research possible.  I admire  the courage  and  loyalty you  have 
demonstrated  in  helping  the  company  succeed  at  its  goals  despite  the  amount  of personal 
stress  and  degree  of uncertainty  because  of  the  changing  nature  of the  organization  as  it 
faces the challenges of its business environment.

Throughout  these  years  at  CWRU,  I  have  been  privileged  to  continue  to  travel 
internationally.  With  guidance  from  former  Assistant  Dean  of Graduate  Studies,  Edward 
Verhosek,  I obtained  funding  from the  Eva  Pancoast  Fellowship  for women  and  matching 
funds  from  the  Department  of  Organizational  Behavior,  and  was  supported  to  represent 
CWRU  at  the  42nd  Japan-America  Student  Conference.  JASC  united  a  group  of eighty 
students from universities in the  U.S. and Japan for a month of travel, education, and fun in 
Tokyo,  Nigata  and  Sapporo.  The  following  year,  my  advisor,  Eric  Neilsen,  through  the 
Ecology of Work Life Conference  and the Herb Sheppard Memorial  Fund supported me to 
do  research  on  nonprofit  and  non-governmental  development  organizations  in  Japan  and 
South Korea.  I was also able to visit colleagues  in the field of Organization Development in 
two cities in the Northeast of Brasil.

Most grateful  thanks to Dr.  Dennis  Gallagher,  an  alumnus of CWRU’s  Department 
of Organizational  Behavior,  for innumerable  hours of professional  mentorship  through  two 
very  formative consulting opportunities during my education at CWRU.  I was able to work 
for  the  U.S.  Air  Force’s  Avionics  Laboratory  Director  on  a  Total  Quality  Management 
initiative,  and  for 3M  Pharmaceuticals' Northridge plant  Manager on  a Self-Directed  Work 
Team effort.  My  appreciation  also  to  Jim  Vaughan  at  3M  Northridge  whose  trust  in  my 
abilities  and whose unconditional  support was  the source of organization-based self-esteem 
which allowed me to grow both professionally and personally.  He was a true role model of 
what Robert Quinn calls "Deep Change".

Thanks also to several other people whose academic guidance  has  been  invaluable: 
Dr.  Edwin A. Locke, my honors thesis advisor at the University of Maryland, whose theory 
of motivation  through  goal  setting  has  been  helpful  to  me  in  the  management  of my  own

V

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


life:  and  to  Dr.  Lisa  Berlinger  who  served  on  my  qualifying  committee  for  research  on 
nonprofit organizations  and  non-governmental  development  organizations  in  Japan.  Your 
friendship over the years has  been a true gift.

To  Dr.  E.E.  Inman,  Dr.  Bettina  Katz,  and  Kay  Bontrager.  most  sincere  thanks  for 
your  guidance  and  compassion  in  mentoring  me  through  difficult  life  transitions  and 
situations. 
I  greatly  admire  your  dedication  to  helping  people  live  emotionally  and 
spiritually healthy lives.

It  is  said  that  behind every  good  man.  there  is  a  good  woman.  I  also  believe  that 
behind every doctoral  candidate who  finishes a dissertation there are  a host of good  family 
members and  friends.  I am truly blessed to have all o f you  in my  life.  I want to especially 
thank  my  mother.  Peg  Duvall,  whose  unconditional  love,  constant  companionship  and 
financial support have encouraged me to keep the goal  in  focus despite the many challenges 
along the way.  I also thank my stepfather. John Duvall,  for his loving and gentle spirit over 
the years, whose willingness to accompany my mom on several trips to Ohio, listen to many 
hours  of dissertation  conversation,  and  accept  telephone  calls  at  any  hour has  been  greatly 
appreciated.  I  sincerely  thank  my  brother,  Mark  Staehle,  for  his  encouragement  over  the 
years, and also  for taking  the time to help  me develop  a dependent variable coding scheme 
despite  being  in  the  final  stage  of  his  own  M.B.A.  program  and  trying  to  cope  with 
graduation  and  job  hunting.  I  thank  my  father.  Michael  Staehle,  for  his  support  and 
encouragement  over  the  years.  When  I  have  given  him  reasons  for  why  I  "can't"  do 
something,  he  has  taught  me  to  think  of ways  I  "can”.  I  also  thank  my  stepmother,  Ruth 
Staehle,  for her love  and encouragement;  her example  of grace and  forethought has been  a 
source  of  inspiration  to  me  throughout  my  school  years. 
I  want  to  express  deep 
appreciation to my dear aunt and uncle,  Betty and Bob Revard, who have also mentored me 
throughout  my  years  in  graduate  schools:  for  all  the  sage  advice  and  tender  loving  care, 
letters,  telephone  calls,  and  for  commenting  on  drafts  of  both  my  qualifying  paper  and 
dissertation.  I  also  want  to  thank  my  uncle.  Dr.  Jon  Allen,  a  clinical  psychologist  at  the 
Menninger Foundation  in  Topeka.  Kansas,  for  his  love  and  encouragement  over the  years 
and through this dissertation process.  I thank my husband.  Robert.  While I have been back 
in  Ohio this  past year he has been  home applying  to  Washington State  University's  School 
of Veterinary  Medicine  in  hopes of a second career as  a large  animal  veterinarian.  He  has 
been accepted -   Praise  God!  I thank my  friends  at  home  in  Washington  from Oak  Harbor 
Southern Baptist church whose prayers and encouragement from across the miles have been 
very much appreciated: especially Mary and David Hnosko.  You two have seen me through 
some pretty tough times.  I can still hear Mary say. "Honey,  you’ve just got to  go back and 
get it done."

I  give  many  a  heartfelt  thank  you  to  all  of  my  companions  from  the  doctoral 
program:  Jim and Beverlee  Ludema whose examples of character and integrity  have been a 
source of inspiration over the years, whose  friendship  I cherish, and whose support  through 
some of the  most difficult times has helped  to keep me pursuing my goals;  Mark Sullivan, 
who lobbied for me while  I was out on the West coast  trying to adjust to married life,  that  I 
not  be  forgotten;  David  Leonard,  who  so  graciously  stored  all  of my  belongings  while  I 
was  in  Los  Angeles  consulting  at  3M,  and  Ram  Tenkasi,  who  had  graduated  and  taken  a

v i

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


the  University  of  Southern  California's  Center  for  Effective 
research  position  at 
Organizations,  for  his  professional  support  while  I  was  in  the  area:  Mary  Finney,  whose 
friendship  and encouragement  I  have greatly  appreciated:  Kathy  Gurley,  for her friendship 
and  for all  of the  professional  conversations  which  led  to  a  terrific  tour of an  earth-mover 
tire  manufacturing  company  in  Kobe.  Japan,  and  the  discovery  of the  Organization-Based 
Self-Esteem  measure  I  have  used  in  this  research;  Bonnie  Copes,  for  your  prayers  and 
support: and, Beatriz Rivera,  for your prayers, your friendship, and for seeing me through to 
the end with  flowers  for the  defense and  formatting of the dissertation:  Babis  Mainemelis. 
for all of the delicious meals you've cooked when I could not cook for myself:  and to all of 
my classmates: Julie Cox,  Patricia Jensen, Changkil  Park.  Ken  Rhee. Leonel Sa Maia.  Lora 
Schwartz, and Craig Wishart, who lived with me through two years of intensive coursework 
and  beyond.  I  want you  all  to  know  how  much  I  appreciate  having  been  able  to share  the 
variety of experiences with you throughout my years as a student in this department.

I  also  thank  my  dear  friend  Hong  Liang,  who  completed  a  Ph.D.  in  Materials 
Science  from  Stevens  Institute  of Technology  while  I  was  doing  my  Master's  degree,  for 
her love and encouragement over these past eleven years.

The  most formative  learning  experience  for me throughout my years  at CWRU  has 
been  becoming  a  Christian  and  having  my  worldview  radically  transformed.  At  a  time 
when  postmodern  thought  and  social  constructionism  have  dominated  discussion  in  the 
social  sciences  as  a  natural  continuation  of  18th  century  Humanistic  philosophies,  I  have 
accepted Jesus Christ as  my personal Lord and Savior.  As it was  written  by  King David of 
Israel (Psalm 40, excerpts from the King James Version),

The LORD hath set  my feet upon a rock and established
my goings;  He hath put a new song in my mouth;
Blessed is he that maketh the LORD His trust.

I  thank  the  following  pastors  and  their  wives  for  their  mentorship  and  friendship over  the 
years:  Rev.  Douglas  and  JoAnn  King,  who  were  at  Church  of  the  Epiphany  in  South 
Euclid,  OH and are  now at St.  Bamabus Anglican church  in  Lynnwood,  WA;  Rt.  Rev.  Dr. 
Samuel  Scheibler  and  Revs.  John  Carlson,  Paul  Siaki  and  Chris  Allen  at  St.  Alban’s 
Evangelical  Anglican  church  in  Brea.  CA;  Pastor  Grafton  and  Jonell  Robinson  at  Oak 
Harbor  Southern  Baptist  church  and  Father  Scott  and  Chitra  Wright  at  St.  Stephen’s 
Episcopal  church  in  Oak  Harbor.  WA:  and.  Pastor Jim  and  Lynn  Mayes,  Pastor Paul  and 
Darleen  George,  Pastor  Cutberto  and  Lilian  Medina  at  Painesville  Baptist  church  in 
Painesville,  OH:  and.  my  stepbrother.  Bob  Bew  at  the  Word  Alive  Fellowship  in  Palm 
Beach. FL.  I thank you all for your prayers, your faith and personal  testimonies which have 
been  a source  of encouragement  for  me  over the  years,  and  for  Biblical  instmction  which 
has  helped  me  to grow  in  the  knowledge of and love  for Almighty God.  I also express  my 
appreciation  to  all  of those  at  Painesville  Baptist church  who  have  kept  me  in  prayer  as  I 
have been finishing this work: especially Monica Volke,  Paula Lewis.  Becky Griffith. Carol 
Hill,  Shelba  Anderson.  Ed  Woods.  Troy  and  Mary  Messer,  Barbara  Sullivan,  and  Patrice 
Toth.

vi i

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


I  thank  those  who  have  provided  homes  away  from  home  for  me  throughout  this 
lengthy  process: 
those  at  Lake  Erie  College  who  made  it  possible  for  me  to  spend  nine 
months  at  the  Mathews  House,  a  historic  home  built  in  the  early  1800s  by  Connecticut 
architect Jonathan Goldsmith:  Patricia Gray who has adopted me  into her family and given 
me  a home  when  I  have  needed  tender  loving  care  the  most:  and.  Jenny  and  Ken  Gallion. 
who lent me their cabin in the woods so that I could hide myself away to write.

Lastly,  thanks  to  everyone  who  came  to  my  dissertation  defense  and  made  the  day 

so very special.  I truly enjoyed being able to share my work with you.

viii

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER  1:  INTRODUCTION 

I. 

Introduction to the Topic of Organizational Change 

13.  Overview of Purpose for the Dissertation 

CHAPTER 2:  LITERATURE REVIEW 

I.  Review of the Literature 

How People Cope with Major Organizational Change 

Determinants of How People Cope with Organizational 
Change 

How People Deal with Situations of 
RoieConflict 
The Amount of Role Conflict Experienced 
Organization-Based Self-Esteem 
Positive and Negative Job Affect 
One’s Status in the Organization as Indicated 
by Structure and Policies 
Meeting Individual Needs During 
Organizational Change 
Organization Culture 
Management of the Change Process 

Toward the Greatest Good for the Individual and the 
Organization 

II.  Research Propositions and Questions 

CHAPTER 3:  METHODOLOGY 

I. 

Introduction to the Research 

II.  Research Design and Methodology 

in.  Development and Validation of the Measures Used 

A. Structured Interviews #1  and #2 

B. Year-End Survey 

ix

p.  L

p.  I

p.  5

p.  9

p.  9

p.  9

p.  17

p.  18
p.  23
p. 24
p.  26

p. 29

p. 30
p. 35
p.  38

p. 47

p. 48

p.  51

p. 51

p. 53

p. 56

p.  56

p. 60

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


CHAPTER 4:  RESULTS 

I.  History of Organization Developments:  The Setting 

II.  Analyses and Results 

Proposition #1  and Related Findings 

Proposition #2 and Related Findings 

1. Role Conflict and OBSE 
2. Role Conflict and Propensity  for Proactivity 
3. Role Conflict and General Job Satisfaction 
4.  Role Conflict and Job Affect 

Proposition #3 and Related Findings 

Proposition #4 

Proposition #5 and Related Findings 

1. Status and Propensity for Proactivity 
2. Status and Role Conflict 
3. Status and Job Affect 

Proposition #6 

Proposition #7 and Related Findings 

Proposition ff8 and Related Findings 

Additional Emergent Research Findings 

Research Question #1 

Research Question #2 

CHAPTER 5:  DISCUSSION 

I.  Review of Propositions 

Review of Proposition # I 

Review of Proposition #2 

X

p.  70

p.  70

p.  95

p. 95

p.  100

p.  102
p.  102
p.  102
p.  103

p.  104

p.  120

p.  121

p.  124
p.  124
p.  126

p.  126

p.  128

p.  134

p.  141

p.  147

p.  150

p.  153

p.  153

p.  153

p.  155

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Review of Proposition #3

Rev iew of Proposition #4

Review of Proposition #5

Review of Proposition #6

Review of Proposition #7

Review of Proposition #8

Review of Additional Research Findings

Review of Research Question #1

Review of Research Question #2

II.  Study Limitations

Development of a Proactivity Code

Development of Propositions

Longitudinal Stability of Proactivity

Relationship Between OBSE and Proactivity

Understanding Reactivity

in.  Concluding Remark

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX H

APPENDIX m

APPENDIX IV

APPENDIX V

APPENDIX VI

APPENDIX VH

p.  156

p.  166

p.  167

p.  168

p.  169

p.  170

p.  171

p.  173

p.  173

p.  174

p.  174

p.  175

p.  175

p.  176

p.  176

p.  176

p.  178

p.  179

p.  180

p.  195

p.  196

p.  198

p.  199

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


APPENDIX Vm

APPENDIX DC

APPENDIX X

APPENDIX XI

APPENDIX Xn

APPENDIX X m

APPENDIX XIV

LITERATURE CITED

p. 204

p. 205

p. 207

p. 211

p. 212

p. 224

p. 230

p. 232

xii

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


LIST OF FIGURES

Figure  1:  Cognitive Approach to Modifying Thoughts and Feelings 

Figure 2:  Dimensions of Proactivity -  Behavioral and Emotional 

Figure 3:  Systhesis of Role Conflict Response Frameworks 

Figure 4:  Dimensions of Proactivity and Corresponding Role Conflict

Scenario Responses 

p.  14

p.  15

p.  21

p.  96

xiii

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


LIST OF TABLES

Table  la:  Inter-item and Item-total Correlations for Questions

Used to Measure  Sent Role Conflict 

Table  lb:  Inter-item and Item-total Correlations for Questions

Used to Measure  Role Ambiguity  Conflict 

Table  Ic:  Inter-item and Item-total Correlations for Questions
Used to Measure  Inter/Intra Personal Role Conflict 
Table  Id:  Inter-item and Item-total Correlations for Questions

Used to Measure Systems Role Conflict 

Table 2:  Revised Propensity for Proactivity Measure 

Table 3a:  Year-End Survey (PeopIe-to-People Relationships) 
Table 3b:  Year-End Survey (Plant Culture) 
Table 3c:  Year-End Survey (Vision and Future) 
Table 3d:  Year-End Survey (Conflict) 
Table 3e:  Year-End Survey (Influence/Leadership) 
Table 3f:  Year-End Survey (Loyalty) 
Table 3g:  Year-End Survey (Career Development/Training/

Recognition) 

Table 3h:  Year-End Survey (Customers) 
Table 3i:  Year-End Survey (Decision Making/Empowerment) 
Table 3j:  Year-End Survey (Redesign) 
Table 3k:  Year-End Survey (Work Orientation and Values) 

Table 4:  Correlations Between Average Total Scores Across

Categories and Single Category Scores for each 
Role Conflict Scenario 

Table 5:  Correlations between Role Conflict Items and Proactivity

Ratings from Structured Interviews #1 

Table 6:  Correlations Between Role Conflict and Job Affect 

Table 7a:  Changes in Proactivity Ratings Between Structured

Interviews #1  and #2 (upward changes) 

Table 7b:  Changes in Proactivity Ratings Between Structured

Interviews #1  and #2 (downward changes) 

Table 8a:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

Table 8b:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

Table 8c:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

(Important) 

(Helpful) 

(Trusted) 

p. 62

p. 63

p. 64

p. 65

p. 68

p. 82
p. 83
p.  84
p.  85
p.  86
p. 87

p.  88
p.  89
p. 90
p. 92
p. 93

p. 99

p.  101

p.  103

p.  106

p.  107

p.  108

p.  110

p.  111

xiv

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Table 8d:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

Table 8e:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

Table 8f:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

Table 8g:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

Table 8h:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

Table 8i:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

Table 8j:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #2

(Taken Seriously) 

(Valued) 

(Like You Counted) 

(Cooperative) 

(Make a Difference) 

(Efficient) 

(Faith in You) 

Table 9:  OBSE Item Intercorrelations 

Table  10:  Mean Score and Range of Ratings for OBSE Items 

Table  11:  Status and Proactivity 

Table  12:  Correlations Between Status and Role Conflict Items 

Table  13:  Correlations Between Year-End Survey Items and
Proactivity Ratings from Structured Interview #1 

Table  14:  Elements of Culture which May Encourage or Discourage

Proactivity and their Relationship to Job Affect 

Table  15:  Status Differences and Aspects of Culture 

Table  16:  Correlations Between General Job Satisfaction and Other

Variables 

Table  17a: Correlations Between Proactivity Scores from Structured

Interview #1  and Year-End Survey Items (Proactive) 

Table  17b: Correlations Between Proactivity Scores from Structured

Interview #1  and Year-End Survey Items (Reactive) 

Table  18:  Correlation Matrix Between Coping Style Correlates 

Table  19:  Results of a Stepwise Regression with Proactivity Ratings
from Structured Interview #1  as the Dependent Variable 

Table 20:  Results of a Stepwise Regression with Proactivity Ratings
from Structured Interview #2 as the Dependent Variable 

p.

p.

p.

p.

p.

p.

p.

p.

p.

p.

p.

11

12

13

14

14

15

16

17

19

23

25

p.

27

p.

p.

31

33

p.

43

p.

p.

p.

45

46

48

p.

49

p.

51

with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Table 21:  Cross-Tabulation of Proactivity Ratings in Structured 

Interviews # I  and #2

p.  152

xv i

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


CHAPTER  1

INTRODUCTION

I. 

Introduction to the Topic of Organizational Change

Why are so many people studying organizational change?  Maybe  it's because 

change is all around us.  Mergers, acquisitions, downsizing, reorganizing, self-directed 

work teams, reengineering, realignment, redesign... Corporate America remains 

dynamic, and  the human fallout is staggering.  Confusion, exhaustion, and breakdowns 

in relationships abound.  Weidenbaum (1995) notes that the seemingly endless waves of 

corporate restructuring of the past decade have soured the attitudes of many Americans. 

He observes that in  1994 publicly announced company downsizings were at a record 

high showing “no sign of ebbing.”  Heckscher (1995) in his book. “White Collar 

Blues”  talks about the changing nature of loyalty in an age of corporate restructuring.

He notes that it used to be a given that if someone made it into middle management that 

s/he was almost assured of retiring from his/her organization.  This  is no longer true as 

organizations continue to downsize and flatten their hierarchies.  Middle managers are 

at the core of change in corporate America.  In a recent article published in The Plain 

Dealer. McCormack (1997) talks about the flattening of organizations, observing that.

There  aren't  many  managers  w'ho  enjoy  working  in  a  horizontal 
organization.  Most  of us  like  the  security  of a clearly  defined  vertical  chain  of 
command.  So  when  you  find  one  who  does,  you  should  hire  [her]  . . .   If you 
want a horizontal organization, you have to hire people who think horizontal.

I

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


The changing nature of leadership required of middle managers has been widely 

2

written about.  Steven Covey’s books Seven  Habits of Highly Effective People 

(1989). and Principle-Centered Leadership (1990) are being read by millions of 

managers around the globe.  Covey (1990) emphasizes qualities beyond being service 

oriented such as optimism, belief in other people, dedication to continuous learning, 

viewing life as an adventure, having a balanced lifestyle and engaging in self-renewal 

(physical, mental, emotional and spiritual) as important building blocks for effective 

leadership.  In essence, the author gives a heads-up for change.  Fostering these kinds of 

qualities helps us to be “change-capable.”  Champy (1995) wrote the sequel to 

Hammer’s and Champy’s  1993  Reengineering the Corporation in which he suggested 

that before we can reengineer organizations we have to reengineer management.  The 

author said that,  ” If management doesn’t change, reengineering will be stopped in its 

tracks.”  Heads-up again!

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Cloudv

Fad?

Work

Stress

unous

Left Out

Anxiety 

Confusion 

Uncertainty 

Retirement 

Downsizing 

About time 

Apprehension 

Improvement

Imagine that these geese are flying through times of major change.  W ho’s 

leading? Who’s adapting and who’s resisting?  How are they coping? And, why are they 

coping the way they are coping? Each of these geese represents an individual’s reaction 

to the question. “What are your initial emotions relative to the redesign of our 

manufacturing plant?”  This question was asked of the plant supervisory group in June 

1996 when the organization under study began raising awareness about upcoming major 

organizational change.  Unlike people, geese don’t suffer from anxiety, emotional stress 

and fear.  They don't worry about the uncertainty which lies ahead.  Perhaps we could 

learn something from them.  In  1991, Angeles Amen gave a speech at an Organization 

Development Network meeting based on the work of Milton Olson in which she 

outlines.  Lessons from Geese:

with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Fact  1: 

Lesson:

Fact 2: 

Lesson:

Fact 3: 

Lesson:

Fact 4: 

Lesson:

Fact 5: 

4

As each goose flaps its wings it creates an uplift for the birds that follow; 
by flying in formation, the whole flock adds 71% greater flying range 
than if each bird flew alone.

People who share a common direction and sense of community can get 
where they are going quicker and easier because they are traveling on 
the thrust of one another.

When a goose falls out of formation, it suddenly feels the drag and 
resistance of flying alone.  It quickly moves back into formation to take 
advantage of the lifting power of the bird immediately in front of it.

If we have as much sense as a goose we stay in formation with those 
headed where we want to go.  We are willing to accept their help and 
give our help to others.

When the lead goose tires, it rotates back into the formation and another 
goose flies to the point position.

It pays to take turns doing the hard tasks and sharing leadership.  As 
with geese, people are interdependent on each other's skills, capabilities 
and unique arrangements of gifts, talents or resources.

The geese flying in formation honk to encourage those up front to keep 
up their speed.

We need to make sure our honking is encouraging.  In groups where 
there is encouragement, the production is much greater.  The power of 
encouragement (to stand by one’s heart or core values and encourage the 
heart and care of others) is the quality of honking we seek.

When a goose gets sick, wounded or shot down, two geese drop out of 
formation and follow it down to help and protect it.  They stay with it 
until it dies or is able to fly again.  Then, they launch out with another 
formation or catch up with the flock.

Lesson:

If we have as much sense as geese, we will stand by each other in 
difficult times as well as when we are strong.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


5

Lessons from geese include: willingness to work together, willingness to accept help 

from and give help to others, willingness to take turns doing the hard work and share in 

the leadership, willingness to encourage each other, and willingness to stand by each 

other when someone falls.  Coping with change requires a lot of willingness!  As 

organizations continue to change, some people's willingness has eroded. The question 

becomes. "How do we understand and better support people through all of the 

changes?” and  "Why do some people resist change while others lead or go with the 

flow?”

II. 

Overview of and Purpose for the Dissertation

This dissertation began, in some sense, back in the summer of 1990 when I 

worked as a total quality (TQ) teams consultant in the Avionics Laboratory at Wright- 

Patterson  Air Force Base after the Department of Defense had begun mandating TQ 

programs for the Armed Forces.  Three years later, I worked for 3M Pharmaceuticals 

as a consultant to a self-directed work teams initiative where I documented, for over a 

year, the numerous highs and lows experienced by the members of various production 

crews as they learned basic business metrics, aspects of group dynamics and how to 

share leadership responsibilities.  In both work situations, I found that some people 

much more readily embraced change than others. The question is,  ‘’Why?”  Why are 

some people more proactive and others more reactive in coping with change? 

Furthermore, how can those managers leading change in their organizations better 

understand elements of their employees and elements of the work environment which

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


factor into people's response to change?  Change is inevitable.  For some people change 

6

is a welcome challenge.  For others, change is very traumatic.

As much as we would like to believe that change in organizations follows along 

some sort of linear path, change evolves within a complex web of interrelationships that 

are built interaction by interaction as people share information, ideas, solve problems 

together and converse in the hallways on a daily basis.  Misunderstandings, missing 

communications, miscommunications and inaccurate communications take place 

throughout any given day.  It is impossible to post a vision statement on the board and 

expect people either to understand or to see it in the way it was intended.

This dissertation tells the story of people going through a major organizational 

change process.  The data collected represent a six month window in time in this 

manufacturing plant's history, shedding light on why some people are more proactive 

and some are more reactive in their orientation to change.  Change affects one’s work 

life on many levels: how work gets done (task design and work  procedures); 

interpersonal relationships (who has access  to whom  and who must interact with 

whom:  people’s work schedules;  pay, future promotions, and opportunity in the 

system;  and, one's power, prestige, and influence over how the organization will be run 

in the future).  Life in a manufacturing plant is hectic by nature; especially in a place 

that runs continuously such as the plant under study.  In even the most efficiently run 

plants, things don't always work as  they are designed to. Equipment breaks, projects 

have to be coordinated across departments, supplies are not always in on time, trucks 

get delayed, people get sick or make mistakes.  Coordinating products across shifts is a

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


constant communication challenge.  Invariably, a lot of attention gets focused on 

whatever product is  in the system at a given moment and whatever problems or 

7

emergencies arise.  Life in a manufacturing plant is characterized by constant motion. It 

is difficult to convene meetings when people are tied to equipment operation, or are not 

all working on the same shift.  Distances across a plant also make it difficult to 

communicate: especially in bad weather.  Keeping hundreds of people  focused on plant- 

wide goals and metrics is a constant challenge, one that you have to love  in order to 

survive and thrive as a middle manager.

At it's heart, work life is built on relationships.  Open lines of communication, 

mutual respect, trust, honesty, and integrity are the fundamental building blocks.  The 

larger the organization, the more difficult it becomes to know people and develop solid 

relationships.  As a manager of change, the key to success lies in understanding what 

kinds of support each person needs  in order to be proactive with all that the changes 

require:  this means understanding elements of the person and the work environm ent. 

While a good change “program” is important, successful organizational change relies 

less on having the perfect program than on supportive, healthy working relationships.

This dissertation focuses particularly on  understanding proactivitv.  What is 

proactivity, and how can it be fostered?  If we look at coping styles as being 

dichotomous (proactive versus reactive),  it becomes obvious that the healthier approach 

for both the individual and the organization is a proactive one.  What do we mean by 

proactivitv ?  Two dimensions are proposed in this dissertation:  behavioral and 

emotional.  Behaviorallv speaking, organizations are looking for leaders who are willing

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


8

to take action to accomplish the companies’  goals, who are willing to be creative and 

flexible in their approach, and who are committed to personal learning and 

development.  Emotionally speaking, organizations are looking for leaders who have a 

positive, can-do attitude, and who are willing to support the organization's vision for the 

future.  Proactivitv, behavioral and emotional, in direct contrast with reactivity, is 

forward thinking and forward moving; not completely  focused on self-protection and 

preservation and inordinately concerned about the future, but moving ahead with a glass 

that is half full rather than half empty.  It is characterized by the kinds of 

"willingnessess" seen in Arrien's (1991) Lessons from Geese.  Proactivity makes for 

"hardy" executives (Maddi and Kobassa,  1984); people who perceive themselves high 

in commitment, control and challenge cope better with stress than those who see 

themselves in more reactive terms.  The construct of proactivity in coping is important 

both to understand and to foster in corporate America as industries continue to downsize 

and reorganize.  People with a proactive coping style are by nature "change-capable" 

and will allow for the kinds of dynamic change and growth necessary for "change- 

capable" organizations.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


CHAPTER 2

LITERATURE REVIEW

I.  Review of the Literature

There are three primary questions to be addressed in this literature review.  What 

do we know about how people cope with organizational change?  What determines how 

people cope? and.  How can  we  manage change  so that people develop coping  styles  which 

benefit  both  the  individual  and  the  organization? 

I  began  this  research  with  a  particular 

typology  for  characterizing  coping  styles:  namely  that  people  tend  to  be  either  generally 

proactive  or reactive  in  their response  to  organizational change.  I  also  began  this  research 

with  the  supposition  that  one's  “organization-based self-esteem”  would  be  related  to  one’s 

coping style, as well as to other variables both internal to the person and related to his or her 

environment.  Therefore  data  were  gathered  on  a  broad  number  of these  variables.  This 

literature  review  addresses  past  findings  that  have  proven  relevant  to  the  results  of  this 

research.

How People Cope with Major Organizational Change

Understanding  how  people cope  with  organizational  change  is  not a new  topic  in 

the  social  science  literature. 

Earlier  research  characterized  response 

to  change  in 

terms  of resistance,  seeking  to  identify  sources  of and  reasons  for  people's  resistance 

to  change.  Lawrence  (1954)  noted  that  resistance  to  change  is  often  more  a  product 

of  people’s  reaction 

to  the social  implications  than  to  technical  job modifications.  He

9

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


1 0
noted that the workplace  is always changing:

We  know  that  people  who  are  working  closely  with  one  another 
continually swap  ideas about short cuts and minor changes  in procedure that are 
adopted  so  easily  and  naturally  that  we  seldom  notice  them  or  even  think  of 
them as change (p. 53).

According  to  Lawrence,  it  is  management  actions  which  are  labeled  “change"  that 

tend  to  be  met  with  resistance.  Furthermore,  when  managers  become  intensely 

involved in  the technical  details  of organizational change  they  may  be  unaware of the 

variety of issues which are  upsetting to people.

In  response  to  the  dynamic  nature  of  today's  business  environment,  more 

recent  literature  focuses  not  only  on  sources  of resistance  to  organizational  change, 

but also on  how to foster proactivity where  people play an  active  role  in  leading  their 

organizations  into  the  future.  Literature  on  organizational  change  indicates  that while 

people’s response is somewhat  influenced by the situation,  people tend to respond on a 

fairly stable basis in either a generally proactive or reactive manner  (Robins and Finley. 

1996).  Why?  One plausible explanation for this is that people develop a coping style as 

a  function  of life  experience.  White  (1975)  notes  that the  way  in  which  one  grows  up 

shapes  how  s/he  makes  sense  of the  world,  and  sets  up  one's  life  expectations.  The 

development of our personalities, ways in which we relate to ourselves and other people 

and cope with our environment begins  very early on in our childhood.  Over time,  we 

develop  a belief system  which  shapes  how  we  see  life  events.  Embedded  within  this 

system  may  be  a  general  tendency  to  cope  with  change  proactively  or  reactively.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1

Lazarus  (1976)  noted  that  "consistency”  characterizes  our  lives:  consistency  of 

personality,  and "style"  including cognitive  style.  Cognitive style  is defined  as  the  "... 

stable ways  in  which the person thinks, perceives, and looks at the world and his or her 

relationship  to  it."  He  claimed  that  this  implies  stability  over  different  activities  and 

situations.  Yet. the author also recognized that people can change:

The  real  question  is  not  whether there  is  complete  stability or complete 
changeability  but.  rather,  which  structures  are  stable,  how  resistant are  these  to 
change,  and when do  they  reach a given  level of stability?  We  do  not yet have 
well-established answers to these questions (p. 35).

Lazarus  (1976)  defined  "coping"  as,  "what  a  person  does  to  handle  stressful  or 

emotionally charged demands."  He  suggested two primary ways  in  which people cope 

with stress:  through direct action, or through what he called "palliation” which refers to 

actions  that  are  directed  at  moderating  or  tolerating  the  emotions  created  by  stress. 

Direct actions  include  proactive  responses  such  as  preparing  one’s  self for an  event,  or 

reactive responses such as avoidance and apathy (a pattern of hopelessness or despair). 

Palliation,  can  take  two  forms:  those  directed  at  alleviating  symptoms  of  stress,  and 

“intrapsychic  modes”  which  we  know  as  defense  mechanisms. 

In  order  to  alleviate 

stress, many people in  this country drink alcohol,  for example.  Another,  healthier form 

of palliation which decreases  stress  is exercise.  There are also  many  muscle  relaxation 

techniques  which  are  effective  ways  to  alleviate  stress.  Defense  mechanisms,  those 

“intrapsychic”  modes  of alleviating  the  symptoms  of stress,  work  on  a  psychological 

level and involve a specific mental process  which “changes a negative appraisal of harm

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 2

or  threat  into  a  benign  one.”  These  include:  identification,  displacement,  repression, 

denial,  reaction  formation, projection,  and  intellectualization.  It is  beyond  the  scope  of 

this  dissertation  to  deal  with  each  of the  kinds  of direct  actions  or  palliation  a  person 

might  engage  to  "cope”:  it  is  more  my  intention  to  make  the  reader  aware  of  the 

complex  nature  of  the  subject,  and  emphasize  that  whatever  methods,  conscious  or 

subconscious, people use to cope with life and its stresses, we tend to develop particular 

coping  styles  which  may  be  either  proactive  or  reactive,  and  are  relatively  consistent 

unless some cognitive effort is expended to change them.

Folkman,  et  al.  (1991)  discussed  the  social  context  of coping.  They  define 

coping  as.  changing  cognitive  and  behavioral  efforts  to  manage  specific  demands  that 

are appraised as taxing or exceeding the resources of the person.”  The authors  note that 

this definition has three important elements:

•  It is process-oriented:  referring to what the person actually thinks or does and 

changes as a situation unfolds (in contrast to a structural or trait-oriented 
approach which refers to what the person usually does):

•  It is contextual:  referring to what the person actually thinks or does within a 

specific context: and,

•  It is without reference to outcome: 

success of the efforts.

referring to efforts to manage, not the 

The authors stated:

This approach to coping has important implications for interventions. 

Coping processes, which by definition are changeable, lend themselves to 
modification through education, counseling, and brief psychotherapy.  In

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1 3

contrast, coping traits and dispositions, which by definition are relatively stable 
and enduring properties of the person, are not easily changed, especially through 
brief interventions (p. 243).

While  White (1975) describes  through a series  of case  studies  how  we develop a  belief 

system  over  time  which  shapes  how  we  see  life  events,  and  leam  particular  coping 

styles.  Folkman  et  al.  (1991)  note  that  we  can  leant  to  see  things  differently  through 

education  and  counseling. 

In  other  words,  we  can  all  leam  to  be  proactive.  The 

authors also differentiate between  problem- and emotion-focused forms of coping.  The 

former  includes  strategies  such  as  cognitive  problem  solving  and  decision  making, 

interpersonal  conflict 

resolution, 

information  gathering,  advice 

seeking, 

time 

management,  and  goal  setting.  The  latter  includes  strategies  such  as  cognitive  efforts 

that  change  the  meaning  of  a  situation  without  changing  the  environment  through 

reframing, social comparison, minimization, or looking on the bright side of things, and 

behavioral  efforts  to  make  oneself feel  better,  such  as  exercise,  relaxation,  meditation, 

support  groups,  or  humor.  Note  that  both  problem-  and  emotion-focused  forms  of 

coping involve a cognitive  approach.  We  may  leam  through our life experiences  a set 

repertoire of coping structures or traits which predispose us to respond more proactively 

or reactively to  life's  stresses,  changes  and demands,  however these  structures  or traits 

can also be relearned.

The  field  of psychology  has  heavily  emphasized  the  importance  of cognitive 

aspects  of  the  person  as  determinants  of  emotion  and  behavior.  The  cognitive 

approach  to personal  growth  and  development has  been  widely used  in  practical  self­

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


help guides  (Bums,  1980:  McGee.  1990).  Bums  (1980)  gives  an example of how  an 

1 4

employee might respond to criticism (modified from p.  132).

Figure  I:  Cognitive Approach to Modifying Thoughts and Feelings

Supervisor tells you, “You’ve been doing poor work lately.*’

Resnon.se #  I

Thought:

I 'm  always doing;
poorly;  I’m  worthless.”

Feelings

ResDonse #2

Thought:

"S/he is on mv
back again.”

Feelings:

sadness, anxiety

anger,  frustration

Behavior:

isolation, moping

Behavior:

lashing out

Note:  from Bums (1980): modified for this research.

Response #3

Thought:

"Here is a chance to
leam something."

Feelings:

security

Behavior:

inquiry

Compare reactive nature of responses #1  and #2, and their negative impact on emotion 

and behavior in contrast to the proactive nature of response #3.  This  model emphasizes 

how  powerful  an  effect  our  thoughts  have  on  our  feelings  and  on  our  behavior.  A 

proactive  thought  process  can  make  real  difference  in  how  productively  we  cope  with 

the  stress and change  in our lives.  Approaching organizational  change  as  a “chance  to 

leam  something”  will  keep  us  in  dialogue  with  the  people  around  us,  allowing  for 

further  inquiry.  Understanding  one’s  belief system  and  cognitive  structure  is  clearly

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


key to learning how to transform a reactive coping style to a more proactive one.

1 5

While people tend to respond to organizational change  proactively or reactiveiy. 

the  intensity  of response  varies greatly.  People  may  be  proactive  as  leaders  of change, 

or  as  supportive  and cooperative  members  of change.  People  may  be  reactive  in  that 

they  feel  left  out  of relevant  decision  making  or  information  loops,  or  they  may  be 

outwardly  hostile  and  damaging  to  the  change  process.  A  person's  response  to 

organizational  change  is  a  product  of  elements  of one's  person  and  the  environment, 

and  their  interaction.  Furthermore,  we  can  think  of  peoples'  responses  to  change  as 

two-dimensional where one can be categorized as proactive or reactive  in terms of both 

his or her behavioral and emotional responses to the change:

Figure 2: Dimensions of Proactivity - Behavioral and Emotional

Emotionally
Proactive

n l

Behaviorallv.

Reactive

Behaviorally
Proactive

Emotionally

Reactive

The  distinction  between  behavioral  and  emotional  responses  to  change  is  an  important

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1 6

one.  Behavioral proactivity  refers  to  the  person  who  is  involved  in  doing  something 

with  respect  to the  change,  while  emotional proactivity refers  to the  person  who  is  less 

actively  supportive,  desiring  to  be  involved,  and  has  a  cooperative  orientation  to  the 

changes.  Often,  in  times of major organizational change, many  people are  emotionally 

supportive  of change  yet  perceive  they  lack  the  resources  to  participate  in  the  actions 

involved with change.

People in category #1  (behaviorally and emotionally proactive) are characterized 

by their involvement in and support for the organizational change process.  They are the 

drivers of change.  They show initiative  in past performance in terms of managing  their 

own careers, going out on  a limb  to do  what  they  believe  in.  going  out of their way  to 

creatively  meet  customer  needs,  and  taking  initiative  in  the  organization  beyond job 

expectations.  Persons  in  category  #2  (behaviorally  reactive/emotionally  proactive)  are 

characterized by their willingness to support the changes, but are  not necessarily central 

to driving change.  They  may  have  a desire  to do  whatever they can  for the  welfare  of 

the organization and have  ideas  about  how  to  help  the  organization  achieve  it’s  vision, 

but they are not taking action because they feel they are not included in decision making 

and/or  information  loops.  Persons  in  category  #3  (behaviorally  and  emotionally 

reactive)  are characterized  by their overall  reactivity  to  the change  process.  They  may 

express confusion, aggravation, and/or feelings of being trapped and unable to influence 

what  is  going  on  around  them.  They  may  feel  that  they  are  no  longer  valued  or 

important 

to  the  organization. 

People 

in  category  #4  (behaviorally  proactive/ 

emotionally  reactive)  are  characterized  by  their  reactivity  and  the  passive  aggressive

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


wav  in which they may act out their frustration.

1 7

Determinants o f How People Cope with Organizational Change

The  importance  of considering  elements  of the  person,  his  or  her environment 

and  their  interaction  has  long  been  acknowledged  in  the  social  science  literature  with 

respect  to  understanding  people's  attitudes  and  behavior.  Wilson  (1989)  lists  several 

elements of the  person  which  may affect how one adapts  to  a given situation,  including 

personality,  beliefs,  motives,  traits,  values,  abilities,  mood,  defensive style,  and  genetic 

propensities.  McClelland (1985)  notes that need fo r achievement and fear o f failure are 

two very powerful  motives which  shape  a person’s  life orientation.  It can be  proposed 

that they also relate to how people cope  with  situations of major organizational change: 

need for achievement being more related to a proactive coping style and fear of failure a 

reactive  coping  style.  Research  on 

the  “open  versus  closed  mind"  suggests  that  a 

reactive  coping  style  may  be  a  function  of  a  person’s  defense  mechanism  against 

anxiety (Rokeach.  1960.)  For purposes  of this  research,  there are several  factors  of the 

person, his or her environment and their interaction that will  be addressed:  how people 

have  dealt  with  situations  of role  conflict  in  the  past  as  a  major component  of coping 

behavior  during  organizational  change,  the  amount  of  role  conflict  one  currently 

experiences  in  his  or  her job:  one’s  level  of organization-based  self-esteem,  positive 

and  negative  job  affect,  one’s  status  in  the  organization;  how  well  one’s  individual 

needs  are  being  met during  the  change  process;  elements  of organization  culture;  and 

how the change process is managed.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


1 8

How People Deal  with Situations of Role Conflict

Role  conflict  is  an  inherent  part  of organizational  life.  Katz  and  Kahn  (1978) 

define  role  conflict  as.  the  ‘"simultaneous  occurrence  of two  or  more  role  expectations 

such  that  compliance  with  one  would  make  the  other  more  difficult."  Role  conflicts 

increase  during  times  of major organizational  change  as  people  begin  to  leave  behind 

old roles and take on new ones.  Over the course of change,  it is often difficult to decide 

when  and how  to  make  these  transitions.  Resolving  situations  of role  conflict  requires 

what Weick (1985) calls “sensemaking":

Sensemaking  is  about  the  enlargement  of small  cues.  It  is  a search  for 
contexts  within  which  small  details  fit  together  and  make  sense.  It  is  people 
interacting  to  flesh  out  hunches. 
It  is  a  continuous  alternation  between 
particulars  and  explanations,  with each  cycle  giving  added  form  and  substance 
to the other (p.  133).

We see that “sensemaking" is a process which requires ongoing dialogue often between 

multiple  parties,  not  necessarily  a  simple  occurrence  between  two  individuals. 

Furthermore,  while  organizational  change  may  have  a  particular  plan  behind  it,  the 

change  process  rarely  completely  follows  the  plan.  Consequently,  new  roles  are 

continually  being  redefined  and  fine-tuned,  creating  the  potential  for  ongoing  role 

conflicts.  Understanding the way in which people deal with situations of role conflict 

is an  important first step  in  learning how to manage organizational change effectively. 

A  study  done  by  Holdorf  (1975)  looked  at  the  different  kinds  of  role  conflict

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


situations  and  how  people  coped  with  them.  He  developed  a  model  which  identifies 

1 9

four types of  responses to role conflict:

•  Immobilization:  characterized by inaction, avoidance, and an inability or 

refusal to choose a course of action:

•  Compliance:  characterized by an effort to avoid conflict, and respond to 

the demands and needs of others;

•  Searching behavior,  characterized by self affirmation where the demands 

of others are put into a lower priority than the needs of one’s self:  and,

•  Adaptive behavior:  characterized by an attempt to respond both to the 

demands of others and the needs of self.

Holdorf found that different types of role conflict were related to different kinds of 

coping responses.  However, compliant coping behavior was the most often used 

strategy for coping.

Neilsen (1984) also addressed how people may respond to role conflict, 

outlining four possible responses (p.246):

•  Denial:  characterized by refusal to recognize to oneself that one’s envisioned 

role is considerably different from what one is actually experiencing.

•  Adaptation:  characterized by recognizing and revising one’s envisioned 

role to fit the experience:  and.

•  Avoidance:  characterized by attempts to prevent others from recognizing  role 

mismatches or from making them even greater.

•  Co-inquiry:  characterized by open recognition both to oneself and to others of 

mismatches between one’s envisioned role and one’s subsequent experience 
followed by an invitation to others to share in dialogue and problem solving 
regarding the conflict.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


2 0

Essentially,  the  first  two  responses  listed  are  reactive  and  the  second  two  are  more 

proactive  in  nature.  Neilsen  advocated  co-inquiry  as  the  healthiest,  most  mature 

response to situations of role conflict:

Co-inquiry entails two types of behavior.  The first is the open recog­
nition both to oneself and to others of mismatches between one's envisioned 
role and one's subsequent experience.  The second is the invitation to others 
to share this problem and to collaborate with the actor in developing a new 
role that is more in line with his or her envisioned role and his or her subse­
quent experience... The strength of co-inquiry lies both in the fact that 
mismatch problems are shared and that their resolutions are mutually deter­
mined. .  .Thus it is an invitation to pool resources and to focus on what is the 
problem . . .  O f all four coping strategies, co-inquiry is most consistent 
with collegial relationships, where both parties recognize each other as 
basically equals and relate to each other holistically (p. 249-51).

Both  of  these  authors’  frameworks  recognize  that  people  tend  to  be  either 

behaviorally proactive  or reactive  in  response  to  the  role conflicts  they  face.  In  some 

respects  both  of  these  frameworks  also  fit  into  the  typology  being  proposed  in  this 

research,  which  extends  the concept of proactivity  beyond  behavior and  recognizes  the 

role  of emotional  proactivity  in  one's  response  to  organizational  change.  Combining 

these three  frameworks results in the following:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


2 1

Figure 3:  Synthesis of Role Conflict Response Frameworks

Emotional
Proactivitv

# 2

#1

Adaptation (Neilsen) 
Compliance (Holdorf)

Co-Inquiry (Neilsen) 
Adaptation (Holdorf)

Behavioral
Reactivity

Behavioral
Proactivity

•ii'}rrj

# 4

Denial (Neilsen) 
Immobilization (Holdorf)

Avoidance (Neilsen) 
Searching (Holdorf)

Emotional
Reactivity

We  see  that Co-inquiry and  Adaptation  (Holdorf)  when  placed in category #1  both  Fit 

the  model  o f behavioral  and  emotional  proactivity;  both  have  elements  of working 

toward  a  solution  to  role  conflict  which  satisfies  both  the  individual  and  his  or  her 

organization.  Adaptation  (Neilsen)  and Compliance when  placed  in category #2  both 

fit  the  model  of behavioral  reactivity  and  emotional  proactivity  in  that  the  individual 

resigns his or her needs in support of the organization (emotional proactivity), yet s/he 

fails  to  become  behaviorally  proactive  in  terms  of  working  toward  a  solution  to  the

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


2 2

role conflict which  satisfies  both his  or her and the  organization’s  needs.  Denial  and 

Immobilization  both  fit  the  model  of  behavioral  and  emotional  reactivity  (category 

#3)  in  that  the  individual  neither supports  (emotional  reactivity)  nor  acts  (behavioral 

reactivity) toward a solution to role conflict which satisfies both the  individual and his 

or  her  organization.  Avoidance  and  Searching  both  fit  the  model  of  behavioral 

proactivitv and emotional reactivity (category #4)  in that the focus  is on satisfaction of 

one's  own  needs  (behavioral  proactivity)  over  the  needs  of  his  or  her  organization 

(emotional  reactivity).  Although  more  work  still  needs  to  be  done  to  fine  tune  this 

model,  the  importance  of  recognizing  the  emotional  dimension  in  addition  to  the 

behavioral  one  when  developing  the  constructs  of  proactivity  and  reactivity  is 

noteworthy.  Emotional  and  behavioral  proactivity/reactivity  are  clearly  intertwined: 

not  totally orthogonal  aspects of the construct.  It  is  important understand that control 

structures  in  organizations  can prevent or encourage  people  from  being  behaviorally 

proactive  regardless  of their emotional  orientation  toward  change.  Middle  managers 

who  are  in  positions  of  authority  but  still  lacking  the  requisite  information  or 

inclusion  in  decision  making  circles  to  become  behaviorally  proactive  may  be 

emotionally  supportive  of change  but  unable  to  be  behaviorally  proactive  (category 

#2).  On  the  other hand,  middle  managers  by  nature  of their position  may feel  obliged 

to act according to the  freedom they have been given  in  the  hierarchy whether they are 

emotionally  supportive  of  the  changes  or  not  (category  #4).  What  is  most  clear  in 

merging  these  two  frameworks  into  this  model  are  responses  which  can  be  labeled 

categories #1  and #3  where people are both emotionally and behaviorally proactive, or

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


emotionally and  behaviorally  reactive.  However,  there  is  less  clarity  with  respect  to 

2 3

the parallels between their paradigms in categories #2 and #4.

In  summary  if  we  look  at  organizational  change  as  creating  large  scale  role 

conflict and ambiguity, then we can infer that how people have coped both behaviorally 

and emotionally in handling role conflicts will tend to be indicative of their coping style 

in times of organizational change.

The Amount of Role Conflict Experienced

In  addition  to  how  people  tend  to  have  coped  with  role  conflicts  in  the  past, 

the  amount of role  conflict  people  experience  on  the job  will  have  an  effect  on  how 

people cope with  major organizational  change.  Role conflict  is  an  ongoing condition 

of organizational life.  Holdorf (1975) found that role conflict has a deteriorating impact 

on relationships over time:

The  finding  essentially  proposes  that  in  conditions  of  role  conflict, 
individuals  find  it  difficult  talking  with  others  at  work;  they  find  it  difficult 
developing  meaningful  relationships,  and  report  that  their job  interferes  with 
relationships with close friends, spouse and family (p. 141).

His  findings  highlight  how  important resolution of role  conflict  is  for the  maintenance 

of healthy working  relationships.  In times of major organizational change, the potential 

for role conflict is even greater.  It is important for managers of change to recognize the 

significant impact the role conflict can have on people’s ability to cope proactively.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Organization-Based Self-Esteem

2 4

Researchers  for  decades  have  been  studying  the  relationship  between  self­

esteem and work-related  variables  (Korman.  1970:  1971:  1976.)  The  basic  assumption 

guiding  this  work  has  been  that  people  respond  to  various  life  experiences  in  terms  of 

their level  of self-esteem.  In  the context of organizational  life,  researchers  have  looked 

at the relationship  between  self-esteem,  work attitudes  and job  performance.  However, 

different  authors  have  expressed  concern  that  the  measures  of  "global  self-esteem" 

which have been used are not specific enough to organizational life.  Pierce et a!.  (19S9) 

have  developed  a  measure  of what  they  call  Organization-Based  Self-Esteem  (OBSE) 

which they define as, “the degree to which organizational members believe that they can 

satisfy their needs by participating in roles within the context of an organization."1 

They further state:

People  with  high  OBSE  have  a  sense  of  personal  adequacy  as 
organizational  members  and  a  sense  of  having  satisfied  needs  from  their 
organizational  roles  in  the  past.  This.  OBSE  reflects  the  self-perceived  value 
that  individuals  have  of themselves  as  organization  members  acting  within  an 
organizational context.  As a result, employees with high OBSE should perceive 
themselves  as  important,  meaningful,  effectual,  and  worthwhile  within  their 
employing organization (p. 625).

Like  the  construct  of  global  self-esteem,  these  authors  have  done  research  which 

indicates that OBSE  is a part of a person's basic belief system:  that, once established,  it 

is relatively stable, "especially when there are no major environmental changes that may 

give rise to new kinds of experiences.”  More longitudinal  research will  be necessary to 

better  understand  how  OBSE  is  affected  in  times  of  major  organizational  change.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


However,  it  seems  clear  that  OBSE  in  daily  organizational  life  has  an  important 

relationship  with  variables  such  as  general  job  satisfaction,  citizenship  behavior, 

2 5

organizational commitment, and job performance.  Pierce et al.  (1989) state:

in 

Results  of the  seven  studies  reported  here  are  not  much  different  from 
those  of  earlier  examinations  of  self-esteem 
terms  of  the  nature  of 
relationships  revealed: 
Positive  experiences  lead  to  high  self-esteem,  and
negative  experiences  lead  to  low  self-esteem.  But  our results  are  some  of the 
first  to  indicate  that  experiences  in  an  organization  affect  employees’  levels  of 
OBSE  which  in  turn  may  affect  their  organization-related  behaviors  and 
attitudes.  .  .  There  is  evidence  suggesting  that  individuals  may  well  develop 
organizational attitudes and engage in behaviors that are consistent with OBSE 
(p. 644).

There  is  a well  documented caveat,  however,  which  should  be  mentioned  here: 

the  causal  relationship  between  attitudes  and  behaviors  is  difficult  to  determine.  For 

example,  decades  worth  of job  satisfaction  studies  have  produced  a  broad  range  of 

results  in  both directions when correlated with job outcomes  (Breer and  Locke,  1965). 

Recent  research  suggests  that  it  is  more  likely  that  behavior  is  more  clearly  causally 

related  to  attitudes  than  vice  versa.  In  other words,  positive job  experiences  are  more 

likely  to  cause  positive job  attitudes  than  positive job  attitudes  are  to  cause  better job 

performance.  Extrapolating  from these  findings,  although we  know that OBSE and job 

outcomes are significantly related,  it is still  not clear from the  literature that high OBSE 

causes positive outcomes.  It is likely that people develop high OBSE as a result of their 

commitment  and job  performance. 

In  other  words,  as  peoples'  behavior  on  the  job 

shows  positive  outcomes,  they  are  given  cues  from  their  management  about  how 

valued,  important, and trusted  they  are  which creates  a sense  of OBSE.  More research

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


2 6

in the causality of these relationships  needs  to be done; especially  looking at how going 

through  major organizational  change  affects  one's  OBSE.  Regardless  of the  direction 

of causality  between  OBSE  and job  related  variables,  it  is  clear  that  the  relationship 

between  OBSE and coping styles  is  an  important one  to more  fully understand.  People 

with  a  high  degree  of OBSE  feel  valued,  trusted  and  important  in  their  organizational 

life  which  should  foster  a  proactive  coping  style  in  times  of  major  organizational 

change.

Positive and Negative Job Affect

The  role  of  emotions  (job  affect)  in  coping  styles  is  important  to  consider. 

While cognitive psychology emphasizes thoughts as the drivers of feelings  and actions, 

other authors point out that the  physiological  beginnings of emotions  may occur before 

a  person  thinks  about  them.  Goleman  (1995)  noted  that  emotions  which  “simmer 

beneath the threshold of awareness can have a powerful impact on how we perceive and 

react,  even  though  we  have  no  idea  they’re  at  work.”  In  other  words,  once  we  think 

about what we are feeling, we can cognitively deal with our emotions and change  them. 

We  can  leam  to  see  the  things  that  frustrate  or anger us  differently,  thus  changing  the 

emotions that we  feel.  Yet,  it  is  important to recognize that emotions  are  subconscious 

and deeply rooted drivers of attitudes and behaviors.  Lund (1930) writes:

What  then  guides  m an’s  conduct?  What  determines  his  interests? 

Is 
there any one principle which more than  any other is  responsible  for his  life and 
behavior?  We  believe  that  there  is,  but  it  is  hardly  to  be  found  in  the  time- 
honored principle of human  rationality.  It is not reason, not intellect.  These, as

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


2 7

we  shall  see.  are  but  the  instruments,  the  servants,  of the  inner  man.  .  .  More 
fundamental,  more  important,  is  the  guiding  and  molding  influence  of a man's 
emotions (p. 5).

While  I  tend  to  place  more  emphasis  on  our  ability  to  be  rational,  and  on  the  role  of 

cognition  as  a  driver  of  attitudes  and  behavior.  I  also  can  see  the  powerful  role  of 

emotions  in our dispositions toward the events  that  we experience, emphasizes the need 

for self-awareness.  Goleman  (1995)  noted  that  we  each  tend  to  fall  into  one  of three 

categories (p. 48):

•  Self-aware: people who are aware of moods as they are 
experiencing them, who have some sophistication about 
their emotional lives;

•  Engulfed: people who often feel swamped by their emotions 

and helpless to escape them; and,

•  Accepting: people who are often clear about what they are 

feeling, but don’t try to change them.

The  author stated  that,  “self-awareness  is  fundamental  to  psychological  insight.”  Not 

only  is  self-awareness  important to self-understanding,  but  also  it  is  a critical  first step 

in self-change if one’s emotions are not in line with a healthy coping style.

Cox  (1997)  noted  the  importance  of understanding  emotions  in  the  context  of 

work life  interactions.  Citing the work of Kemper (1990). she pointed out that changes 

in  one's  power  and  status  in  an  organization  can  lead  to  affective  states  such  as  fear, 

anxiety,  satisfaction,  happiness,  or  anger.  Thus  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  the 

powerful  role  o f emotions  in  the  workplace,  and  understand  that  while  emotions  may

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


precede  thoughts,  it  is  through  self-awareness  that  we  can  cognitively  reshape  our 

emotions.  This  is  particularly  important  to  understand  when  it  becomes  one’s  goal  to 

2 8

work toward a more positive coping style.  Allen (1995) stated:

As  a  start,  you  must  leam  to  identify  your  positive  feelings.  Look  for 
them.  Notice them.  Then you can use various methods to cultivate them.  Make 
them a more  prominent part of your experience.  Make good experience a habit, 
a daily  routine.  Ultimately,  you  can  gain  a sense  of choice  and  freedom  about 
your feelings.  You can  leam to change  unnecessary distress -  to bring  it within 
more tolerable bounds and to shift into more positive experience (p.270-I).

Understanding  one's  belief  system  and  cognitive  structure  is  key  to  learning 

how to transform a reactive coping style to a more proactive one.

In summary, one’s job affect plays an important role in coping styles.  Weick 

(1995) links emotion with "sensemaking’’ stating that:

An interruption to a flow  [of events in an organization] typically induces 
an  emotional  response,  which  then  paves  the  way  for  emotion  to  influence 
sensemaking.  It  is  precisely  because  ongoing  flows  are  subject  to  interruption 
that sensemaking is infused with feeling (p. 45).

Positive and negative job affect,  therefore in  times of major organizational change  may 

be  particularly  heightened  as  sensemaking  activities 

increase 

in 

response 

to 

interruptions  and  ongoing role conflict situations.  A proactive coping  style  most  likely 

will  result  in  positive  job  affect,  while  a  more  reactive  coping  style  will  most  likely 

result in negative job affect.  As has been pointed out, recognizing our emotions so that 

they become part of our cognitive awareness is the first step in dealing with them.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


One's Status in the Organization as Indicated by Structure and Policies

2 9

Most  modem  business  organizations  tend  to  develop  some  form  of  hierarchy 

which  determines  the  nature  of  communication  and  decision-making.  People  are 

typically given a job title and description, and placed  in a box  on  a  formal  organization 

chart.  While there  is much  written  in the social science  literature  about  informal  norms 

as the most immediate drivers of organizational life, there is no denying the existence of 

formal  hierarchy.  In  a  manufacturing  organization  such  as  the  one  under  study, 

collegiately  degreed  and  non-degreed  personnel  are  typically  considered  to  be  in 

different  job  titles  and  have  very  different  job  descriptions  even  though  they  are 

involved  in  much  the  same  work.  Designations  such  as  “engineer"  and  "foreman" 

gamer markedly different  levels  of prestige  even  though  they  may  be  both  involved  in 

the  production  of the  same  product.  As  a  result,  it  is  common  that  the  organization 

treats  the  people  in  these  two job  titles  very  differently  in  terms  of communication  of 

information,  and  decision-making.  Engineers  tend  to  be  upwardly  mobile  in  the 

organization, with ties to upper level managers.  Foremen tend to reach the peak of their 

formal careers as foremen unless  they obtain a college degree,  having  no  further formal 

job  mobility,  and  tend  to  have  their  ties  with  each  other  and  those  in  production 

operation  roles.  Consequently,  we  can  argue  that  in  times  of  major  organizational 

change,  the structure  and  policies  surrounding  these  two groups  has  a  major  impact on 

the  way  in  which  each  group  perceives  its  environment,  the  scope  of  its  ability  to  be 

proactive, and in turn, how its members will choose to cope with change.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Meeting Individual Needs  During Organizational Change

3 0

While  people  go  to  work  to  provide  a  service  in  exchange  for  pay.  they  also 

bring  individual  needs  to  the  workplace.  One’s  ability  to  meet  his  or  her  needs  affects 

one's  coping  style.  Porter (1961)  studied "need  satisfactions"  in  lower and  mid-level 

management jobs using Maslow's  framework of security, social, esteem, autonomy, and 

self-actualization needs.  For each need category,  he asked people. "How much is there 

now?  How  much  should  there  be?  And.  How  important  is  this  to  you?"  Porter  found 

that  self-actualization  needs 

in 

terms  of  opportunity 

for  personal  growth  and 

development  in  one’s  management  position,  the  feeling  of  fulfillment  from  being  in 

one's  management  position,  and  feeling  of  worthwhile  accomplishment  in  one’s 

management position  were  the  most  critical  need  areas  of those  studied  for  perceived 

deficiency 

in 

fulfillment  and  perceived 

importance 

to 

the 

individual.  Major 

organizational  change  may  either  facilitate  or  interfere  with  self-actualization  in  mid 

career life.  To  the extent that it  facilitates  self-actualization, change  may  be  associated 

with promoting a proactive coping  style.  To  the extent that change  interferes  with self- 

actualization. we might assume that change fosters reactivity.

Schein  (1978)  in  his  book  on  career  dynamics  makes  some  very  interesting 

observations about mid career life.  He wrote:

A reappraisal of one’s area of contribution, the discovery of one’s career 
anchor,  a  more  realistic  sense  of how  far one  is  going  to  go  in  a career,  and  a 
rethinking of one's  criteria  for success  all  lead to  a reassessment of how  "work 
involved"  and  “accommodative”  to  family  and  self-oriented  activities  one  is 
going to be  in the remainder of one’s life.  Though the decisions made now may 
not  be  permanent,  they  nevertheless  will  represent  a  major commitment  to  the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


3 1

future.  Facing these decisions can be a source of great stress,  because trade-offs 
may  have  to  be  made.  .  .  It  is  important  for  both  the  individual  and  the 
organization  managing  that  individual  to  recognize  that  these  decisions  are 
complicated  and  involve  work,  family,  and  self-interaction.  .  .The  final,  and 
perhaps  most difficult, problem of mid career and midlife to be reviewed here  is 
that of maintaining a positive, growth-oriented attitude toward  life.  Many of the 
forces  identified  above  are  difficult  to  deal  with,  and  people  may  be  strongly 
tempted  to  become  complacent and  resigned  to  their "fate.” even  when  options 
for further growth are available (p. 179-1 SO).

How  people  reassess  the  balance between  work and  family  life  later on  in  their careers 

may  play  into  coping  styles  in  times  of major  organizational  change.  Proactivity  can 

require extra time and energy  which people are unable or unwilling to spend, preferring 

to  go  with  the  flow  or coping  in  a  reactive  manner to  what  is  going  on  around  them. 

Furthermore.  Schein  indicated  that  maintaining  a  positive,  growth-oriented  attitude 

toward life and avoiding resignation to one's  "fate" is a further challenge people  in mid 

career life may face.  Maintaining a proactive coping style requires people to continue to 

grow and learn in new ways.

In  looking  at  individual  needs  and  trying  to  understand  the  dynamics  of  the 

individual  in  organizational  life.  Culbert  and  McDonough  (1985)  also  made  some 

interesting observations.  These authors claimed that the  management of people is often 

done in a very rational manner.  They advocated a more subjective approach observing:

Organizations  are  comprised  of  people  with  diverse  personal  concerns 
and interests who, left to their own devices, are inclined to (1) interpret the same 
organization  events  differently  from  one  another;  (2)  mistakenly  expect  that 
others  will  view  these  events  more  or  less  as  they  have  viewed  them;  and  (3) 
depend  excessively  on  organizational  power and  power  politics  for  reconciling 
these  differences  in  views.  .  .  We  believe  that  organizational  effectiveness 
depends on  the  extent  to which  people  who  work together are  able  to  reconcile 
their  personal  differences  in  perception  and  expectation  without  resorting  to

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


3 2

. 

power  politics. 
.[this  requires]  people  to  tell  one  another  enough  about 
themselves and the needs that lie behind what they want so that others can better 
understand  how  they  see  events,  what  they  hope  to  achieve,  and  why  they  are 
proceeding 
time 
comprehending  subjective  interests  and  dealing  more  directly  with  the  roles 
specific  individuals  play  in  determining  their  unit's  goals,  processes,  and  basic 
perceptions (p.  12-13).

in  a  specific  way. 

.  Managers  need 

to  spend  more 

. 

The  authors  noted  that  trusting  relationships  are  key  to  successful  management:  they 

are.  "what  makes  a  flawed  organizational  plan  work."  The  importance  of developing 

trusting  relationships  has  been  noted  by  other  authors  as  well  (Stewart.  1996:  Mishra. 

1993).  Especially  in  times  of  major  organizational  change,  trusting  relationships  are 

imperative  for  any  successful  change  effort.  Mishra  (1993)  found  that  trusting 

relationships  enhanced  both  comprehensiveness  in  decision  making  and  collaboration 

within and between  organizations  in a time of crisis.  Robbins  and Finley  (1996)  stated 

that:

Change  fails  when  workers  lose  faith  in  the  change  leadership  has 
proposed.  It succeeds  when leaders  understand and anticipate  trust issues going 
into the initiative and honestly address them (p. 41)

Culbert and  McDonough  (1985)  noted,  however,  that  trusting  relationships  are  getting 

harder  to  develop:  that  too  many  managers  are.  “caught  up  in  the  rational  model." 

failing  to  look  more  deeply  at  the  subjective  elements  of  human  behavior.  They 

observed  that  all  people  need  a  sense  of  “context”  in  the  organization  in  order  to  lay 

aside political behavior:

As  we  see  it.  three  essential  elements  must  be  linked  together before  an 
individual  can  present  him-  or herself in  a  way  that  can  produce  context.  The 
first,  and  probably  the  most  essential,  element  relates  to  one's  organization

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


3 3

function:  How  is the function one performs central to the productivity and well­
being of the organization?  The second  is role:  How does  the  role  an  individual 
has  defined  for  him-  or  herself  provide  a  credible  and  effective  way  of 
performing  that  function?  The  third  is  daily  activities:  How  are  one's  daily 
activities  viable  ways  of  accomplishing  the  unique  role  and  function  one  is 
attempting to  perform?  Absent any one of these connections and the  individual 
is  vulnerable  -   his  or  her  contributions  are  subject  to  frames  of reference  that 
make them seem unimportant and the individual nonessential (p.45).

The  authors  went on  to  discuss  tactical  versus  strategic  management,  claiming  that  the 

former  is  more  common  but  that  the  latter  is  what  is  required  for  a  deeper  level  of 

understanding  of  the  workforce  and  healthier  relationships.  They  listed  three  skills 

important for managers to be "strategic" (p.  Ill):

1.  An individual must possess a strong sense of his or her strengths and 

organization value, and understand the minimum conditions required for 
him or her to operate effectively.

2.  An individual must have the ability to communicate his or her strengths 

and associated needs for context so that others can comprehend what s/he 
has to contribute and what supporting role s/he can play.

3.  An individual must possess the ability to perceive another person's 

strengths accurately and be responsible to his or her needs for context in 
in key organizational situations.

The  authors  concluded  their  discussion  of  tactical  versus  strategic  management  by 

saying  that,  often  the  latter  requires  more  psychology  than  either  what  current 

management  culture  supports,  or  what  managers  skill  levels  support.  Moreover,  the 

authors stated:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


3 4

Many  executives  fear that  what we  are  suggesting,  if implemented,  will 
cause  the  organization  to  grind  to  a  halt.  They  reason:  "What  could  be  less 
efficient  than  a  situation  where  managers  and  their  subordinates  sit  around 
analyzing  one  another all  day  long?”  In  response  to  this  reasoning,  we  would 
ask  "What  could  be  less  efficient  than  managers  and  subordinates  who  have 
little  idea  of what  is  behind  another's  behavior,  who  find  it  necessary  to  spend 
hours  trying  to get  over their wonderment  and  resentment  of the  other person's 
'misguided'  actions,  and  to  search  for  organizationally  acceptable  ways  to 
control, divert,  and circumvent the actions and attitudes  to  which  they  have just 
been exposed?” (p.  193-4).

Clearly,  individual  needs  must  be  taken  into  consideration  when  trying  to  understand 

organizational  behavior in daily life:  and even  more  so in times  of major organizational 

change  when  formal  and  informal  norms  begin  to  shift.  Hence,  managers  of change 

will  have  to  understand  the  impact  on  individuals  as  they  search  for  ways  to  recreate 

"context”, rethink career anchors, and seek self-actualization in their new roles.

Because  a  person's  position  in  the  organization  is  often  central  to  a  person's 

identity  in  mid  and  late  career  life,  organizational  change  can  feel  very  threatening. 

Therefore, the  way the change process is managed is critical  in determining how people 

will  respond.  It  is  important  to  provide  good  data  to  people  on  the  importance  of the 

changes,  risks,  resources  available,  time  lines  for  implementation,  in  addition  to 

providing  reassurance  and  participation  in  the  change  process.  Supporting  people  to 

support the changes  will  help  them  to  be  proactive  both emotionally  and behaviorally. 

Moreover, organizations with a history of supportive management will  more likely have 

already  developed  a  proactive  workforce,  while  a  history  of  the  opposite  will  more 

likely leave an organization with a propensity for reactivity to change.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


3 5

Organization Culture

Every  organization  develops  it's  own  “culture."  While  different  definitions  of 

culture  abound  in  the  social  science  literature,  almost  everyone  agrees  that  it  can  have 

an  important effect on organizational change.  Beach  (1993)  defined culture  as.  “shared 

beliefs  about  what  is 

true,  right,  appropriate,  proper,  necessary,  desirable,  and 

unthinkable  for the  organization  and  about  how  one  ought  to  act  in  the  context of that 

organization.”

Hobbs (1987) defined culture as:

The  total  pattern  of  human  behavior  -   composed  of customs,  beliefs, 
social  norms, and material traits that form the tradition of a group of individuals 
that  is  transmitted  to  succeeding  generations  through 
language,  symbols, 
thought, and action (p. 87).

Hobbs  (1987) 

studied  fourteen  companies  and  categorized  them  into  one  of  three 

groups based on the  level of attention they paid to their culture:  considerable,  moderate 

to  low-key.  and  benign  neglect.  He  commented  on  those  that  are  in  the  category  of 

paying considerable attention to culture that:

It  is  probably  no  coincidence  that  the  conscious  effort  that  these  firms 
devote  to  nourishing a common corporate culture  is  instrumental  in  the  success 
of each  enterprise.  The  common  bond  that  helps  unite  a  large  organization  is 
just one  additional  aspect in the arsenal of attributes that assist these companies 
in sustaining outstanding records of performance (p. 92).

Elements  of culture  that  he  related  to  success  include:  esprit  de  corps,  canng  attitude.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


and concern for the employees.

3 6

Lorsch  (1986)  called  culture  "the  invisible  barrier  to  strategic  change."  He 

defined culture as:

The shared beliefs top managers have about how they should manage 

themselves  and  other  employees,  and  how 
their 
business(es).  These  beliefs  are  often  invisible  to  the  top  managers  but  have  a 
major impact on their thoughts and actions (p.95).

they  should  conduct 

Lorsch  (1986)  claimed  that  in  order  for  strategic  change  in  an  organization  to  be 

successful,  “it  requires  a basic  rethinking of the  beliefs  by  which  the  company defines 

and  carries  on  its  businesses." 

In  a  study  done  of  twelve  successful  companies,  he 

found  that  there  existed  a  system  of  beliefs  called  “culture"  that  underlay  strategic 

choices.  He  states  that  the  beliefs  that  make  up  an  organization’s  culture  can  inhibit 

change  in  two  ways:  They  can  produce  a  myopic  view  of what  is  possible,  and  they 

keep  managers  from  responding  to  changing  events  in  new  ways. 

In  other  words, 

people tend to, “respond to changing events in terms of their culture."

The  question  for  purposes  of  this  research  is,  “What  aspects  of  culture 

encourage or discourage  proactivity  in  times  of major organizational  change?"  Lorsch 

said  that  leaders  need  to  be  skilled  at  understanding,  “unfreezing",  and  “refreezing" 

culture.  He  knew  of  no  reliable,  quick  method  for  understanding  culture,  but 

emphasized  the  importance  of using  a  methodology  that  would  allow  for  input  from 

insiders as well as outsiders.  Kotter and Heskett (1992)  stated.  “Only cultures  that can 

help organizations anticipate and adapt to environmental change will be associated with

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


3 7

superior  performance  over  long  periods  of  time." 

They  claimed  that  adaptive 

organizations develop a culture that pays close attention to customers, shareholders, and 

employees.  Without a focus on all  three, the authors claimed that organizations  will  not 

be  able to change successfully,  while a culture that  focuses  on  customers, shareholders, 

and  employees  is  naturally  responsive  to  organizational  change  in  the  external 

environment.  With  respect  to  employees,  again,  the  key  is  to  provide  credible  data  on 

the  nature  of  the  upcoming  organizational  change  so  that  people  can  be  emotionally 

proactive.

Heckscher (1995),  in a study of over two hundred  middle managers across eight 

large  industrial companies,  analyzed peoples’  responses to organizational change in the 

midst of ongoing corporate restructuring noting that many people have, "put their heads 

down,  focusing  more  and  more  narrowly  on  their jobs,  and  trying  to  block  out  the 

seeming chaos  around  them.”  Others,  however,  have  embraced  new  identities  and  are 

overcoming  the  situation  by  remaining  loyal  to  their  companies  only  if  they  feel 

challenged and respected.  Once again, we see the proactive versus reactive responses  to 

organizational  change.  The  author  claimed  that  the  most  change-adaptable  firms 

studied were those with  a higher number of proactive  people.  Not only  is it  important 

to  support employees  in  times  of major organizational  change  in order to  increase  their 

opportunity  for  both  behavioral  and  emotional  proactivity,  but  also  it  is  important  to 

recognize  that  the  more  people  already  in  the  organization  who  have  proactive  coping 

styles going into a major organizational change, the more likely the long term success of 

change.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


3 8

Management of the Change Process

The management of organizational change is the  topic  of much current literature 

as  a  result  of more  than  two  decades  of mergers,  acquisitions,  downsizing,  realigning, 

and  reengineering  that  come  with  a  dynamic  global  market  economy.  Robbins  and 

Finley (1996) estimated that tens of billions of dollars are spent annually on training and 

consulting  related  to  the  management  of organizational  change.  Even  with  all  of the 

attention organizational change efforts have received, some estimate that more  than half 

of  all  change  efforts  fail  (Mariotti.  1996).  There  are  many  reasons  for  failure  which 

range  from  systems  to  interpersonal  issues  (Mirvis  and  Berg  1977:  Kanter.  1983; 

Kotter,  1996: Larkin and Larkin,  1996; Oakley and Krug.  1991.) 

As  was  previously 

noted,  Robbins  and  Finley 

(1996)  observed 

that  people 

tend 

to  respond 

to 

organizational  change  in  either a proactive  or  a  reactive  way.  The  nature  of peoples’ 

response,  according to the  authors,  has  to do with  factors  such  as general  orientation  to 

change,  perceived  opportunities  and  losses  involved  with  the  change,  and  whether 

people  are  analytical  versus  people-oriented.  The  authors  said  that  leaders  need  to 

recognize this and adapt the way in which they motivate people accordingly:

Good  leaders  know  people  as 

individuals: 

they  know  what  their 

differences  are,  their  dreams  strengths,  weaknesses,  and  character  quirks. 
They’re  not best  friends -  they just  know  who  they  are,  that they  are,  and  what 
they need in order to change (p.45).

They  advocated  what  they  call  a  “push/pull"  strategy  where 

“push"  refers  to

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


encouraging  reactives  to  cooperate  and  "pull”  refers  to  encouraging  proactives  who 

3 9

already demonstrate a propensity for change to "engage the imagination."

Kotter  (1996)  noted  that  contemporary  organizations  have  not  been  well 

managed  for  a  rapidly  changing  environment. 

“Structure,  systems,  practices,  and 

culture  have  often  been  more  of a  drag  on  change  than  a  facilitator."  He  painted  a 

picture of the organization of the future where a sense of urgency replaces complacency, 

teamwork  is  at  the  top  of  the  organization,  people  who  can  create  and  communicate 

vision  do,  broad-based  empowerment  and  delegated  management  is  more  the  norm, 

unnecessary  interdependencies  within  a  company  are  reduced,  and  where  corporate 

culture is  more adaptive.  He said the key to all of this  lies in encouraging  leaders  to be 

"life  long  learners";  people  who  takes  risks,  engage  in  humble  self-reflection,  solicit 

opinions of others,  listen carefully, and are open to  new ideas.  The author described an 

executive who developed these qualities;

I  first  met  Manny  in  1986.  At  that  time,  he  was  an  alert,  friendly,  and 
ambitious  forty-year-old  manager.  He  had  already done  well  in  his  career,  but 
nothing about him seemed exceptional.  No one in his firm, at least as much as  I 
could  tell,  called  him  a  “leader." 
I  found  him  to  be  a  little  cautious  and 
somewhat political,  like many people raised  in  twentieth-century  bureaucracies. 
I would have expected him to remain in a senior staff job  for a few decades  and 
to make a useful but far from outstanding contribution to his corporation.

The  second  time  I  met  Manny  was  in  1995. 

In  only  a  short 
conversation,  I could sense a depth  and sophistication that  had  been  unapparent 
before.  In talking with others at  his company,  again  and again  I heard a similar 
assessment.  “Isn't  it  amazing  how  much  Manny  has  grown,"  they  told  me. 
“Yes," I said, “It’s amazing."

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4 0

Today  Manny  is  running  a  business  that  will  generate  about  S600 
million  in  after-tax  profits.  That  business  is  rapidly  globalizing  with  all  the 
attendant  hazards  and  opportunities.  As  I  write  this,  he  is  leading  his  group 
through  a  major  transformation  designed  to  position  the  organization  for  a 
promising  future.  All  from  a  man  who did  not  look  like  a  leader,  much  less  a 
great leader, at age forty.

A  few people  like  Manny  have  always  been  around.  Instead of slowing 
down and peaking at age thirty-five or forty-five, they keep learning at a rate we 
normally associate only with children and young adults.  These exceptions to the 
norm  help  us  see  that nothing  inherent  in  human  DNA  prevents  growth  in  later 
life (p.  176-7).

In summary,  Kotter saw successful organizational change as dependent upon successful 

leadership  at  the  top of the  organization  where  life  long  learning  was  a  key  leadership 

characteristic  necessary  not  only  for  one's  own  proactivity,  but  also  for  modeling 

proactivity for the rest of the organization.

In  his book “Deep Change,” Quinn  (1996)  wrote  to encourage  internally driven 

leadership.  He observed that, in life, we are all embarking either on the journey of deep 

change or we are dying a slow death:  it is a choice.  He said:

Most of us  build  our identity  around  our knowledge  and  competence  in 
employing  certain  known  techniques  or  abilities.  Making  a  deep  change 
involves  abandoning  both  and  "walking  naked  into  the  land  of  uncertainty." 
Slow  death  begins  when  someone, confronting  the  dilemma of having  to  make 
deep organizational change or accepting the status quo, rejects the option  for the 
deep  change.  This  decision  results  in  the  gradual  (and  occasionally  not  so 
gradual) disintegration of an organization, business or industry (p. 3,  18).

He  noted  that  transformational  leaders  are  risk  takers  who  maintain  faith,  courage  and 

energy.  One executive interviewed remarked:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4 1

I've  been  in  this  position  for  four  years,  and  every  year  the  work 
pressure  has  increased.  My  people  are  doing  all  they  can just  to  hold  on.  I'm  
fifty-seven,  and  I'm  doing  all  I  can  to  hold  on.  I  know  we  need  to  implement 
this thing.  I just don't think we can do one more major change (p.  15).

While  some  people  choose  to  make  deep  change,  others  choose  slow  death.  .  .  just 

holding on.  . .The author stressed that deep change requires continuous personal change. 

"We are energized when we are learning and progressing, and we begin  psychologically 

to  die  when  we  allow  ourselves  to  stagnate."  Deep  change  requires  willingness  to 

examine  past  failures,  and  learn  to  see  things  in  new  ways.  "People  seek  solutions  to 

new  problems  in  the  same  places  where  they  found  old  ones.”  Deep  change  requires 

new paradigms or cognitive maps. 

Quinn (1996) also stressed the need  for leaders to 

model  change  for other employees,  "this  requires  that  the  people at  the  top  themselves 

engage in the deep change process."  Furthermore, he emphasized the importance of the 

top management team functioning as a “team":

It  is common  for the  group  of people  who  head an  organization  to  refer 
to  themselves  as  the  top  management  team. 
I  have  worked  with  many  such 
groups.  Seldom has one of these groups actually  functioned as a team.  I define 
a  team  as  an  enthusiastic  set  of  competent  people  who  have  clearly  defined 
in 
roles,  associated 
trusting 
in  a  common  activity,  working  cohesively 
relationships,  and  exercising  personal  discipline  and  making 
individual 
sacrifices  for the good of the  team.  When  a team exhibits  these  characteristics, 
it  performs  at  levels  that  exceed  organizational  expectations.  The  whole  is 
greater than  the  sum  of its  parts.  There  is  high-level  cooperative  interaction. 
What  I  often  encounter  when  working  with  top  management  "teams"  is 
individual self-interest, anger, insecurity, distrust, little cohesion, and continuous 
political  posturing.  .  .  It  does  not  take  long  for  members  of an  organization  to 
figure  out  when  there  is  little  cohesion  within  the  top  “team."  This  team  is 
viewed by the rest of the organization as being  insincere and lacking in integrity, 
and  this  perception  breeds  contempt  at  every  level.  As  a  result,  there  is  little 
cooperation or sense of enthusiasm.  In such a distrustful climate, people tend to

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


their own self-interests.  Political alignments and coalitions  flourish (p.  161-2).

4 2

Building  trusting  relationships  is  key.  Quinn  (1996)  described  using  a  team  building 

intervention  in  which  he  helped  the  group  "discuss  the  undiscussable."  He  began  by 

engaging  participants  in a diagnosis of the culture of the organization, and a simulation 

exercise.  The  exercises  led  to  group  discussion about  trust  and cooperation.  The  next 

day  each  person  was  given  a  stack  of  index  cards  (one  for  each  of  the  other 

participants).  Each person  had to  write  what  they  most appreciated  and  admired  about 

every other person.  On the other side of each index card, they were told. "if you were to 

be  a  high  performance  work  team,  what  would you  need  from  each  person  that  you’re 

currently not getting?”  Index cards  were then sorted and given to each person  by  name 

so  that  they could review  the  feedback.  The  author reported  that  although the  exercise 

was  emotionally  exhausting,  their  trust  level  was  significantly  improved.  One  of the 

participants  commented.  "In  my  whole  career.  I  have  never  had  a  developmental 

experience that powerful."

Another important aspect of change management is the whole issue of employee 

participation,  involvement and empowerment.  Many contemporary  authors  emphasize 

the role of these three in effective  leadership of change.  In  fact,  the  terms  participation, 

involvement, and empowerment have all been discussed in the management literature as 

important prerequisites for effective the development of an organization culture that will 

support  change.  Neilsen  (1986)  noted  that  our concept  of authority  has  changed:  that 

the average citizen now feels more "empowered” than ever before.  This societal change

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4 3

has  had  major  implications  for the  workplace  overall.  The  trend  is  clearly  to  delegate 

authority  downward  in  organizations,  to  "empower"  the  workforce,  and  to  encourage 

employee  participation  in  a  variety  of  forms  (Lawler.  1980.  1987.  198S.  1991: 

Mohrman.  1982;  Mohrman and Lawler.  1988: Axelrod.  1992: Zell.  1994V  While  it  is 

the trend in organizations  and receives  much support at a philosophical  level,  the  move 

toward  increased  participation,  involvement,  and  empowerment  has  not  been  without 

difficulty  on  a  more  practical  level.  Neuman  (1989)  listed  nine  reasons  beyond 

personality  factors  why  an  employee  might  not  want  to  participate  in  organizational 

change:  Structural reasons which include organization design,  work design, and human 

resources  management  issues;  relational  reasons  which  include  the  management  of 

participation, dynamics of hierarchy, and an  individual's stance toward the organization; 

and,  societal  reasons  such  as  socialization,  ideology  of work,  and  the  social  history  of 

politics.

In  a  discussion  of  three  kinds  of  approaches  to  involvement  an  organization 

could choose to implement, Ledford (1991) stated:

We  believe  that  advanced  forms  of  employee  involvement  are  rare 
because  they  are  inconsistent  with  the  dominant  management  ideology  and 
fundamental design principles of most contemporary organizations (p. 7).

No  matter  what  ideological  forces  exist  to  promote  involvement  in  contemporary 

American work life, control  through hierarchy  is still  the dominant organizational  form. 

Pasmore  (1994)  in talking about the need  for increased  management  flexibility and real 

leadership wrote:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4 4

I  want  to  create  more  opportunities  for  leadership,  more  chances  for 
more people  with dreams to help the rest of us  live them.  The cause  of death in 
most  of our  large  organizations  is  control,  not  leadership:  but  because  the  two 
are often associated with the same people,  it's easy to  indict  leaders on the basis 
of circumstantial  evidence.  I  know  there  are  criminals  out  there:  leaders  who 
control their organizations to death in the service of their own egos, who destroy 
more  leadership  than  they  provide.  But  there  are  many  more  innocent  citizens 
who  find  themselves  in  leadership  positions  uncertain  of what  to  do.  of how  to 
encourage  dreams  or  innovation. 
I'm   also  certain  that  there  are  many  more 
brilliant  leaders  in  our  organizations  than  we  recognize,  and  that  our  current 
mode  of  organizing  will  keep  them  well  hidden,  unable  to  contribute  their 
genius to our success (p.  174).

Heirarchy. while an  inevitable element of organization at some  level,  makes  managerial 

flexibility  difficult  for  those  who  desire  to  manage  in  a  more  empowering  way,  and 

makes  control  easy  for those  who  want  to  maintain  it.  In  fact,  much  has  been  written 

about  the  difficulty  managers  have  in  giving  up  control.  Many  managers  and 

supervisors  see  employee  participation,  involvement  and  empowerment  as  a  threat. 

Klein  (1984)  reported  that  while  more  than  half  of  the  supervisors  interviewed 

perceived  employee  involvement  programs  as  positive  for their companies  and  for  the 

employees,  less  than  one  third  of  the  supervisors  viewed  them  as  beneficial  for 

themselves.  It  is  doubtful  that  supervisors  opinions  have  changed  dramatically  in  the 

past fifteen years.  Walton and Schlesinger (1979) noted that often supervisors are put in 

very ambiguous situations, that they may lack the skills to delegate effectively,  and that 

management  may  fail  to  support  supervisors  in  transition  as  the  workforce  begins  to 

take  on  more  of  the  supervisory  responsibilities.  Pyle  (1989)  looked  at  resistance  to 

participative  work  systems,  concluding  that  managers  may  feel  threatened  due  to

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4 5

perceived  losses, 

including  loss  of  control  associated  with  participative  decision 

making,  i.e..  “[they]  may  feel  that  they  no  longer have  a significant  role  to play  in  the 

organization."  The  author  found  support  for  the  hypothesis  that  supervisors  who  feel 

threatened  by  a  change  toward  employee  participation  may  react  by  tightening  their 

forms  of  control.  She  suggested  that  the  role  of  the  supervisor  must  be  carefully 

addressed  before  any  move  toward  employee  involvement  is  initiated.  Role  clarity  is 

key  to  supervisors'  understanding  what  they  are  supposed  to  do  as  leaders  of 

participative systems.  Mohrman  (1993)  and  Morley  (1995)  both  discussed  employee 

participation,  involvement, and empowerment in terms of the power dynamics at play in 

an organizational context.  Both of these  authors  reminded  us  that  "empowerment"  is  a 

relatively abstract concept that has popular appeal.  W hat that means  for daily work life 

in  terms  of  role  responsibilities,  access  to  information  and  involvement  in  decision 

making  is  another  matter.  Regardless  of the  numerous  pitfalls  associated  with  a  move 

away  from  hierarchy  toward  participation,  involvement  and  empowerment,  authors 

continue to try to understand and define the concepts.  Brower (1995) proposed four key 

elements  of  empowerment:  decision  making  authority,  accountability,  alignment  of 

direction, and "ableness."  Ableness has three components:  knowledge and skill:  having 

an  affirming,  receptive  will:  and.  having  the  requisite  physical,  emotional,  mental,  and 

spiritual state of being.  He commented:

Unfortunately,  most  education  and  training  does  nothing  to  raise  our 
state  of  being.  .  .Yet  our  state,  our  emotional,  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual 
condition,  is  tremendously  important  not  only  to  us  as  individuals,  but  also  to 
our  ableness  to  handle  our  daily  work  and  to  grow. 
It  is  so  important  and 
powerful a part of us that a negative state can undermine our capabilities (p. 22).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4 6

Spreitzer  (1995.  1996)  looked  at  both  psychological  dimensions  and  social 

characteristics  which  are  important  components  of  empowerment. 

Psychological 

dimensions included:  Meaning, competence, self-determination, and  the ability to have 

an  impact.  Social  characteristics  included:  Perceptions  of  role  ambiguity,  span  of 

control,  sociopolitical  support,  access  to  information  and  resources,  and  a  work  unit 

climate which fosters participation. 

Spreitzer and Quinn (1996) reported the results of 

a fascinating longitudinal study conducted at the  Ford Motor Company over a period of 

four years  with  approximately  three  thousand  mid  level  managers.  The  program  was 

designed  to  support  managers  to  become  transformational  leaders  in  their  work  units. 

They found three  factors  critical  to empowerment:  Self-esteem,  positive job affect and 

social support.  One of their most interesting findings was that those mid level managers 

who were “plateaued”  in  their organizational  roles  were  the people  most likely to make 

the most radical changes in their workgroups.  Quinn (1996) remarked:

If we want more  innovative,  more effective, and  more  influential  people 
in our organizations, empowerment  is  indeed worth the effort.  .  .Organizational 
conditions  lead  to an empowering environment but  not to empowerment.  In an 
empowering  environment,  people  are  more  likely  to  take  risks,  experience 
success,  and  then  feel  empowered  themselves.  We  do  not.  however,  empower 
people. 
Empowerment  cannot  be  delegated.  We  can  only  develop  an 
appropriate  empowering  environment  where  people  will  have  to  take  the 
initiative to empower themselves (p. 266-8).

While 

the 

road 

to 

implementation  of  participation, 

involvement  and 

empowerment  is  not  a  clear-cut  one,  it  certainly  receives  wide-spread  philosophical 

support  in  American  society  and,  in  this  author’s  opinion,  is  a  worthy  goal  to  work

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4 7

toward.  Although  some  people  are  uncomfortable  with  the  concepts  or  become 

frustrated for the reasons Neumann (1989)  listed, there are many others who are capable 

and interested  in pursuing participative,  involving, empowering work systems.  Clearly, 

it  is  an  important  facet  of  leadership  in  developing  change-capable  individuals  and 

organizations.

In  summary,  a  change  process 

that  is  likely 

to  elicit  emotionally  and 

behaviorallv  proactive  coping  strategies  is  one  that  fosters  trust  by  giving  people  the 

information,  resources,  emotional  and  social  support  they  need  to  adjust  to  and 

participate  in  the  changes. 

It  is  a  process  that  empowers  employees  to  participate  by 

fostering an empowering environment.  Those  leading the change  effort  need  to  model 

teamwork  at  the  top.  They  need  to  communicate  the  vision  in  ways  that  people  can 

understand, and they need to act in ways that are consistent with the  vision.  Leaders of 

change need to be models of deep change.  They need to  find ways people can “discuss 

the  undiscussable,"  and  promote  learning.  The  process  must  leave  people  feeling  that 

their  individual  needs can  be  met.  and  that  they  will  again  find  context  and  meaning. 

Successful  change  management  involves  helping people  to  develop  a  proactive  coping 

style.

Toward the Greatest Good fo r  the Individual and the  Organization 

Helping  people  leam  to  cope  proactively  with  organizational  change  is 

beneficial  to  both  the  individual  and  his  or  her  organization.  Encouraging  what 

Neilsen  (1984)  called  a  “spirit  of co-inquiry."  (in  which  problems  are  openly  shared 

and  solutions  are  mutually  determined)  fosters  trust  and  the  kinds  of  willingnesses

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


4 8

Arrien  (1991)  described  in  "Lessons  from Geese.”  Maddi and  Kobasa (1984)  urged 

companies  to  consider  ways  in  which  people  can  foster  "hardiness”  by  facilitating 

such  changes  that  employee  commitment,  control,  and  challenge  are  maintained: 

thus,  avoiding  actions  which  foster  a  sense  of powerlessness  and  threat.  We  know 

that people  tend  to  respond  to  their lives,  stress,  change,  and organizational  change  in 

a  manner  that  is  either generally  proactive  or  reactive.  While  the  literature  suggests 

predispositions  for proactive  or reactive  coping  styles  stem  from  a  series  of life-long 

learning  experiences,  we  know'  that  a  cognitive  approach  toward  learning  proactive 

coping  strategies  can  work.  Organizations  which  develop  policies  and  procedures, 

and  culture,  and  adopt  an  approach  to  change  management  that  considers  individual 

needs  and  allows  for  participation  will  encourage  both  emotional  and  behavioral 

proactivity. 

Encouraging  proactive  coping  styles 

is  not  only 

is  healthy  for 

individuals,  fostering  "hardy”  employees,  but  also  is  an essential  aspect  of creating  a 

“change-capable" organization culture.

II.  Research Propositions and Questions 

The  following  propositions  relate  to  the  relationship  of  individual  and  environmental 

level  variables to coping styles:

Proposition #1:  There  will  be  a significant  relationship  between  how  one  has 
responded  to  role conflict  situations  in  the past and  his or her 
coping style in the present;  the more proactively one has coped 
with  role  conflict  in  the  past,  the  more  proactively  s/he  will 
cope w'ith change in the present.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4 9

Proposition  #2:  The  amount  of  role  conflict  experienced  in  one's  job  will  be 
significantly correlated with his or her coping style;  the greater 
the amount of role conflict, the less proactive the coping style.

Proposition  #3:  A  person's  level  of  organization-based  self-esteem  will  be 
significantly correlated with his or her coping  style;  the  higher 
the OBSE.  the more proactive the coping style.

Proposition #4:  A person’s job affect will  be  significantly correlated with  his 
or  her coping  style;  the  more  proactive  the  coping  style,  the 
more  positive  one’s  job  affect,  and  the  more  reactive  the 
coping style, the more negative one's job affect.

Proposition #5: One’s status in the organization will be significantly correlated 
the  more 

with  his  or her coping  style:  the  higher the  status, 
proactive the coping style.

Proposition  #6:  How  well  one’s  individual  needs  are  met  going  through  the 
change process will be significantly correlated with his or her 
coping  style: 
the  more 
proactive  the  coping  style,  and  the  less  one’s  needs  are  met. 
the more reactive the coping style.

the  more  one’s  needs  are  met. 

Proposition #7:  People who perceive the organization to have a supportive

culture  for  change  will  be  more  likely  to  have  a  proactive 
coping style.

Proposition  #8:  Management  of  the  change  process  will  affect  one’s  coping 
style; the more empowering the process, the more proactive his 
or her coping style.

The  following  research  questions  relate  to  the  relative  importance  of different  coping 

style correlates on proactivity:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


5 0

Research  Question  # l :What  is  the  relative  importance  of different  coping  style

correlates  in accounting  for a person's  coping  style  in 
the present?

Research  Question  #2:What  is  the  relative  importance  of different  coping  style
correlates  in  accounting  for  a  person's  coping  style  in 
the future?

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


CHAPTER 3 

METHODOLOGY

I.  Introduction to the Research

This 

study  was  conducted 

in 

a  medium-sized. 

non-union.  Midwest 

manufacturing 

plant.  The  plant  can  be  characterized  by  its  high  throughput,  and 

continuous  process  operations.  Until  recently,  its  market  niche,  maintained  over  time, 

allowed  for  stability  of  operations,  hierarchical  management,  and  a  stable  culture.  This 

study 

focused  on  the  plant  leadership  group:  people  in  positions  of  supervision.  The 

research  began  in  the  Fall  of  1996.  The  plant’s  role  in  the  corporation’s  business  plan 

had  been  changing.  As  a  result,  some  of the  large  volume  processes  that  the  plant  had 

been  geared  up  for in  the  1970s  were  being  transferred  to  other  facilities,  and  this  plant 

was 

to  become 

the  plant  of  choice  for  new  business  and  a  larger  variety  of  smaller 

quantity  orders.  By  the  year  2000,  the  plant  anticipated  downsizing  considerably.  Their 

plan  was  to  downsize  via  attrition  rather  than  having  layoffs  or  widespread  buy-outs. 

The  plant  had  been  assigned  a  new  plant  manager  who  had  come  in  with  the  new  Chief 

Executive  Officer  (CEO)  at  the  beginning  of  1996  saying.  "By  the  end  of  the  year,  this 

plant  will  be  visibly  different.”  A  plant  redesign  team  was  commissioned,  which 

included  three  experienced  engineers:  the  two  operations  managers  and  the  organization 

effectiveness  manager  who  later  became  head  of the  human  resources  group  at  the  plant. 

The  plant 

steering  committee  had  attended  a  Reengineering  seminar,  and  the  plant 

redesign  team's  mission  was  to  reengineer  the  plant  around processes and coordinate by

51

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


5 2

production shift rather than departments within shifts.  By the end of  1996.  the redesign 

team  presented  a  proposal  to  the  steering  committee  which  put  engineers  back  on 

rotating  shifts  in  an  effort  to  emphasize  plant-wide  metrics  and  goals,  and  reduce  the 

number  of  supervisory  positions  by  one  third.  Prior  to  this  change,  one  of  the 

production  units  along  with  the  warehouse  group  had  gone  through  extensive  training 

on self-directed work teams and had been in the process of becoming self-directed  for a 

period  of about two years.  While  people  gave  the  initiative  mixed  reviews,  it  was  felt 

that  some  of  the  empowerment  concepts  could  still  be  applied  plant-wide  and 

incorporated directly into the redesign.

This  was  the  first  time  the  plant  had  invited  someone  from  the  field  of social 

science to do a research project.  I  was  not being paid by  the company  for the  research, 

nor  was  I  asked  to  focus  on  a particular  research  topic.  However,  I  was  interested  in 

research  that  would  have  relevance  for  the  people  hosting  me.  Due  to  the  nature  of 

ongoing  change  efforts  in  the  plant.  I.  along  with  representatives  from  the  plant  and 

corporate human resources departments, decided that the focus of the study would be on 

the  changing  nature  of  plant  leadership.  Human  resources  personnel  wanted  to 

understand the nature of peoples’  proactivity or reactivity to the changes being proposed 

by the design team, in an effort to help people cope more effectively through the change 

process.

Participants  were  selected  by  the  researcher  based  an  analysis  of  official 

organization charts  and suggestions  made  by  plant redesign design  team  members  who 

were  also  part  of  the  research  sample.  Because  it  was  not  possible  to  interview  all

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


5 3

personnel with supervisory positions in the plant due to the researcher’s time constraints, 

a sample  of forty  people  was chosen  which  represented approximately  half of the  total 

supervisory group at that time.  The selection focused particularly on the operations area 

but included representation from key leadership positions across many other areas of the 

plant 

including  Human  Resources.  Customer  Support.  Administration.  Quality 

Assurance.  Environmental  Safety  and  Health.  Logistics,  and  Engineering  Services. 

Half of the  sample  was  comprised of degreed engineers  and one other degreed  person, 

and  the  other  half was  comprised  of non-degreed  foremen  with  the  exception  of  two 

people:  one  person  who had obtained  a non-technical  Bachelor's degree  while  working 

and another who was  in  the process of obtaining an engineering degree while  working. 

Only  two  out  of the  forty  participants  were  women.  The  average  age  of the  degreed 

engineers was approximately thirty nine years with an average tenure with the company 

of  approximately  fifteen  years.  The  average  age  of  the  non-degreed  foremen  was 

approximately  forty  eight  years  with  an  average  tenure  with  the  company  of 

approximately  twenty  six  years.  Thirty  eight  out  of the  forty  participants’  jobs  were 

directly  affected  by  the  plant  redesign  (one  of the  participants  retired  before  I  finished 

the  research and one of the  participants  was  the  plant manager whose job  remained  the 

same.)

II.  Research  Design and Methodology

I conducted field research over a period of six months.  The research began  with 

a two hour interview  with  each  of the  participants.  During  that time,  participants  were 

told  the  purpose  of the  study,  asked  to  fill  out  a  measure  of Organization-Based  Self-

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


5 4

Esteem, and then asked to respond to a series of structured, open-ended questions about 

the history of the plant and their role in it. the nature of decision making and handling of 

conflict, and the plant vision statement which had been recently redrafted and published 

plant-wide  (see  Appendices  I  and  II  for  copies  of  the  OBSE  measure  and  Structured 

Interview  #1).  Each  interview  was  tape  recorded  and  transcribed  by  the  researcher. 

None  of the  participants  refused  to  be  taped.  These  interviews  were conducted  during 

the  months  of October and  November,  1996  before  the  plant  redesign  team  had  made 

their proposal to the plant steering committee.

Subsequently.  I  developed  a  survey  based  on  the  themes  emerging  from  the 

interviews  which  was  distributed  to  each  of the  forty  participants  along  with  measures 

of role  conflict  (called  “Job  Roles”)  and job  affect  (called  “Job  Attitudes”),  and  asked 

people to respond to a set of four scenarios (called “Adaptive Strategies”) developed to 

assess  prior coping styles  under different  types  of role conflict  (see Appendix  III,  Parts 

I, II and III).  Ail of the participants  filled out the survey by the first week of December. 

During the  months of December and January,  all  plant employees  attended  at least  one 

focus  group  meeting  in  which  members  of  the  design  team  explained  the  plant 

redesign's  purpose  and  reviewed  the  new  organization  charts.  These  meetings  were 

conducted  primarily  by  the  department  heads  in  small  (N=20),  mixed  groups  of 

foremen,  operators,  engineers  and  other  support  personnel  so  to  allow  for  discussion. 

After  focus  group  meetings  were  finished,  I  interviewed  research  participants  a second 

time  (between  mid-February  and  the  end  of  March)  using  an  open-ended,  structured 

interview format similar to the first interview (see Appendix IV for a copy of Structured

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


5 5

Interview #2).  Each  interview  lasted about one hour.  These  interviews  were  also  tape 

recorded and transcribed  by  the  researcher.  Again,  none  of the  interviewees  refused  to 

be  taped.  Second  interviews  were  meant  to  further assess  how  people  were  preparing 

for  the  upcoming  organizational  changes.  Concurrently  with  second  interviews, 

research  participants  were  going  through  a  nomination  process.  All  plant  employees 

were  involved  in  nominating  themselves  and  their  co-workers  to  positions  in  the 

redesigned  organization  chart  (see  Appendix  V  for  a  comparison  of  old  and  new 

organization charts  and  participants’  positions before  and after redesign).  At  that  time, 

two of the  forty  participants were  moved to corporate positions and had relocated prior 

to  their second  interviews,  and  one  of the  forty  had  retired  and  was  unavailable  for  a 

second interview.

Upon leaving the research site at the beginning of April. I sent each participant a 

thank  you  letter  with  a  research  evaluation  form  to  be  filled  out  anonymously  and 

returned  by  mail  to  me  at  CWRU  (see  Appendix  VI  for  a  copy  of  the  form  used). 

Twenty  seven  out  of  the  thirty  nine  forms  sent  out  were  returned.  All  twenty  seven 

reported that the purpose  of the  research  was clear,  that the  participants  felt completely 

free to express their honest opinion at all times, and that they  trusted that their interview 

and  survey  information  would  be  kept  confidential  as  promised.  Twenty-three  out  of 

twenty-seven  people  reported  that  they  felt  they  had  learned  something  of  value  by 

participating in  the research process.  Twenty-four out of twenty-seven said they would 

approve of having  other graduate  students  propose  research projects  like  this  one:  That 

they saw it as value added to have students engage in this kind of research.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


On  May  1.  1997  new  positions  were  announced.  Three  research  participants 

5 5

were  no  longer  with  the  plant.  One  was  unaffected  by  the  changes  because  of  his 

position  as plant  manager.  Two of the  participants  were  minimally  affected since  they 

were  already  steering  committee  members  in  particular  roles  which  changed  only  in 

terms  of  increased  responsibility  for  the  success  of  plant  redesign.  However,  the 

remaining  thirty-four  were  greatly  affected  by  the  nomination  process:  three  of  the 

participants  were  moved  back  to  being  operators,  three  were  promoted  to  the  plant 

steering committee level and made direct reports to the plant manager,  two remained as 

direct  reports  to  the  plant  manager  but  acquired  many  new  roles  and  responsibilities, 

and  of  the  remaining  twenty-six  participants  only  eight  were  given  new  supervisory 

positions  while  the  others  were  assigned  non-supervisory  technical  specialties.  Note 

that the redesigned organization  had one  third fewer supervisory  positions  built  into  its 

new structure.  This was truly a major plant redesign.

III.  Development and Validation of Measures Used

A.  Structured Interviews #1  and #2

The  purpose  of  these  interviews  was  two-fold: 

the  researcher  wanted  to

understand  both  the  history  and  culture  of the  organization,  and  the  experience  of the 

interviewee  in  his  or  her  role  in  the  organization  and  the  change  process.  Questions 

used  in these measures were  developed through discussions  between  the researcher and 

the  dissertation  advisory  committee  members  (see  Appendices  II  and  IV).  These 

interview' protocols  were designed to be  open-ended  in  order to  get  the  interviewees  to

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


5 7

reflect  on  their  experiences  in  the  organization  over  time  leading  up  to  the  current 

organizational change process (Structured Interview #1), and their experience going into 

major organizational change (Structured Interview #2).  Because these interviews would 

be  generating  transcripts  which  would  then  be coded  for clues  as  to each  interviewee's 

level  of  proactivity  in  the  organization  both  in  the  past  and  concurrent  with  ongoing 

organizational change efforts, the researcher tried to give each person ample opportunity 

to  give  examples  of  how  s/he  had  been  proactive  in  the  organization  up  until  the 

interview as  well  as  respond to questions  related to how  s/he  would  handle  his/her role 

in the  future. 

In  order  to  code  participants'  first  and  second  interview  transcripts  for 

proactivity.  I developed a code (see Appendix VII)  which was based on the  first twenty 

interview  transcripts  from  Structured  Interview  #1. 

I  used  this  code  to  assign  a 

proactivity score to each participant for both Structured Interviews #1  and #2.  Interview 

transcripts  were  given  a  score  of  1,  2,  3,  or  4  to  reflect  the  quadrant  in  the  coding 

scheme  in  which  the  modal  number of statements coded were  found  for each transcript 

(l=highly  proactive,  2=moderateIy proactive.  3=generally  reactive.  4=highly  reactive). 

In  order  to  validate  the  use  of this  code,  twenty  interview  transcripts  from  Structured 

Interview  #1  (conducted  Fall  1996)  and  10  transcripts  from  Structured  Interview  #2 

(conducted  Spring  1997)  were  given  to  a  thirty  year-old  male  Master's  of  Business 

Administration  (M.B.A.)  student  from  another  university  who  had  taken  a  class  in 

Organizational  Behavior.  I  described the  purpose of the  research  to  him  and answered 

questions  about  the  use  of the  code.  He  then coded  the  selected  transcripts.  Inter-rater 

reliability of 76%  was established based on a validation sample of thirty out of seventy

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


5 3

nine  transcripts,  where  the  rater  and  researcher  agreed  that  the  modal  number  of 

responses  for  a given  transcript  was  either on  the  proactive  or  the  reactive  side  of the 

coping  style  typology 

(see  Appendix  VIII). 

Inter-rater  reliability  decreased  to  53% 

when  agreement  on  the  particular  quadrant  each  transcript  belonged  in  within  the 

proactive  dimension  was  considered  (i.e..  when  the  emotional  dimension  was  added, 

creating quadrants #2 and #4 of the coding scheme).  Upon comparing  the  codes  given 

by the two different raters, three observations were made.  First, neither coder found any 

codeable  statements  for  quadrant  #4  (emotionally  proactive/behaviorally  reactive). 

Second,  most  of  the  disagreements  between  the  two  raters  dealt  with  whether  a 

particular interview  fell in one of the two emotionally proactive categories.  Agreement 

on whether an interview was proactive versus  reactive  was at the 76%  level:  70%  with 

respect to the  twenty  interview transcripts  from Structured  Interview #1,  and 90%  with 

respect  to  the  twenty  interview  transcripts  from  Structured  Interview  #2  (note  that  the 

format for Structured Interview #2 contained questions that were much more focused on 

the  redesign,  hence  they  offered  more  codeable  data  than  transcripts  from  Structured 

Interview #1).  Third,  in six out of the seven cases where there was a disagreement over 

whether an interview should be classified as an overall quadrant #1  or #2 (see Appendix 

VIII),  the  M.B.A.  coder  took  a  more  conservative  stance,  disagreeing  over  whether or 

not  action  taken  by  the  interviewee  was  truly  independent  of  the  organization’s 

directives.  Since  both  coders  agreed  that  the  difference  between  quadrant  #1  and  #2 

was  a  matter of degree  to  which  the  interviewee  had  displayed  proactive  behavior  (as 

well  as  emotion),  the  decision  was  made  to  convert  the  two  dimension/four  category

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


scheme  into  a  single  dimension  (generally  proactive  versus  generally  reactive),  with 

5 9

four levels intensity:

I =highly  proactive  including  activities  that  might  be  construed  as 
independent initiative:

Immoderately proactive (cooperative)

3 =generally reactive

4=highly  reactive,  including  activities  that  might  be  construed  as  going 
against the organization’s stated objectives or plans.

The  researcher’s  assignment  of quadrant  numbers  were  kept  for all  transcripts 

coded including the thirty  transcripts  from Structured  Interviews #1  and #2 which were 

used  as  the  validation  sample.  Lastly,  there  were  four  cases  where  there  was  total 

disagreement between the  researcher and the  M.B.A.  student rater in assignment of the 

participants'  transcripts  as  overall  proactive  or reactive  (see cases  marked  by  a  *  under 

the column  "Transcript #").  In other words,  the  researcher had marked  the  transcript an 

overall "1" and the rater had marked it an overall “3” or vice  versa.  In these  four cases, 

a third  party,  a  professor of Organizational  Behavior,  was  asked  to  code each  of those 

four transcripts using the coding scheme.  With three of the four transcripts coded by the 

third  party,  there  was  agreement  with  the  researcher's  overall  category  coding.  The 

exception  was  transcript #24;  the  researcher coded  it  an  overall  "3",  and  the  third  party 

scored  it  an  overall  "2”. 

In  this  case,  the  researcher’s  classification  was  used  in  the 

analyses.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


6 0

In  order  to  have  more  confidence  about  using  the  researcher's  classification  of 

proactivity  for  transcripts  from  Structured  Interviews  #1  and  #2,  all  of the  important 

correlation  analyses  reported  in  Chapter  4  were  reanalyzed  in  using  two  different 

variations.  In  the  first case,  analyses  were repeated by reassigning all of the transcripts 

from Structured Interview #1  u'hich received an overall “ 1" or "2" (proactive rating) the 

same  rating  "1”  meaning  “proactive”.  In  the  second  case,  all  of the  transcripts  from 

Structured  Interview  #1  which  received a rating of "2”  were  dropped  from  the  data set 

(resulting N=27).  Results  of the  two  sets of analyses  were consistent with  the  original 

analyses.  In  fact,  when  transcripts  coded  “2”  were  dropped  from  the  analyses,  the 

correlation coefficients were significantly improved in many cases.

B.  Year-End Survey

The following components comprised the Year-end Survey  (see Appendix HI):

•  Job Roles 

(Appendix HI,  Part I: measure of current role conflict)

•  Job Attitudes (Appendix III, Part II: measure of job affect:  positive/negative)

•  Adaptive 
Strategies 

(Appendix HI, Part ID:  measure of prior coping styles in 
response to role conflict)

•  Interview 
Themes

(Appendix HI, Part IV:  from Structured Interview #1)

The  measures  called  “Job  Roles”  and  “Job  Attitudes"  were  borrowed  from  Holdorf 

(1975).  In his dissertation. Holdorf borrowed from and expanded on the work of French

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


6 1

and  Cobb  (Margolis  and  Kroes,  1973)  in  looking  at  what  he  called  "stress  model 

components."  The  first  part  of Holdorfs  stress  model  relates  to  types  of role  conflict 

people  typically  experience  in  organizational  life,  what  I  have  labeled  above  as  "Job 

Roles".  Holdorf (1975) delineated five types of role conflict:

•  Sent: 

Stress occurs as people receive conflicting demands:

•  Role Ambiguity. 

Stress  occurs  as  people  have  inadequate  information
necessary to perform their roles:

• Interpersonal: 

Stress comes from intrusions across role boundaries:

•  Intrapersonal: 

Stress  arises  when  there exists  conflicting  internal  needs
an/or desires;  and,

•  Systems: 

Stress occurs as people interface with organizational
subsystems other than their own and experience mutually 
exclusive definitions of each subsystem’s domain.

Holdorf  (1975)  measured  each  of  the  five  types  of  role  conflict  with  four  or  more 

questions.  He  then  computed  inter-item  correlations  (between  items  in  a  given 

subcategory) and item-total correlations (between each item score and the total score for 

each  subcategory)  in  order  to  establish  construct  validity  for  each  of  the  categories 

(N=87).  Items  that  demonstrated  correlations  with  the  sum  of the  other  items  with  a 

Pearson r =.30 or above were  retained in their categories.  For purposes of this research. 

I  combined  the  interpersonal  and  intrapersonal  categories. 

I  selected  two  items  from 

each  of the  interpersonal  and  intrapersonal  role  stress  categories  and  created  a  single 

category.  Furthermore,  I  limited  the  number of questions  to  four pertaining  to each of 

the  remaining  four  categories.  The  following  tables  show  inter-item  and  item-total

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


correlations for questions related to each of the four role conflict categories.

6 2

Table  la:  Inter-item and  Item-total Correlations  for Questions  Used to Measure Sent Role Conflict

Item

Correlations 

Inter-Item 

Item-Total

I.  Different people ask you  to 

do thines which conflict.

2.  People in a good position  to 
see  if you do what they ask 
give you things to do which 
conflict with one another.

.54*

.0

3.  People whose requests should 
be met give you things which 
conflict with other  work you 
have to do.

.37** 

.33** 

.43** 

.37** 

4.  People whose requests should 
be met give you things which 
conflict with other requests you 
receive.

.35** 

.39** 

.63** 

.38** 

.44** 

.61** 

Note: 

The first correlation coefficient listed  in each  pair was taken  from  Holdorfs (1975)
findings,  the second  from  this research  study.

Note: 

**  Denotes  p=.01.

Note:  The original  wording  for  Item  I  was.  "Persons equal  in  rank and authority over you

ask you to do things which conflict."

.74*

.72*

.74**

.70**

.78**

.79**

.80**

.81**

Table  la shows the questions  used  to  measure sent role conflict,  and  the  inter-item and 

item-total  correlations  found  in  this  research  (N=40)  compared  with  what  Holdorf

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


(L975)  found in his research (N=87).  We can see  from the results of Table  la that these 

four questions are highly intercorrelated,  indicating that they are all  measuring  the same 

6 3

general construct.

Table  lb:  Inter-item and  Item-total Correlations  for Questions  Used  to  Measure  Role Ambiguity  Conflict

Item

Correlations

Inter-Item

Item-Total

I

-)

3

1.  How often are you clear on 

what your job responsibilities are ?

2.  How often can you predict

what others will expect 
o f you on the job ?

56**

.46**

3.  How much of the time are

your work objectives well 
defined?

.48**

.39**

.09

4.  How often arc you clear

about what others expect 
o f you on  the job ?

.56*

.63**

.39*

.24

.67**

.36*

Note:  *  Denotes p=.05;  **  denotes p=.0l.

.79**

.73**

.81**

.59**

.82**

.67**

.88**

.75**

The  reader  may  note  that  these  research  data  show  that  two  of  the  inter-item 

correlations  are  not  significant,  and  that  the  total-item correlation  for  item  2  while  still

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


significant, is lower that what Holdorf (1975)  found.

6 4

Table  lc:  Inter-item and  Item-total  Correlations  for Questions  Used to Measure  Inter/Intra Personal 

Role Conflict

Item

Correlations

Inter-Item 

Item -Total 

1 

2 

3

1.  To what extent does your manager 
agree with  you  regarding your own 
assessment o f your readiness for 
promotion?

2. To what extent are you and your 
manager committed to the same 
goals?

.42** 

.06 

3 . 1 can be as open and honest as  I'd 
like to be  with  my  subordinates.

4 . 1 can be as open and honest as  I'd 

like to be with  my  peers.

xx 

.13 

xx 

.28 

xx 

.11 

xx 

xx 

.36* 

.43** 

.55**

.62**

.55** 

.49**

.50* 

.60**

.46* 

.81**

Note: 

Item-total correlations  listed  for Holdorfs (1975) data are  based on the total  number o f questions 
for each of the inter- and intrapersonal categories: there are only two of  those questions  for each 
category  listed.

Note:  *  Denotes p=.05:  **  Denotes p=.01.

The  reader  may  note  that  while  most  of  the  inter-item  correlations  are  not 

significant, that the item-total correlations are significant at least at the p=.05  level.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


6 5

Tabic  Id:  Inter-item and  Item-total Correlations  for Questions  Used  to  Measure  Systems  Role Conflict

(rent

Correlations

Inter-Item

Item-Total

1 

2

3

1.  How much do you take  part  with

others  in  making decisions that
affect you?

2.  How much do you participate  with
others in  helping set the way things
are done on your job?

.51**

.55**

3.  How much do you decide with

others what part o f a task you  will do?

.46** 

.44**

.33* 

.42**

4. To  what extent are you and the inter­
face support departments within  the
company committed to  the same goals?

25* 

.20*

.15 

.55**

.18*

.25

Note:  *  Denotes p=.05;  **  Denotes p=.01.

.79**

.66**

.76**

.86**

.73**

.68**

.56**

.71**

We  can  see  from  these  results  that  questions  1-3  are  highly  intercorrelated; 

although  question  4  is  less  significantly  correlated  with  the  others,  the  item-total 

correlations  are  significant.  Overall,  there  seems  to  be  a  basis  for  validity  of  the 

construct being measured.

In addition to measures of job roles, attitudes, and adaptive strategies,  interview

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


6 6

themes  were  developed  by  the  researcher  using  interview  transcripts  from  Structured 

Interview #1;  themes  were  taken out of the  transcripts often  word  for  word (unless  the 

particular  words  used  could,  by  their  style,  identify  a  particular  interviewee  in  which 

case the wording was altered).  Items  were then thematically grouped  into  the  following 

sub-categories:

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

People-to-people relationships
Plant culture
Vision
Future
Conflict
Influence
Career development
Relationship with the corporation
Empowerment
Loyalty
Information flow
Training
Leadership
Customers
Recognition
Work orientation and values
Decision making
Plant redesign

One of the sub-categories was added by the researcher:

• 

Organizational relationships

This category came out of work done by  Neilsen  (1984)  which develops  three different 

models for looking at a group's orientation toward each of two different dimensions:

1.  People's willingness to be candid about their experience in the organization versus 
being closed, and willingness to take responsibility for behavior in the organization 
versus willingness to delegate that responsibility;

2.  People's  willingness  to  relate  to  each  other  in  terms  of  formal  roles  versus 
holistically as people, and people viewing each other as equals versus unequals; and.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


6 7

3.  People  viewing  most  members  of  the  organization  as  committed 

the 
organization’s  welfare versus viewing only a few as committed, and people viewing 
most  members  of  the  organization  as  having  important  resources  to  offer  versus 
viewing only a few people to have important resources to offer.
In  each  of the  three  models,  the  pair of dimensions  can  be  laid  out  on  axes  where

to 

each of the  four resulting quadrants  is  descriptive  of an  "organizational  type".  Neilsen

(1984)  proposed  that organization development efforts  are  most easily  undertaken  with

those  organizations  where  members  respond  in  a  favorable  way  to  each  of  the

dimensions  in  each  of  the  models  (i.e.,  are  candid  about  their  experiences,  and  take

responsibility  for  their  own  behavior,  relate  to  each  other  holistically,  and  view  each

other as equals;  believe that  most members are committed to  the organization's welfare,

and believe that most members have important resources to offer).

I  also  added  a  general  job  satisfaction  question  (Item  #10  under  the  subcategory

‘"Work Orientation and Values”).

After the  Year-End  Survey was  developed,  it  occurred  to  me  that  a  subset  of the

Interview Themes  could  be  used  to create  a separate  scale  which could  be  used  as  an

additional  measure  of  a  person's  proactivity. 

I  call  this  scale,  “Propensity  for

Proactivity”  because  it  contains  items  which  indicate  how  a  person  thinks  about  the

upcoming organizational changes and his  or her perception of his or her role  in  them.

I selected twenty-two items  from the  Year-End Survey (see Appendix  EX).  Sum  totals

on  these  items  were  created  and  then  used  in  subsequent  correlation  analyses.

Descriptive  statistics  reveal  the  nature  of the  distribution  for  this  sample  as  follows:

N=40; 

range  (54-97):  X=74.45;  S.D.=  11.53.  Although  the  sample  size  was  very

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


6 8

small  for running a reliable  principal  components  analysis  (PCA),  results  of the  PCA 

showed two principal components;  the  first component, accounting for 32% of the 

total  variance  in  the  model,  and  the  second  component  accounting  for  only  11% 

additional  variance.  When I looked at the complete correlation matrix,  it was obvious 

that  only  the  eight  items  making  up  the  first  principal  component  were  all  highly 

intercorrelated;  therefore,  I  decided  not  to  use  items  from  the  second  component  in 

subsequent  analyses.  The  following  eight  items  were  included  in  the  first  principal 

component:

Table 2:  Revised Propensity for Proactivity Measure

Vision 5: 
Vision 9: 
* Future  10: 

I see the big picture and my role in it.
I think I’m in a position to get the plant to achieve the vision statement.
It’s hard to know how to gear up for the future because I really don’t
know where we’re going.
I think I’m in a position to influence the future and well-being of the
plant.
Influence 6: 
I have the freedom to contribute to this organization in the way I see fit.
Influence  14:  I think I can influence the outcome o f redesign so that we’ll wind up a 

Influence  1: 

better run organization in the long run.

^Decision  14:  I get by-passed in decision making around here.
^Redesign 9: 

I don’t feel I can have an impact on the outcome of plant redesign.

*Note:  These items were reverse scored for purposes of analysis.

Descriptive  statistics  for  the  revised  measure  are  as  follows:  N=40;  range  (15-38); 

X=26.75;  S.D.=5.86.  The correlation between  participants  scores on the  two  measures

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


6 9

was  significant  (r=.93;  p=.Ol).  Using  participants*  scores  on  the  revised  measure,  ail 

analyses  involving the  Propensity for Proactivitv measure were  recomputed.  All  of the 

results  held  their  significance;  therefore,  what  is  reported  in  the  results  section  are  the 

correlation coefficients using the revised Propensity for Proactivity measure.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


CHAPTER 4 

SETTING AND RESULTS

I.  History of Organization Developments:  The Setting

In order to set the stage for the results section, it is important to begin with a  history 

of organization  development  efforts  at  the  corporate  and  plant  levels,  and  to 

review  the 

results  of  the  Year-End  Survey  before  presenting  the  results  of  specific  quantitative 

analyses.  In  1991. the Chief Executive  Officer (CEO) of the  corporation  wrote  a reminder 

to  the  employees  about  the  on-going  quality  initiative  from  the  mid  1980s.  The  late 

Edwards Deming, well acclaimed first in Japan during the restructuring period that followed 

World War 13, had been  called in  as a consultant to the corporation.  Deming's  "14 points", 

which  were  adopted  as  guidelines  for  the  corporation,  are  as  follows  (taken  from  an 

employee quality manual being used in the plant):

•  Create constancy of purpose toward improvement of product and service, with 

the aim to become competitive and to stay in business, and to provide jobs.

•  Adopt the new philosophy.  We are in a new economic age. Western 

management must awaken to the challenge, must learn their responsibilities, 
and take on leadership for change.

•  Cease dependence on inspection to achieve quality.  Eliminate the need for 

inspection on a mass basis by building quality into the product in the first 
place.

•  End the practice of awarding business on the basis of price tag.  Instead, 

minimize total cost.  Move toward a single supplier for any one item, on a 
long-term relationship of loyalty and trust.

•  Improve constantly and forever, the system of production and service, to 

improve quality and productivity, and  thus constantly decrease costs.

70

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


7 1

•  Institute training on the job.

•  Institute leadership.  The aim of leadership should be to help people and 

machines and gadgets to do a better job.  Leadership of management is in need 
of overhaul, as well as leadership of production workers.

• Drive out fear, so that everyone may work effectively for the company.

•  Break down barriers between departments.  People in research, design, sales 

and production must work as a team, to  foresee problems of production and in 
use that may be encountered with the product or service.

•  Eliminate slogans, exhortations and targets for the work force asking for zero 

defects and new levels of  productivity.

•  Eliminate work standards (quotas) on the factory floor.  Substitute leadership: 

Eliminate management by objective.  Eliminate management by numbers, 
numerical goals.

•  Remove barriers that rob the hourly worker of his right to pride of 

workmanship.  The responsibility of supervisors must be changed  from sheer 
numbers to quality.  Remove barriers that rob people in management and in 
engineering of their right to pride of workmanship. This means, among other 
things, abolishment of the annual or merit rating and of management by 
objective, management by numbers.

•  Institute a vigorous program of education and self-improvement.

•  Put everybody in the company to work to accomplish the transformation. The 

transformation is everybody's job.

Each  of  the  14  points  was  "operationalized"  by  the  organization's  corporate  quality 

group.  The CEO stated:

In the years ahead, we need to continue to strengthen  our  understanding 
and  use  of quality  management  for the  benefit of our customers  and  our  future 
growth.  During  the  past  nine  months,  our quality group  has  been  studying  our 
progress  and  direction  for  quality  management  using  your  input  from  various 
focus  groups  and  14  points  meetings.  Coming  from  this  work  are  three

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


objectives which will be incorporated into our  1992 strategic plans:

7 2

•  Become a more external customer driven company: one that strives to meet or 

exceed customer expectations as measured by our customers' perception.

•  Create the proper environment, as measured by our employees' perceptions, to 

implement quality management.

•  Develop a system to measure the effect of quality  management on the 

business.

For  a  better  understanding  of  Deming’s  work  and  the  total  quality  movement  in 

industry,  Deming  (1982),  Ishikawa  (1985),  Lawler  (1986).  Garvin  (1987),  and 

Hackman and Wageman (1995) are excellent references.

In  1992,  concurrently  with  the  appointment of a  new  Vice  President  of Human 

Resources  (HR),  the  CEO  of  the  corporation  encouraged  people  to  read  Stephen 

Covey's  "Seven  Habits  of  Highly  Effective  People”  (1991),  which  he  felt  would 

contribute  to  creating  a  learning  environment  as  well  as  foster  a  continued  focus  on 

quality.  These seven habits are:

•  Be proactive-, increase your self-awareness,
•  Begin with the end in mind: use your imagination,
•  Put first things first: use your willpower,
•  Think  'win-win': seek mutual benefit in relationships.
•  Seek first to understand: then to be understood,
•  Synergize:  seek new alternatives and be creative, and
•  Sharpen the saw: engage in self-renewal and improvement.

Due  to  changes 

in 

the  business  environment,  which  included  increased  market 

competition  and  the  need  for  creative  business  solutions,  the  culture  of  the  overall 

organization  has  been  in  a state  of transition.  Employees  are  being encouraged  to  take

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


7 3

more  responsibility  for  their  own  careers.  As  the  corporation  continues  to  flatten  its 

structure,  people  who are  flexible  in  terms  of the  direction of their careers  (i.e..  pursue 

horizontal  opportunities  rather  than  look  to  upward  mobility  as  a  career  ladder)  are 

becoming more valued.

Beginning  in  1992.  the  corporation  was  "realigned."  Strategic  business  units 

were  redefined;  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  corporation.  HR  became  a 

strategic  planning  unit on  a par with the  other business  units.  The  new  Vice  President 

of HR worked with the HR group  in a realignment effort where  "Esse Quam Videri” (to 

be,  rather  than  to  seem)  became  their  motto.  The  group  went  from  having  a  narrow 

personnel  focus to  becoming  the  corporate  owners  for  "creating  a culture  for success", 

one  of  the  nine  initiatives  under  "enduring  strategies"  for  the  corporation.  The  HR 

group  developed  their  own  vision,  mission,  objectives  statements,  and  norms  of 

behavior  for  their  group  (see  Appendix  Xa-d).  Their  goal  is  to  become  a  global  HR 

organization with a presence  in  all the plants  worldwide. They  focus  on  four key areas: 

compensation,  ethics,  change  management,  and  leadership.  They  have  initiated  360- 

degree  reviews  as  a  part  of the  new  performance  appraisal  process  expectations,  and 

they  are  encouraging  people  to  do  performance  reviews  two  to  three  times  per  year. 

Also, a corporate "university" was created.  Courses include:

•  Introduction to Management and Leadership (for  new leaders),

•  Quality Tools and Concepts (based on Edwards Deming's work, required for 

everyone throughout the corporation).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


•  Building Effective Performance Agreements (required for everyone doing 360- 
degree reviews),

7 4

•  The Human Side o f Change (an elective course based on Stephen Covey's 

7  Habits of Highly Effective People).

•  The Quality o f Being Human (an elective that addresses diversity in the 

workforce), and

•  Skills fo r  the Empowering Leader (an elective).

The  HR  group  recognizes  the  importance  of  modeling  change  for  the  rest  of  the 

corporation, including the various manufacturing plants around the world,  in addition to 

the  importance  of providing  in-house  resources  for people  to  learn  new  leadership  and 

personal skills.

A  1992  plant-specific  employee  opinion  survey  showed  high  employee 

satisfaction  with  pay  and job  security.  However,  people  expressed an  interest  in  more 

participative decision making.  The plant began to consider self-directed work teams  as 

an option.  Following the  lead of hundreds  of other manufacturing  facilities  in a variety 

of industries,  the  plant  under study  began  in  1992  to benchmark other companies’  self­

directed work team (SDWT)  initiatives with the intention of implementing SDWTs area 

by  area  in  the  plant,  over  time. 

In  late  1993,  one  production  section  was  chosen  to 

participate  in  a  self-directed  work  team  initiative.  An  outside  consultant  was  hired  to 

facilitate 

the  efforts. 

In  plant  steering  committee 

level  meetings,  production 

superintendents  were  invited  to  discuss  which  section  they  thought  would  be  the  most 

likely  to  make  the  transition  successfully.  Once  a  section  was  chosen,  a  cross- 

functional  team of approximately eight people  from different  levels of the  section  were

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


7 5

chosen.  This group  met regularly  with the consultant  in both on- and off-site  meetings 

throughout much of 1994 and  1995 as they continued to learn about and implement self­

directed  work  teams  in  their  production  section.  About  a  year  into  the  process,  the 

shipping and warehouse group also began to participate  in  the plant’s self-directed work 

team initiative.

Part  of the  education  of these  groups  came  from  reading  different  publications 

on employee empowerment,  self-directed  work teams  and  related  topics  (Kotter,  1995; 

Geber,  1992;  Byrne,  1993;  Kizilos.  1990;  Frohman.  1992;  Wellins  and  George.  1991; 

and  Hughes,  1991).  As  they  continued  to  meet  as  groups,  read,  and  learn  from  their 

experience  in  hands-on  implementation  of  the  concepts  with  their  work  teams,  the 

groups  published  their  own  manuals  for  use  in  their  sections.  These  manuals  give 

rationales  for  and  information  about  self-directed  work  teams  in  addition  to  detailing 

roles and responsibilities of the different  positions that were created  as the  foremen  left 

their shifts and went on day shifts to work together as a facilitation group.  Implementing 

self-directed work teams  led to a radical shift in the way the sections operated.  As  with 

any  transition  of  this  kind,  there  were  numerous  ups  and  downs,  and  a  variety  of 

opinions as to the success of the efforts.

At the end of 1995, another employee opinion survey was administered.  Results 

of this  survey  showed  dissatisfaction  with  the  lack  of standardization  of work  policies 

and practices, and the desire  for managers to be better "leaders".  Also in  1995, the self- 

directed  work  team  initiative  was  reevaluated.  Because  of  changes  in  the  external 

business  environment,  it  was  decided  that  a  move  toward  a  plant-wide  redesign  that

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


7 6

incorporated  employee  empowerment  and  self-directed  work  team  concepts  would  be 

preferable  to  continuing  section  by  section  over  a  period  of years  to  extend  the  self­

directed  work  team  effort  as  had  been  originally  planned.  Several  of  the  steering 

committee  members  attended  a  "reengineering"  seminar  conducted  by  Michael 

Hammers  which  was  based  on  Hammer  and  Champy's  1993  Reengineering  the 

Corporation.  This  book  emphasizes  the  importance  of identifying  key  manufacturing 

processes  and redesigning work around those  key processes promoting  ownership from 

start  to  finish  for any  given  product  (eliminating  handoffs  in  the  system).  The  authors 

recommend starting  from scratch  with  how  work is  done  rather than  trying  to patch  up 

old systems.  The focus is, of course, on improving customer satisfaction and decreasing 

product  cycle  time.  With  these  concepts  in  mind,  a  design  team  for  plant  "redesign" 

was commissioned early on in  1996.  In May of 1996. a new plant vision statement was 

drafted for the plant:

We will be the plant o f choice fo r new,  highly specialized products and 

services.  Our facility  is  benchmarked fo r  its  innovation,  flexibility  and  cost 
effective approach to satisfying internal and external customers; 
our  multi­
skilled, 
is  our  most  competitive  advantage.  Work 
responsibilities and organizational structures are broadly defined.  This enables 
employees  at  all  levels  to  be  routinely  redeployed  to  where  they  are  most 
needed.

flexible  workforce 

This  statement  was  presented  by  the  plant  manager  in  a series  of large  group  meetings 

plant-wide.  In June of  1996,  a series  of small  group  workshops  were  conducted  plant- 

wide  with  people  in  supervisory  roles  to  address  the  vision  statement  and  talk  about

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


redesign.  In  these  meetings,  people  were  also  asked  to  give  their  input  regarding  the 

7 7

following:

Leadership:
What  does  leadership  look  like  as  described  by  the  vision  and  principles 
discussed  so  far?  What  are  the  personal  characteristics  of effective  leaders  in 
our future?  What are  the  roles  and responsibilities of leaders?  How do you see 
your  leadership  role  changing  to  fit  our  plant  as  described  by  the  vision  and 
principles discussed so far?

Trust:
What does trust  look  like as described by  the  vision  and principles discussed so 
far?  What behaviors  build trust  in  the workplace? What role do  leaders  play  in 
building trust?

Openness:
What  does  openness  look  like  as  described  by  the  vision  and  principles 
discussed  so  far?  For employees  to  be  effective,  what  types  of information  do 
they need?  How should this information be used?

Versatility'.
What  does  versatility  look  like  as  described  by  the  vision  and  principles 
discussed so far?  How can 
employees  demonstrate  greater  versatility  in  the 
workplace?  What currently prevents this  from  happening?  What is the value of 
versatility in the workplace?

Collaboration:
What does collaboration look like as  described  by  the  vision  and  principles 
discussed  so  far?  What groups  need  to  work  more closely  together to  make  us 
more  successful 
that  hinder 
collaboration?  How should groups interact to increase collaboration?

internally?  externally?  What  are 

issues 

the 

Diversity.
What does diversity look like as described by the vision and principles discussed 
so  far?  How  can  leaders  maximize  team  performance?  What  is  needed  for  an 
employee  to  feel  valued  by  his/her team?  Describe  how  employees  view  each 
other's contributions?

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


7 8

The resulting  information was also taken  into consideration by the  plant redesign  team. 

In  October  of  1996,  two  corporate  human  resources  specialists  came  to  the  plant  and 

conducted  leadership  interviews  with  all  who  wanted  to  participate.  People  had  been 

asked  to  call  Human  Resources  and  have  their  names  put  on  a  sign-up  sheet.  These 

interviews  were  designed to  identify necessary and desirable characteristics of effective 

leaders  for  the  future.  Of the  seventy  people  interviewed,  approximately  one  third  of 

them  were  also  participants  in  this  research.  The  results  of  the  interviews  were 

summarized and posted to the organization the following month. Some of the highlights 

of the interviews include:

Great Leaders:

•  Lead by Example
•  Coach/Teach
•  Are Honest
•  Are Competent
•  Are Proactive
•  Listen
•  Are Caring and Empathetic 

People Who Can Be Trusted:

•  Seek Advice
•  Are Open in Communications
•  Are Consistent
•  Empower Others
•  Have self-awareness

People Who Appreciate Others:

•  Show Respect
•  Give Positive Feedback
•  Go Above and Beyond What's Expected

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


7 9

People W ho Communicate Well:

•  Seek Advice
•  Are Honest
•  Check for Understanding
•  Use Multiple Delivery  Systems

The  data  from  this  list  show  a desire  for  leaders  who  are  people-oriented,  people  who 

can  listen  and  communicate  well,  people  who  are  trusted  and  respected  in  the 

organization, and people who can appreciate others. Also, in the Fall of  1996. one of the 

Design Team members began to have informal one-on-one meetings with engineers and 

foremen  as  time  permitted.  This  gave  people  a  way  to  ask  more  specific  questions 

about redesign, give input, and express concerns.

Along  with  the  on-going  organization  development  efforts,  several  different 

books  were  recommended to  be  read by plant steering committee  members  and  people 

in  supervisory  roles  in  the  plant.  One  of the  most  influential  books  was  Flight  of the 

Buffalo (Belasco  and Stayer,  1993).  The  authors  describe  the  old  leadership  paradigm 

as being one that required a leader to plan, organize, command, coordinate, and control. 

Using a herd of buffalo to paint a picture, the authors write:

I saw my organization functioning like a herd of buffalo.  Buffalo are 

absolutely loyal  followers of one leader..  .In my company, I was head buffalo. 
Originally,  I liked [it].  After all,  my brilliance built the organization.  I wanted 
people to do exactly what I told them , to be loyal and committed.  I loved being 
at the center of power, and I believed that that was the leader's job.  I realized 
eventually that my organization didn't work as well as I’d like, because buffalo 
are loyal to one leader they stand around and wait for the leader to show them 
what to do.  When the  leader isn't around, they wait for him to show u p .. .1

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


8 0

found a lot of "waiting around"  in my organization.  Worse, people did only 
what I told them to do, nothing m ore.. .1 also found it was hard work being lead 
buffalo.  Giving all the orders, doing all the "important" work took  12-14 hours 
a day.  Meanwhile my company was getting slaughtered out there in the market 
place because I couldn't respond quickly enough to the changes (16-17).

The authors go on to say that a much better leadership paradigm is a flock of geese,

•  Leaders transfer ownership for work to those who do the work;

•  Leaders create the environment for ownership in which each person  wants to 

be responsible;

•  Leaders coach the development of personal capabilities; and,

•  Leaders learn fast themselves and encourage others also to learn quickly.

The  authors  note  that  the  challenge  is  to change  our  leadership  paradigm  from 

controlling to coaching, where leadership can be rotated as needed.

Other books  that became  recommended  reading  included Zapp  (Byham,  1988), 

a tale of employee empowerment that begins,  "Once upon a time, in a magic land called 

America,  there  lived a  normal  guy  named  Ralph  Rosco.  .  .  a  land  where  managers  did 

the  thinking,  supervisors  did  the  talking,  and  employees  did  the  doing."  Ralph  got 

"zapped"  with a great idea and his boss Joe got  "zapped"  and began  to  see  the  world of 

employee empowerment.  Jim Paluch’s book, 5 Important Things (1996). is a short story 

about  a  thirty-two  year old  man  who  is  driven  to  success  by  focusing  on  five  things: 

continuing  to  learn,  appreciating  people,  having  a  positive  attitude,  setting  goals,  and 

refusing 

to  quit. 

The  common 

theme  among  all  of 

the 

recommended 

readings.beginning  in  1992  with  the  CEO's  request  that  everyone  read  Steven  Covey's 

writings,  focuses  on  people  taking  personal  responsibility  for  their  own  growth.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


development, and success as leaders in the organizational environment.

8 1

Furthermore,  in  1996.  following  a corporate  lead,  the  plant  began  to  implement 

a  360-degree  performance  appraisal  process  which  was  intended  to  help  people  assess 

their blind spots  and better prepare  to meet  the changing  leadership  needs  of the plant. 

That  initiative  is  still  in  its  infancy  in  terms of actual  implementation,  however,  having 

been done only on a limited basis with steering committee level  managers at the time  of 

this study.

In  order to  assess  elements  of culture  that  were  operative  for people  going  into 

plant redesign, themes from the first interviews (Fall  1996) were extracted and the Year- 

End  Survey  was  developed.  For each  of the  sub-categories  in  the  survey,  items  were 

selected  where  75%  of  the  participants  either  agreed  or  disagreed  about  the  item. 

Because  the  research  was  done  with  approximately  half  the  total  supervisory  group, 

selecting  items  that  75%  of the  sample  agreed  or  disagreed  on  meant  that  that  item 

represented  the  sentiments  of at  least  two-thirds  of the  total  supervisory  group  in  the 

plant  at  that  time.  The  following  tables  show  summaries,  by  survey  sub-category,  of 

abbreviated survey items (see Appendix  IH for the complete list of survey items  in their 

exact wording.)  Note  that these categories  follow  the original  grouping of items  in  the 

survey  which  were conceptual  groupings  based on  what seemed  to the  researcher to  be 

reasonable subcategorizations.  Because  the  sample  size  does  not  permit reliable  factor 

analysis,  items  were  left in their original  groupings.  Note  also  that some subcategories 

have been combined in the same table where there is conceptual similarity.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


8 2

Table 3a:  Year-End Survey (People-to-People Relationships)

Item

Disagree

Don 7 
Know

\g re e

I have the respect of my peers/co-workers.

I have the respect of my subordinates.

This is a good company; the pay is good 
and they treat us well.

The well-being of this plant and the 
people here mean a lot to me.

Trust between management and operators 
has been hurt over the years by a 
breakdown in communication.

The way changes in pay structure were 
recently handled has hurt morale.

I've seen people here with performance 
problems that don't get addressed.

We hold people accountable for their 
job performance.

This company knows how to manage the 
people side of change.

0

1

1

0

6

~)

1

31

29

2

5

5

0

3

1

0

I

7

38

34

34

40

31

37

39

8

4*

* Note: This item was just below the 75% agree/disagree cut-off point.

Major  themes  related  to  people-to-people  relationships  which  seemed  to  be 

operative  in  this  organization  were  the  existence  of  respect  between  peers  at  the 

supervisory  level  and  their  immediate  subordinates;  but  overall  a  breakdown  in

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


8 3

communication  between  management  and  the  workforce;  issues  around  performance 

and  accountability  that  have  not  been  addressed  with  the  workforce;  a general  feeling 

among supervision that this  is a good company to work for and that the company's well­

being and that of the  people were  important:  however,  people  felt that  there  was  a lack 

of knowledge on the part of the company to manage the people side of change.

Table 3b:  Year-End Survey (Plant Culture)

Item

Disagree

Don't  Agree 
Know

Over time, different sections of the 
plant have developed into their own 
"cultures "/"plants”.

Lots of things get started and not 
finished around here; everyone is 
too busy.

We focus more on what causes problems 
than what causes successes.

1

0 

39

2

2

6 

I 

32

37

These  data  showed  a  perceived  lack of unification  and  standardization  across  areas  of 

the plant, and  a sense  that initiatives may  be delayed  in their completion because there 

has been too much going on.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


8 4

Table 3c:  Year-End Survey (Vision and Future)

Item

Disagree

Don 7 
Know

Agree

Management could have better handled the 
changes over the past year: better 
prepared us to move toward the vision 
statement.

We heard at the beginning of the year 
that by the end of the year the plant 
would look significantly different, but 
we didn't know what that meant or how 
to work toward it.

People used to come in and do a good job, 
but the work ethic has changed.  If we 
don’t improve our standards, we won't 
have much of a future.

3

7

0

7

30

3

1

30

39

These data showed  lack of clear understanding of the  vision  statement for the  plant and 

lack of understanding  of how  to  work to support  it.  They also  showed concern  for the 

future.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


8 5

Table 3d:  Year-End Survey (Conflict)

Item

Disagree

Don't 
Know

Agree

Now you hear "It’s not my job." a lot; 
people don't want to work in other 
areas across the plant (cross-train).

Everyone is pulling in different dir­
ections: there’s lack of common under­
standing about goals and priorities.

Policies are currently not administered 
in a standard way across the plant.

People don't trust each other to admin­
ister policies consistently across the 
plant.

I would like for people to agree to 
administer policies in a fair, standard 
way.

3

7

2

3

2

6

4

2

2

2

31

29*

36

35

36

* Note: This item was just below the 15% cut-off point.

These  data  suggested  that  the  root  of  much  of  the  conflict  in  the  organization  stems 

from lack of standard administration of policy, and lack of goal clarity across the plant.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


8 6

Table 3e:  Year-End Survey (Influence/Leadership)

Item

Disagree

Dan't 
Know

Agree

I think I’m in a position to influence 
the future and well-being of the plant.

I want to be in a position where I can 
shape the future of the plant.

There's always an opportunity here to 
give your ideas.

When I don't understand something, I go 
out of my way to ask questions until I 
get answers.

Even when I’m not able to get work done 
the way I want to. I keep trying.

We need to get people more involved in 
decision making so that they can have 
more of a stake in the outcomes.

We've seen a lot of management disappear 
or get shoved aside; we need to make 
sure that good people get into and 
stay in leadership roles in the plant.

4

0

5

I

2

2

0

6

I

5

3

2

6

30

38

30

36

36

32

1

38

These data generally showed a lot of willingness to get involved in the organization, get 

answers, and to be persistent in working toward influencing the future and well-being of 

the  plant.  In  addition,  there  was  recognition  that  more  people  need  to  be  involved  in 

shaping  the  future  of the  plant,  and  that  getting  people  into  key  leadership  roles  was 

important.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


8 7

Table 3f:  Year-End Survey (Loyalty)

Item

Disagree

Agree

Don't 
Know

People here care about the company;  when 
something really  needs to get done,  people 
get  it done.

Most of the people in this plant are committed 
to its  well-being (note:  this item came  from 
the section "Organization  Relationships").

This company  means everything to me;  it’s 
my  life and I want to see the plant 
stay  here another 20 years.

I’m loyal to this company; whether I 
agree  with the decisions that are made 
or not.  I'll do my best to support the 
future direction o f the organization.

I have a sense o f ownership  for this  plant; 
I want to do what I can  to shape its future.

I don't know what I'll  be doing in the 
future, but I'm willing to do what­
ever management wants.

I'm a loyal employee and  want to see 
the company do well even beyond  the 
point  I plan to retire.

People have developed an  "entitlement” 
mentality over the years that  is hurting us.

I

4

4

0

1

4

I

3

3

5

4

I

0

5

0

3

35

31

31

38

37

29*

37

31

* Note: This item  was just below the 75% cut-off point.

Responses to these  items demonstrated a high degree of loyalty and commitment to the 

future  of  the  company  and  this  particular  manufacturing  plant.  There  was  also  a 

concern that an "entitlement”  mentality was felt to be hurting the company.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


8 8

Table 3g: Year-End Survey (Career Development/Training/Recognition)

h e m

Disagree

Don 'r  Agree 
Know

I've had a lot of good opportunities 
here over the course of my career.

I’ve been satisfied with my career 
here so  far.

Career development here is very political.

I’m able to publicly admit I’ve 
made a mistake without fear that 
it will have a negative impact on 
my job/career.

When people change jobs around here, 
often there's no overlap with the 
person who had the job previously.

I'm able to recognize others for a 
job well-done.

We have enough flexibility with 
administering pay and other incentives 
to reward creativity and productivity.

4

5

5

4

2

4

4

2 

4 

7 

33

30

28*

4 

32

4 

0 

33

35

3 

32

* Note: This item was just below the 75% cut-off point.

Data  from  these  categories  suggested  that  people  feet  they  have  had  and  currently  do 

have  a  lot  of opportunity  with  this  company,  but  that  career development  is  seen  as  a 

political  process.  In general,  people  felt they could openly admit when  they have made

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


8 9

a  mistake  without  fearing  that  their  jobs  or  careers  would  be  at  risk.  This  is  an 

important  quality  of  any  learning  organization,  and  is  important  in  times  of  major 

organizational  change  when  people  are  required  to  think  creatively  and  do  things 

differently.  People  also  generally  felt  that  they  could  recognize  others  for  their 

accomplishments in the organization.

Table 3h:  Year-End Survey (Customers)

Item

I know who my customers are.

I understand what the customers want.

Ail of our initiatives work together 
toward meeting customer service.

I am able to be customer-focused in 
my job.

Disagree

Don't 
Know

Agree

0

3

3

2

2

2

5

3

37

34

31

34

From  these  data,  we  see  that  participants  saw  themselves  and  the  organization  as 

customer-oriented;  they knew who  their customers were and what they wanted, and  felt 

that the various initiatives in the plant were working together to meet customer needs.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


9 0

Table 3i:  Year-End Survey (Decision Making/Empowerment)

Item

Disagree

Agree

Don't 
Know

This company is very hierarchical; 
decisions are made top-down.

I’m able to make the kinds of decisions 
that are important to me.

People often make decisions without 
considering how they will affect the 
rest of the plant.

Foremen are expected to support manage­
ment, but they are often not included 
in decision making.

We do too much micro-managing around here.

People make decisions based on know­
ledge of their area rather than the 
overall direction of the plant.

If we want to empower the workforce, we 
need to better prepare the managers first.

In order for empowerment to work here, 
we have to be able to hold people 
accountable for the work they are 
expected to do.

Empowerment efforts here have gained 
a reputation for meaning "no accountability".

8

5

4

8

5

J

1

1

1

1

6

3

3

5

5

2

0

5

30

28*

33

28*

30

32

36

38

32

* Note: These items were just below the 75% cut-off point.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


9 1

Data  regarding  this  category  show  that  people  saw  decision-making  as  hierarchical, 

although,  generally  speaking,  people  felt  that  they  could  make  those  decisions  about 

things  which  were 

important 

to 

them. 

Decision-making,  however,  was  also 

characterized  by  lack  of awareness  about  how  one  person's  decisions  would  affect  the 

rest of the plant.  This  relates  to the  lack of standardization of policies, and the  fact that 

the  different sections  have  evolved  into  separate  "plants"  over the  years.  There  was  a 

feeling  that  along  with  hierarchy  in  decision-making,  there  was  also  too  much  micro- 

managing;  again,  this  is  probably  a  function  of general  lack  of understanding  of clear 

plant-wide goals and objectives.  There was also an acknowledgement that foremen may 

be getting left out of critical decision-making processes.  With respect to empowerment 

initiatives  in  the plant,  it  is clear that  many  people  felt that people  in empowered  areas 

have not been held accountable for the extra responsibility, and that management should 

have been better educated to support the efforts before the initiatives were implemented 

in  the  organization;  if  it  is  to  work  in  the  future,  empowerment  will  need  to  receive 

better management support.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


92

Table 3j: Year-End Survey (Redesign)

Item

Disagree  Don 't 
Know

Agree

In order to see some real change from 
redesign, we'll have to have a mindshift. 
not just different boxes on paper.

There's a lot of apprehension about what 
redesign will look like for the 
organization.

We can spend a lot of time on redesign, 
but if people don’t get involved, they 
won't work toward making it successful.

I’m confident that I have whatever skills 
I will need for a "redesigned" plant.

0 

0 

2 

8 

I

1

4

4

38

38

33

28*

* Note: This item was just below the 75%  cut-off point.

These data showed that there was general apprehension among the supervisory group as 

to  what  redesign  would  mean  for  the  plant,  and  that  it  would  require  more  than just 

rewriting  the  organization  charts  to  make  it  happen;  that  people  need  to  get  more 

involved  in  order  to  make  it  successful.  In  general,  people  felt  they  have  the  skills  to 

make redesign a success, although clearly there was uncertainty as well.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


9 3

Table 3k:  Year-End Survey (Work Orientation and VaJues)

Item

I like having a job that’s challenging.

If I have an idea,  I tell people about it.

I'm very people-oriented.

I take pride in my work.

I'm very results-oriented.

Everything changes; you just have to 
make the best of it.

Disagree

Don 'r 
Know

Agree

1

0

2

0

2

2

36

40

30

39

32

36

0

7

0

5

1

These  data  showed  a  basic  outgoing  approach  to  people  and  work,  and  a  recognition 

that  things  change  and  it  is  important  to  make  the  best  of the  situation.  Note  also  that 

everyone responded that they take pride in their work.

In  summary,  the  data  from  these  tables  showed  some  elements  of culture  that 

will  probably  have  a significant  impact  on  the  way  in  which  this  organization  handles 

the redesign over the course  of the  next  few years.  People  recognize  that  it will  take  a 

"mindshift", and not just a rearrangement of the organization chart to  make the redesign 

successful.  While there  is  a  lot of apprehension about what  redesign  will  mean  for the 

organization  and  individuals,  the  amount  of  dedication  to  the  future  success  of  the 

company and the  plant is clear;  many people say they take pride  in their work, and they 

are  willing to do whatever it  will  require  to  make  this  a success.  People  recognize  the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


9 4

need  for good  leadership:  getting  and  keeping  the  right people  in  key  positions.  Most 

people want to be in a position  to influence the future and well-being of the plant. They 

feel  that  there  is  always  an  opportunity  to  give  ideas.  People  feel  that  it  is  a  good 

company, that they have had a lot of good opportunities over the course of their careers, 

and  have  been  satisfied with  their careers  so  far.  Many  people  feel  that  they  have  the 

skills  they  will  need  for  a  "redesigned"  plant,  and  that  they  have  the  respect  of  their 

peers,  co-workers,  and subordinates.  They  recognize  that everything  changes  and  that 

they "just have to make the best of it," or they accept change.

Some  of  the  cultural  challenges  people  in  this  organization  may  need  to 

overcome include:

•  Learning to manage the people side of change;

•  Holding people more accountable for their performance and addressing 

performance issues as they arise;

•  Building up trust between management and the workforce:

•  Learning to focus on what makes  for success rather than focusing on what 

causes problems;

•  Working toward reunifying the plant around common goals, priorities, and 

implementation of policies:

• Encouraging employee flexibility (cross-training); and

•  Involving people more in decision-making to build ownership for the 

outcomes.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


II. 

Analyses and Results

9 5

In the sections below, each of the propositions will be restated followed by a 

review of the analyses used to examine each proposition, the results of these analyses, 

and any additional relevant findings based on other data gathered.

Proposition #1  and Related Findings

It  was  proposed  that there  is a significant relationship between  how a person 

has responded to role conflict situations in  the past and his or her coping style in  the 

present;  the  more proactively  one  has  coped with  role  conflict  in  the past,  the  more 

proactively  s/he  will  cope  with  change  in  the  present. 

In  order  to  examine  this 

proposition,  a  set  of four scenarios  were  used  to  assess  peoples’  coping  styles  in  past 

situations of role conflict.  The  idea for the  use of such scenarios came  from H oldorf s 

research  on  role  conflict  and  coping  styles  (1975).  For  purposes  of  this  research,  I 

developed  the  scenarios  which  I  felt  would  have  face  validity  for the  organization  (see 

Appendix  IH.  Part  HI.)  Note  that  each  scenario  focuses  on  a  specific  kind  of  role 

conflict:  1. Sent;  2. Systems;  3. Role Ambiguity; and,  Interpersonal (the definitions  for 

each of these were given in Chapter 3).  Responses to each of the  four scenarios  ranged 

from  1 

to  4.  paralleling 

the  2x2  grid  used 

to  code 

interview 

transcripts 

(l=behaviorally/emotionally  proactive;  2=behaviorally  reactive/emotionally  proactive; 

3=behaviorally/emotionally  reactive;  4=behaviorally  proactive/emotionally  reactive. 

For example, the first scenario reads, “Think of a time when a supervisor asked/told you 

to do something you thought was  not the best thing  to do.  Which option best describes

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


how you responded?”  This scenario represents a situation of sent role conflict.  Each of 

9 6

the four response options can be laid out on the 2x2 grid as follows:

Figure 4:  Dimensions o f Proactivity and Corresponding Role Conflict Scenario 

Responses

Emol
Pro:

ionally
ictive

2

(response “a”) 

1  .

(response “c")

Behaviorallv

Reactive

Behaviorallv

Proactive

3

(response “b")

4

(response ”d”)

Emo
Re

tionally
active

Responses “a" through ”d" read as follows:

a. 

I was uncertain about how to handle our differences so I just let it slide.

b. I just did what s/he wanted because s/he wanted it.

c. 

d. 

I kept  talking  with  him/her  about  my  ideas/opinions  until  we  were  able  to
come to some meaningful agreement.

I found a way  to just do  it the way  I thought  it needed to be done  regardless
of what s/he thought.

Response “c” is clearly  the  most behaviorally and emotionally proactive.  Response  “a"

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


9 7

shows that the person thought about it (emotionaily  proactive),  but didn’t know what to 

do and “let it slide” (behaviorally reactive).  Response “b" shows no thought (emotional 

reactivity).  "I  just  did  what  s/he  wanted  because  s/he  wanted  it,”  and  no  behavioral 

proactivity.  Response  "d"  shows  lack  of thought  with  respect  to  finding  a  mutually 

beneficial  solution  (emotional  reactivity),  but  clearly  shows  behavioral  proactivitv.  “I 

found a way to just do  it the way  I thought it needed  to be done  regardless of what s/he 

thought."  Scenario  #2  gives  an  example  of  systems  role  conflict  (quadrants  1-4 

represent responses "c",  “b”,  “d”,  and “a" respectively.)  Scenario #3  gives  an example 

of  role  ambiguity  (quadrants  1-4  represent  responses  “a”,  “d”,  “c".  and  “b" 

respectively.)  Scenario #4 gives an example of interpersonal  role conflict (quadrants 1-4 

represent  responses  “c”,  “a”,  “d”,  and  “b”  respectively.)  For each  scenario,  there  is  an 

option  “other”.  In each  of the  two cases  where  a participant  chose  to  give  an example 

under  “other”,  I  was  able  to  make  an  educated  judgement  about  which  category  of 

response the  data given  represented.  Neither of the  cases  were  difficult  to  place  in  the 

grid.  Scores across the  four scenarios were then averaged to create a single score which 

was  used in the  analysis.  Descriptive statistics  for the  scenario  scores  reveal  the nature 

of the distribution  for this research sample as  follows:  N=40;  range (1-4);  X =1.59; S.D. 

=  .511.  Descriptive  statistics  for  the  proactivity  ratings  from  Structured  Interview  #1 

reveal the nature of the distribution as  follows:  N=40;  range  (1-3):  X=l.825;  S.D.=.813. 

In  support  of  this  proposition,  there  was  a  significant  correlation  (r=.393,  p=.012) 

indicating  that  the  more  proactive  the  reported  response  to  scenarios  of  past  role 

conflict,  the  more  proactive  the  current  coping  style  as  measured  by  participant’s

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


9 8

scores  from the coding of Structured  Interview #1.  In  other words,  the  way  in which 

people  cope  with  role  conflict  tends  to  be  consistent  with  the  way  in  which  people 

respond  to organizational change:  people  tend either to have a proactive or a reactive 

coping  style  which  is  probably  related  to  the  way  in  which  people  handle  role 

conflicts in general.  Furthermore,  the use of scenarios also allowed  for a more in-depth 

look  at  the  relationship  between  specific  kinds  of  role  conflicts  and  coping  styles. 

Peoples’  responses  to  the  scenarios  were  proactive  with  one  exception.  The  greatest 

frequency  of  category  #4  response  was  found  in  relation  to  the  interpersonal  role 

conflict  scenario.  When  people  were  asked  to  think of a time  when  they  felt  they  and 

their  supervisor  were  not  committed  to  the  same  goals,  several  people  responded  that 

they,  "found a way  to  work  on  things  they  thought  were  important  regardless  of what 

their  supervisor  thought."  The  correlation  between  people's  average  score  across 

scenarios  and  each  of the  four scenarios  shows  that  interpersonal  role  conflict  is  most 

significantly correlated with peoples'  average total  role conflict  scores.  In other words, 

people’s reported response to situations of interpersonal role conflict accounted for most 

of the  variance  in  the  data.  The  following  table  shows  correlations  between  average 

total  scores  across  role  conflict  categories  and  single  category  scores  for  each  role 

conflict scenario:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


9 9

Table 4:  Correlations Between Average Total Scores Across Categories and Single 

Category Scores for Each Role Conflict Scenario

Interpersonal Role Conflict. r=.82: p=.01 

Systems Role Conflict. r=.5l, p=.0I 

Sent Role Conflict,  r^.49: p=.01 

Role Ambiguity, r=.39: p=.01

Scores on  the  scenarios  were  also  found  to  be  significantly  correlated  with job  affect. 

The more proactively people  responded  to  the  role  conflict scenarios,  the  more  "good" 

(r=.38,  p=.05)  and  "motivated"  (r=.37,  p=.05)  people  rated  their job  affect. 

In  other 

words, there  is a relationship between the extent to which people  report they respond to 

role  conflict  in  a  more  proactive  way,  and  the  extent  to  which  they  report  how  often 

they feel good and motivated on  the job.  It  is  important to recognize  that causality can 

not  be  inferred  from  this  data.  It  is  possible  that  feeling  good  and  motivated  follows 

seeking  mutually  beneficial  solutions  to  situations of role conflict, just  as  it  is  possible 

that feeling good and motivated  helps  people to  pursue  mutually beneficial  solutions  to 

situations of role conflict in their jobs.  It is interesting to note that when the correlations 

between  specific categories of role conflict represented  in each of the scenarios  and the 

job  affect  variables,  it  is  only  in  the  interpersonal  role  conflict  category  that  there  are 

any  significant  correlations  with  job  affect  variables;  "good"  (r=.38,  p=.05),  and 

"motivated"  (r=.34,  p=.05);  almost  identical  results  to  the correlations  between  average

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1 0 0

scores  for the scenarios  and the job affect  variables.  This  further suggests  that  there  is 

an important relationship between the way in which this kind of role conflict is handled 

and  the  extent  to  which  people  feel  good  and  motivated  on  the  job.  These  results, 

however, speak clearly to the  importance of achieving role clarity in  organizational  life. 

The correlation  between  participants’  response  to  the  general job  satisfaction  question 

from  the  Year-End  Survey  and  their  overall  responses  to  the  scenarios  was  also 

significant  (r^=.40,  p=.05).  The  higher  the job  satisfaction  reported,  the  more  willing 

people  were  to  keep  discussions  ongoing  and open,  working  toward  mutual  agreement 

when  there  were  role  conflicts.  Correspondingly,  the  more  the  willingness  to  keep 

discussions  ongoing  and  open  when  there  are  role  conflicts,  the  higher  the  job 

satisfaction.  Here  again,  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  that  directionality  cannot  be 

determined  with  a  simple  correlation;  further  research  would  be  required  to  infer 

causality.

Proposition #2 and Related Findings

It was proposed  that the amount o f role conflict experienced in  one’s job is significantly 

correlated  with  one's  coping  style;  the  greater  the  amount  o f role  conflict,  the  less 

proactive  the  coping  style.  In  order  to  examine  this  proposition,  sum  total  scores  on 

the  16-item  role  conflict  measure  (see  Appendix  III,  Part  I)  were  correlated  with 

proactivity  ratings  from  Structured  Interview  # 1 .  Descriptive  statistics  for  the  role 

conflict measure  reveal  the nature of the distribution  as  follows;  N=40;  range (21-46);

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 0 1

X=34.83;  S.D.=4.83.  W hen  total  scores  on  the  role  conflict  measure  (see  Appendix 

HI.  Part  0  were  correlated  with  proactivity  ratings  from  Structured  Interview  #1  no 

significant correlation  was  found.  Correlations between  individual  items  from the  role 

conflict measure  were then correlated with proactivity ratings  from Structured Interview 

#1.  The correlations  between  participants'  scores on  some  particular role  conflict  items 

in the role conflict measure and their proactivity ratings for Structured Interview #lwere 

significant.  The following table shows these relationships:

Table 5: Correlations between Role Conflict Items and Proactivity Ratings from 

Structured Interview # 1

Item 

Systems Role Conflict

How much do you participate with 
others in helping set the way
things are done on your job? 

How much do you take part with 
others in making decisions  that
affect you? 

Role Ambiguity

How often are you clear about 
what others will expect of you
on the job? 

Correlation

(r=-.49. p=.0 1)

(r=-.37, p=.05)

(r=-.31, p=.05)

We  see  from  these  data  that  the  more  participants  report  that  they  take  part  in  shaping 

the way their jobs are done and in making decisions that affect them, and the more often

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 0 2

they  are clear about what other people expect of them on the job. the  greater frequency 

of proactive statements are found in their first interview transcripts. Lastly, scores on the 

role conflict measure were correlated with the  following measures:  Organization-Based 

Self-Esteem (OBSE). Propensity  for Proactivity, general job satisfaction,  and job affect 

(see Appendix III, Part II).

1.  Role Conflict and OBSE

The correlation between participants' total role conflict scores and their OBSE score 

was significant (r=-.57,  p=.01).  In other words,  the greater the role conflict reported the 

lower the OBSE and vice versa.

2.  Role Conflict and Propensity for Proactivity

The  correlation  between  participants'  total  scores  on  the  role  conflict  measure  (see 

Appendix III, Part I) and their scores on the revised Propensity for Change  measure (see 

Appendix  IX)  was  significant  (r=-.508,  p=.01). 

In  other  words,  the  greater  the  role 

conflict the lower the Propensity for Proactivity and vice versa.

3.  Role Conflict and General Job Satisfaction

The  data  show  that  there  is  a  significant  correlation  between  role  conflict  and 

general  job  satisfaction.  When  the  total  score  on  the  role  conflict  measure  was 

correlated  with  the score  to the general job  satisfaction question  (r=-.38,  p=.05)  we see 

that  the  greater the  reported  role  conflict,  the  less  the  general job  satisfaction  and  vice 

versa.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


4.  Role Conflict and Job Affect

1 0 3

Results of correlation analyses between total scores for the role conflict measure and 

the job affect items (see Appendix III,  Part II) show the following relationships:

Table 6 : Correlations between  Role Conflict and Job Affect

Job Affect

Positive

Nesative

In control

(r=-.64. p=.01)

Frustrated

(r=.55, p=.01)

Good

(p=-.57, p=.01)

Cheerful

(r=-.56, p=.01)

Pulled in 
Different 
Directions

Irritated 
or Annoyed

(r=-54, p=.01)

(r=.45, p=.01)

Motivated

(r=-.48, p = 0 l)

Trapped

(r=.45, p=.01)

Successful

(r=-.38, p=.05)

Confused

(r=.41, p=.0 1 )

Relaxed

(r=-.34. p=.05)

Angry

(r=.38, p=.05) 

Drained

(r=.38, p=.05) 

Tense

(r=.33, p=.05)

These data show a very clear relationship between role conflict and different emotions.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1 0 4

Proposition #3 and Related Findings

It was  proposed  that a person  s level o f organization-bcised self-esteem  would 

be  significantly  correlated  with  his  or  her  coping  style;  the  higher  the  OBSE,  the 

more proactive  the coping style  (note:  this  was hypothesized prior to  the  research.). 

In  order  to  examine  this  proposition.  OBSE  scores  were  correlated  with  ratings  of 

proactivity  from  Structured  Interview  # 1 .  In  order  to  measure  OBSE.  Pierce,  et  al.'s 

(1989)  10-item  scale  was  used  (see  Appendix  I).  This  measure  was  construct 

validated  through  a series  of seven  studies  drawing  on  data  from  over two  thousand 

people  in  different  kinds  of organizations  and  occupations  (Pierce,  et  al,  1989).  The 

authors  concluded 

that 

their  measure  demonstrated  consistently  good 

internal 

consistency,  reliability,  homogeneity  of  scale 

items,  and  stability  over 

time: 

furthermore, that the scale also demonstrated convergent and discriminate validity and 

reasonable  predictive  and  concurrent  validity.  They  stated  that  they  have  found 

sufficient  evidence  that  OBSE  is  part  of an  employee's  belief system,  and  that,  once 

established,  is  relatively  stable  unless  environmental  changes  give  rise  to  new 

organizational  experiences  which  change  the  employee’s  beliefs  (see  Appendix  I  for 

the OBSE measure).  Descriptive statistics for the OBSE measure reveal the nature of 

the  distribution  for  this  research  sample  as  follows:  N=40:  range  (32-49);  X=41.5: 

S.D.=3.21.  It  was  proposed  that  there  would  be  a significant  correlation  between  the 

OBSE measure and coping styles  as  measured by coding  Structured  Interview  # 1   (see 

Appendices  I  and  VO).  As  hypothesized,  there  was  a  significant  correlation  in  the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


predicted  direction  (r=-.398.  p=.05). 

1 0 5
In  other  words,  people  who  reported  higher 

levels  of  OBSE  also  tended  to  have  more  statements  in  their  interview  transcripts 

which  were codeable  for indications o f proactivity (l=highly proactive.  2 =moderately 

proactive.  3=reactive).  It  is 

important  to  note  that  correlation  does  not  imply 

causation,  only that  there  is  a  relationship  between  variables.  It  is  possible  that  to  the 

extent  one  is  told  s/he  is  valued,  trusted,  important,  etc.  by  his/her  management,  the 

more  likely s/he  is  in  times  of major organizational  change to be proactive  in  support 

of  the  organization's  goals. 

It  is  also  possible  that  those  people  who  tend  to  be 

proactive  in  the  organization  in  times  of  major  organizational  change  are  seen  as 

proactive  and  are  therefore  told  by  management  that  they  are  valued,  trusted, 

important, etc.  Further research of a longitudinal  nature would be  necessary to  better 

understand  the  causal  direction  of the  relationship  between  OBSE  and  one’s  level  of 

proactivity in times of major organizational change.

It is interesting to note that this correlation did not prove significant when OBSE 

scores were correlated with proactivity scores for the second set of interviews (r=-. 146). 

Approximately  one  third  of  the  participants  proactivity  scores  changed  either  up  or 

down  when  second  interview  transcripts  were  coded  (see  Appendix  XI).  While  there 

were  a  significant  number  of  participants  whose  proactivity  ratings  stayed  the  same 

across  Structured  Interviews  #1  and  #2.  in  fifteen  out  of thirty-nine  cases  participants’ 

transcripts  were  coded  differently  (either  higher  or  lower)  for  the  second  interview. 

Why  the  change?  A  thematic  analysis  of those  fourteen  cases  revealed  the  following 

themes:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 0 6

Table 7a:  Changes in Proactivity Ratings Between Structured Interviews #1  and 2

Increase in  Proactivity

Themes Attributed to the Change

"3"  to "I"

[o „r

"3"  to "2"
. . y . tQ . . y .

"3" to "2"

"2"  to  "I"

"2”  to  "I”

Has better information.  Feels more 
support from management; has better 
reassurance  from management.

Feels his  ideas have been heard.

Was given a "safe"  position  .

Was asked  for his input.  Knew better 
where he would fit into the redesign.

Feels management was  listening to him 
and  asking  for  input.  He  knew  better 
where he would  fit into the redesign.

He was in a valued role  and  was asked  to 
stay there.

He had peer support in  the midst 
of uncertainty.

Note:  l=highly  proactive;  2=moderately proactive;  3=reactive

From  this  data,  vve  see  that  increases  in  peoples’  proactivity  ratings  from  Structured 

Interview #1  to Structured  Interview  #2  can  be  attributed,  at  least  in  part,  to  perceived 

cues  from  management  related  to  OBSE  constructs.  The  same  seemed  to  be  true  for 

decreases in proactivity ratings between  interviews:

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1 0 7

Table 7b: Changes in Proactivity Ratings between Structured Interviews #1  and #2

Decrease in  Proactivity

Themes Attributed to the  Change

[o

"2"  to  "3"

”2"  to "3"

"2” to "3"

"2"  to  ,,3"

”!"  to  “2"

"1"  to  "2"

"1"  to  "2"

He  felt that his  input had  been  ignored.

He had  unaddressed  concerns.

He  felt he was getting mixed messages 
and  no satisfactory answers.

He  feared  being perceived as not 
supportive  for  trying to get answers.

He  felt management's "minds were made 
up”;  that management  would  not listen 
to him.

He  felt he had little ability  to give input.

He  felt  "left out."

He thought that the changes being 
made  were unclear.

Note:  I=highly  proactive;  2=moderateIy proactive;  3=reactive

It  is  clear  from  this  analysis  that  the  cues  management  gives  to  employees  during 

times  of  major  organizational  change  are  important  in  shaping  their  attitudes  and 

behavior. 

In 

times  of  major  organizational  change,  people’s  “sensemaking" 

frameworks  are  challenged  (Weick,  1995).  At  that  time,  people  may  be  even  more 

sensitive  to  and  affected  by  the  cues  that  management  gives  them  than  they  are  in  a 

normal  day  on  the  job. 

People  who  once  felt  valued  and  important 

in  the

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


organization may begin  to question their value and importance.  Likewise, people who 

feel  they’ve  been  forgotten  or abandoned  may  reach  new  career  heights  as  they  hear 

1 0 8

that they are an important part of the team for the  future.

In  order  to  further  understand  the  nature  of OBSE  in  this  organization,  during 

the second interviews the OBSE rating scale was  made into a critical  incident interview 

(see  Appendix  IV.  question  7).  Several  important  themes  emerged  (see  Appendix  XII 

for  the  complete  lists  for each  of the  ten  items  in  the  OBSE  measure,  categorized  by 

status:  foremen and engineers.  Note that in some cases there  is a number in parentheses 

to indicate the frequency with which that statement was made among the group). Thirty- 

eight  out  of  forty  participants  responded  to  this  measure;  not  all  participants  gave  a 

response  for all  ten  items.  It is evident from this data that there are a variety of kinds of 

themes which emerge under different items.  In some cases,  themes that are  focal  to the 

foremen as a group  are different from themes  that are  focal  to  the  engineers.  Different 

things  make  different  people  feel  esteemed,  and  these  differences  are  again  somewhat 

affected  by  one’s  status  in  the  organization.  The  following  tables  summarize  themes 

from the ten different items that make up the OBSE measure:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 0 9

Table  8 a:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #1  (Important)

Foremen
(N =I8 )

Engineers
(N=20)

Being told I'm important to
the organization.

Getting Information.

Being promoted to a responsible
Role/job; being picked for
something important; doing
start-ups.

Being told my work is appreciated.

Being given new opportunities;
working on special projects.

Having the autonomy and authority
to do things.

Promotions/salary increases.

Problem solving; being able to
answer people's questions.

Problem solving; helping/coaching.
people.

Getting good people promoted.

Representing the company to the public.

Giving presentations to corporate.

From these data we see that both  foremen and engineers felt important when told are so 

by  the  organization;  when  they  were  given  jobs  or  assignments  which  provide  new 

opportunities,  more  autonomy  and/or  responsibility;  when  they  were  able  to  solve 

problems; and, when they were able to help/coach people.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1 0

Table  8 b: Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #1  (Helpful)

Foremen
(N=18)

Engineers
(N=2 0 )

Doing training; helping people
get their jobs done; answering
questions; giving advice.

Trouble-shooting; resolving
technical issues.

Pleasing customers.

Doing training; giving and getting
people the resources, tools, and
information they need; coaching.
counseling; doing employee reviews
and helping people to develop.

Resolving technical issues;
Making product improvements.

From  these  data  we  see  that  both  foremen  and  engineers  felt  helpful  when  they  were 

involved  in  training  and  employee  development;  and,  when  they  were  resolving 

technical issues.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


I l l

Table 8 c: Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview # 1   (Trusted)

Foremen
(N=18)

Engineers
(N=20)

Getting information.

Getting information.

Being asked for my opinion, or
for advice.

Having the men's confidence.

Being in a responsible position.

When people ask my opinion/
ask for help; share confidential 
issues with me.

Getting promoted; having 
autonomy.

Representing the plant to 
outside agencies.

Working on start-ups.

From  these  data  we  see  that  both  foremen  and  engineers  felt  trusted  when  they  got 

information; and, when they were asked for their opinion.

Table  8 d: Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #1  (Taken Seriously)

Foremen
(N=18)

Engineers
(N=20)

When I have a position of author­
ity/responsibility.

When management listens and takes
action.

When management listens to my
concerns and takes action.

With redesign; being involved
in teaching/coaching.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1 2

From these data we see that both foremen and engineers felt taken seriously when 

management listened to their concerns and took action.

Table 8 e:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #1  (Valued)

Foremen
(N=18)

Engineers
(N=20)

Being told I’m valued.

Being in a position of
responsibility.

Problem-solving; saving time.
effort; avoiding problems.

Doing training.

Being acknowledged for my leadership.

Being in a position of responsibility.

Making  technical  improvements,  money,
doing start-ups, having an impact on the
Products, doing special project.

Representing the company to the public.

From these data we see that both foremen and engineers felt valued when they were in a 

position  of responsibility;  and,  when  they  were  able  to  problem-solve,  make  technical 

improvements, save time, money, effort and avoid problems.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1 3

Table 8 f: Emergent OBSE Themes  from Structured Interview # 1   (Like You Counted)

Foremen
(N=18)

Engineers
(N=20)

Being given responsibility.

Being given responsibility/autonomy

Being asked for an opinion;
when your ideas are used.

Feeling like part of the team.

Having management support.

Getting good feedback in
reviews and from subordinates.

Being asked for my opinion.

When people acknowledge my
contributions.

When you can see the results of  your
decisions.

From  these  data  we  see  that  both  foremen  and  engineers  felt  like  they  counted  when 

they  were  given  responsibility  and  autonomy;  when they  were  asked  for their opinion; 

and. when people gave them good feedback/acknowledged their contributions.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1 1 4

Table Sg:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #1  (Cooperative)

torem en
(ISM 8)

Having to work as a part of a
team.

Sacrificing personally for the
greater good of the company.

Going wherever I’m needed.

Doing all the little "extras".

Engineers
(N=20)

Having to work as a pan of a team

With redesign: being willing to support
whatever is needed.

Doing all the little “extras.”

Getting involved in doing work
with outside organizations.

From  these  data  we  see  that  both  foremen  and  engineers  felt  cooperative  when  they

were having to work as a part of a team, and in doing all the little  "extras".

Table Sh:  Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview # 1   (Make a Difference)

Foremen
(N=18)

Engineers
(N=2 1 )

When I have autonomy, responsi­
bility, and can make decisions.

When I have autonomy: am relied on
for technical expertise.

When people use my input.

When people ask for help.

With empowerment/redesign;
getting buy-in from the men.

Being able to unite different
parts of the plant.

Making key decisions, getting things
done: making technical progress.

With redesign:  shaping the plant’s future:
helping people understand the vision.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1 5

From  these  data we  see  that  both  foremen  and engineers  felt  they  could  most  make  a 

difference  in  the organization  when  they had autonomy,  responsibility,  and could  make 

decisions.  Also,  both  groups  felt  that  they  could  make  a  difference  with  redesign,  in 

being able to unite different parts of the plant around a common vision  for the future.

Table  8 i: Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview #1  (Efficient)

Foremen
(N=18)

When my job is structured.

Engineers
(N=20)

When I can structure my work; when
I can control the scope of my work.

When I get good information.

Relying on technical systems/tools.

Planning and organizing well.

When I put in extra hours.

When I can delegate.

From  these data we  see  that  both  foremen  and engineers  felt  most efficient  when  their 

jobs were more structured.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1 6

Table  8j: Emergent OBSE Themes from Structured Interview # 1   (Faith in  You)

Foremen

Engineers

Hearing that people have faith
in you.

Being asked to participate in
important work or to be put in
an important position.

Hearing from management that they
Have faith in you.

Being given autonomy, responsibility:
being given assignments above and
beyond what's expected.

Being asked for my opinion: being
trusted to make decisions.

Being promoted.

Being asked to contact a customer.

From these data we see that both  foremen and engineers  felt most that there was  faith in 

them when they heard it from their management.  In summary, the  most common theme 

across  OBSE components  which  best describes  people's  sense of a time  when  they  felt 

most  important,  valued,  trusted etc.  in  the  organization  related  to  being  in  positions  of 

responsibility where there was autonomy and the ability to problem-solve, use  technical 

expertise, and  train, coach and develop the people they worked with.  It is  interesting to 

see  the  item  inter-correlations  between  the  different  items  that  make  up  the  OBSE 

measure:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1 7

Table 9: OBSE Item Intercorrelations

Item

Correlations

H 

T 

TS

V 

LYC

C MD

Important(I) 

- 

.54** 

.45**

7 3 ** 

5 4 **

-

.44**

F

E

-

Helpful  (H)  1.0

.39*

.31*

-

.37*

-

Trusted  (T) 

1.0 

.36*

.41** 

.48**

-

.33*

1.0

.45** 

.54**

1.0 

.47**

1 . 0

-

-

-

.37*

.51**

.39*

-

-

-

-

.57**

-

.39*

.39*

Taken
Seriously(TS) 

Valued  (V)

Like You 
Counted (LYC)

Coopera­
(C)
tive 

Could Make 
Differ­
ence 

(MD)

Efficient(E)

That There 
was Faith 
in You  (F)

1 . 0

-

-

-

1 . 0

1 . 0

-

1 . 0

Note: * denotes p=.05; ** denotes p=.0I

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1 8

We  see  from  these  data  that  important,  trusted,  valued,  and  like  you  counted  are  all 

highly intercorrelated  for this  research population:  if the sample size were  large enough 

to  perform  a  principal  components  analysis  it  would  be  likely  that  these  four  items 

would  all  load  highly  on  the  same  principal  component. 

In  any  case,  they  group 

together very well conceptually as a factor.  If we look at the themes which came out of 

critical  incident  interviews  across  these  four categories,  it  is  evident  that  the  common 

theme  among  these  four  items  is  being  given  a  position  of  responsibility  in  the 

organization:  that  alone  may  account  for  much of people’s  sense  of organization-based 

self-esteem in this  setting.  It is also  informative to look at the  mean scores and range of 

participants ratings for each item in the OBSE measure:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 1 9

Table  10:  Mean Scores and Range of Ratings  for OBSE Items

OBSE ITEM

Cooperative

Trusted

Helpful

Faith  in  Me

Taken Seriously

Count Around  Here

Can Make a Difference

Valued

Efficient

Important

Mean Score

Range

4.38

4.35

4.25

4.15

4.15

4.10

4.10

4.08

4.05

3.96

3-5

3-5

3-5

3-5

2-5

2-5

2-5

3-5

2-5

3-5

Note: 

Items were scaled  l=strongly disagree, 2=disagree, 3=neither, 4=agree, 5=strongly agree

According to  this  data,  "cooperative"  was  the  highest  rated  item  in  the  list of ten  items 

comprising  the  OBSE  measure.  In  fact,  one-fourth  of the  participants,  including  both 

foreman and engineers, when asked "think of a time when you felt most cooperative.  .." 

responded,  "I'm  always  cooperative.”  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  "important"  was 

the item with the  lowest mean score  for the participant group;  furthermore, eight out of 

forty  participants  responded  with  a  rating  of  "3"  to  this  item,  unsure  that  they  were 

getting  cues  from 

their  management 

that 

they  were 

indeed 

important 

to 

the 

organization; and only two out of eight were foremen.  Finally, OBSE was significantly

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


positively  correlated  with  scores  on  the  revised  Propensity  for  Proactivity  measure 

(r=.327;  p=.05),  and  with  positive  and  negative job  affect  (r=.428:  p=.01.  and  r=-.332. 

1 2 0

p=.05 respectively).

Proposition #4

It  was  proposed  that  a  person's job  affect  is  significantly correlated  with  his 

or her coping style;  the  more proactive  the  coping style,  the  more positive  one’s job 

affect,  and the more  reactive  the  coping  style,  the more negative  one’s job affect.  In 

order to examine this proposition,  two job affect scores were created:  a sum total  for 

positive job  affect  items  was  created,  and  the  same  was  done  for  negative job  affect 

items.  These sum totals  were  then  correlated with proactivity ratings  from Structured 

Interview # 1 .  Descriptive statistics  for the job affect items are as  follows:

Positive Affect

In Control:

N=40; range (1-4); X=2.83: S.D.=.781

Good:

Cheerful:

Motivated:

Successful:

Relaxed:

N=40; range (1-4); X=2.93: S.D.=.859

N=40: range (1-4); X=2.63; S.D -.925

N=40; range (2-4); X=3.03; S.D.=.800

N=40; range (1-4); X=2.75; S.D.=.870

N=40; range (1-4); X=2.45; S.D.=.846

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Negative AJfect

1 2 1

Frustrated:

N=40; range (1-4); X=2.45: S.D.=.876

Pulled in Different 
Directions

N=39: range (1-4): X=2.41; S.D.=.966

Irritated or Annoyed N=40: range (1-3); X=2.03: S.D.=.698

Trapped

Confused

Angry

Drained

Tense

N=40; range (1-4): X=1.63; S.D.=.774

N=39: range (1-3): X=l.69; S.D.= 694

N=40; range (1-3); X=1.65; S.D.=.700

N=40: range (1-4); X=2.23; S.D.=.862

N=40; range (1-4); X=1.98: S.D.=.800

Results of the analyses show a significant relationship between negative job affect and 

coping  styles  (r=.363,  p=.05).  The  more  reactive  the  coping  style,  the  greater  the 

amount of negative job affect.  The correlation  between  positive job affect and coping 

styles was not significant although it was in the predicted direction (r=.-.270; p=.092).

Proposition #5 and Related Findings

It  was  proposed  that one's status  in  the  organization  is significantly correlated 

with his or her coping style; the higher the status,  the more proactive the coping style. 

In  order  to  examine  this  proposition,  research  participants  were  divided  into  two 

groups:  engineers  and  foremen.  Status  was  correlated  with  proactivity  ratings  from 

Structured  Interviews  #1  and  #2.  Descriptive  statistics  for  proactivity  ratings  from 

Structured  Interview  #2  reveal  the  nature  of the  distribution  as:  N=39:  range=(I-3);

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 2 2

X=1.85:  S.D.=.779.  No significant correlation  was  found between  status  (foremen=l. 

engineers=2)  and  proactivity  ratings  from  Structured  Interview  #l(r=-. 145),  but  a 

significant correlation was found between status and proactivity ratings  from Structured 

Interview #2 (r=-.319, p=.05).  Specifically, as people were  in the process of nominating 

themselves 

to  new  positions 

in 

the  redesigned  organization  chart, 

there  were 

significantly  more  codeable  statements  for reactivity  found  in  the  interview  transcripts 

for  foremen  than  for  engineers.  We  can  also  look  at  it  from  another  perspective:  the 

higher  one's  status  in  the  organization,  the  greater  the  modal  number  of  proactive 

statements  were  found  in  the  second  interviews  (Xs=1.8  and  1.7  in  first  and  second 

interviews  respectively  for  the  engineers,  and  Xs=I,85  and  1.9  in  first  and  second 

interviews  respectively  for  the  foremen  where 

l=highly  proactive,  2 =moderately 

proactive,  and  3=reactive).  Another  way  to  show  this  relationship  between  status  and 

proactivity is to look at the distribution  for engineers and foremen of the modal number 

of comments found in interview transcripts for first and second interviews:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 2 3

Table  11: Status and Proactivity

Modal Score 

Engineers (N =21)

Interview  1

Engineers (N =21)

Interview 2

Foremen (N=19)

Interview  1

Foremen (N=18)

Interview 2

I 

9

1 0

7

5

2 

9

9

4

6

3

3

2

8

7

Note: Modal Score:  l=highly proactive, 2=moderately proactive, 3=reactive

We see from these data that engineers, as a group, had more statements codeable 

for proactivity in both interviews than the foremen, but the differences were even 

greater for Structured Interview #2 (see Appendix XI).

It is interesting to note also that research participants were asked about how they 

perceived their level of proactivity at the time of the second interview (see Appendix

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


IV: Structured interview #2).  When asked where they saw themselves on the grid, only 

two of the thirty participants who responded to the question saw themselves as reactive 

1 2 4

(see Appendix XI).

When the data were further examined, looking specifically for differences 

between foremen and engineers, several important findings emerged:

1. Status and Propensity for Proactivity

The correlation  between status and the total  scores on the revised Propensity  for 

Proactivity  measure  for  each  participant  (see  Appendix  IX)  was  significant  (r=.478, 

p=.002).  Overall, the engineers had higher Propensity for Proactivity scores.  The mean 

scores and their ranges  were  as  follows:  engineers  (N=21;  X=29.14;  range= 16-38);  and 

foremen (N=19; X=23.84; range=l5-30).  We  can  conclude  from  these  results  that 

overall,  the  engineers  as  a  group  perceived  themselves  to  be  more  prepared  to  be 

proactive in the organization.  This finding is consistent with the  Year-End Survey item, 

“Foremen  are  expected  to  support  management  but  are  often  not  included  in  decision 

making,”  which  at  least 65%  of the participants  agreed  with (N=40;  range=l-5;  X=3.6;

S.D.= 1.036).  This  was  a  perception  shared  by  both  foremen  and  engineers;  the 

correlation between status and this survey item was not significant (r=-.269).

2.  Status and Role Conflict

Of the  16 items in the Year-End Survey (four  items relating to each of four 

different types of role conflict:  systems, sent, role ambiguity and interpersonal), one 

item from each of the four categories was significantly related to status:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 2 5

Table  12: Correlations between Status and Role Conflict Items

Item

Interpersonal

I can be as open and honest as I'd
like to be with my peers.

Role Ambiguity

How often can you predict what
others will expect from you on the
job?

Sent

People in a good position to see if
you do what they ask give you
things to do which conflict with
one another.

Systems

How much do you take part with
others in making decisions that
affect you?

Correlation

(r=-.43, p=.01)

(r=.36, p=.05)

(r^-.36, p=.05)

(r=.39, p=.05)

With respect to being open and honest with their peers, the data shows that the foremen 

as a group rated this slightly higher than the engineers  (X=3.3  and 3.1  respectively).  In 

terms of being able to predict what others will expect  from them on the job,  data shows 

that  the engineers  rated  this  quite  a bit higher than  the  foremen  as  a group  (X=3.2  and 

1.5  respectively).  As  for  sent  role  conflict  where  people  are  given  things  to  do  which

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1 2 6

conflict with one  another,  this  was slightly  more  true  for the  engineers  as  a group  than 

for the  foremen  (X=2.5  and 2.2  respectively).  Lastly,  with  regard  to  how  much  people 

take  part  in  making  decisions  that  affect  them,  engineers  rated  this  higher  than  the 

foremen (X=3.1  and 2.45 respectively).

3.  Status and Job Affect

There  was  a  significant  correlation  between  status  and  one  of  the  job  affect 

items  from  the  Year-End  Survey:, anger  (r=-.42,  p=.01).  More  anger  was  reported  by 

foremen  (X=1.95;  range=l-3)  than  by  engineers  (X=  1.38:  range=l-3)  where  l=not 

much, 2=sometimes. and 3=often.

Proposition # 6

It  was  proposed  that  how  well  one’s  individual  needs  are  being  met  going 

through  the change process is significantly related to his or her coping style;  the more 

one's needs are met,  the more proactive  the  coping style,  and the  less one's needs are 

met,  the  more  reactive  the  coping  style.  While  there  was  not  a  great  deal  of data  to 

examine  this  proposition,  its  results  were  derived  from  three  Year-End  Survey  items 

which  were  found  to  be  correlated  with  proactivity ratings  from  Structured  Interview 

#1  (note  that  all  three  items  were  intercorrelated  at  the  p=.01  level).  Descriptive 

statistics for these three Year-End Survey items show the following distributions:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


I’m afraid of being “pigeon-holed" after redesign.

1 2 7

(N=40; range (1-4);  X=2.7; S.D.=.912)

I'm preoccupied with the changes because of what they are doing to my 
daily life now.

(N=40: range (1-5):  X=2.63: S.D. =1.08)

I'm preoccupied with the changes because of what they might mean for 
my future.

(N=39; range (1-4); X=2.72; S.D.=.999)

Descriptive  statistics  for proactivity ratings  from Structured  Interview #1  were  reported 

under  Proposition  #1  so  they  will  not  be  repeated  here.  Results  of  the  correlation 

analysis  show  a  clear  relationship  between  a  reactive  coping  style  and  concern  over 

what redesign will mean for their work life:

Table  13: Correlations between Year-End Survey Items and Proactivity Ratings from 

Structured Interview #1

Item

Correlation with Proactivity

I’m afraid of being “pigeon-holed” after 
redesign.

I’m preoccupied with the changes because 
of what they’re doing to my daily life now.

I’m preoccupied with the changes because 
of what they mean for my future.

(r=.654, p=.01)

(r=.420, p=.0l)

(r=.321.p=.05)

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


More research needs to be done in order to better understand these findings as they 

relate to management literature on the importance of self-actualization, career anchors 

1 2 8

and “context” in mid career life.

Proposition #7 and Related Findings

It  was  proposed  that  people  who  perceive  the  organization  to  have  a 

supportive  culture fo r  change  are  more  likely  to  have  a proactive  coping  style. 

In 

order  to  examine  this  proposition,  seven  items  from  the  Year-End  Survey  that  the 

researcher thought  were  indicative  of organization  culture  that  would  either encourage 

or  discourage  people  from  being  proactive  were  selected.  These  items  and  their 

descriptive  statistics  are  as  follows  (note  that  there  was  65%  agreement  among  the 

research  participants 

that 

these 

items  were 

indicative  of  the  culture  of  their 

environment):

Encourage Proactivity (EP):

My management wants me to step out and be creative.

(N=40: range =2-5; X=3.68:  S.D.=.797)

There's always an opportunity to give your ideas.

(N=40; range=2-5; X=3.7;  S.D.=.791)

I'm  able to publicly admit  I’ve made a mistake without fear that it 
will have a negative impact on my job/career.

(N=40: range=l-5; X=3.85;  S.D.=.893)

I’m able  to make the kinds of decisions that are important to me to 
be able to make.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


(N=40;  range=2-5; X=3.63;  S.D.=.740)

Discourage Proactivity (DP):

Career development here is very political.

(N=40; range=2-5:  X=3.80;  S.D.=9.39)

The company is very hierarchical; decisions are made top-down.

(N=39; range=2-5; X=3.64;  S.D.=.903)

We do too much micro-managing around here.

(N=40; range=2-5; X=3.70; S.D.=.79l)

Two  one-way  analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA)  procedures  were  computed  with  the 

“Encourages  Proactivity”  (EP)  and  “Discourages  Proactivity”  (DP)  variables;  the  first 

ANOVA  grouped  participants  by  proactivity  scores  from  Structured  Interview  #1 

(l=highly  proactive,  2=moderately  proactive,  3=reactive;  see  Appendix  VII),  and  the 

second  ANOVA  grouped  participants  by  status  (foreman  or  engineer).  Results  of the 

first analysis  showed only EP1  to  be  significant  (F=2.51;  p=.095).  Because  this  result 

was  only  marginally  significant,  the  analysis  was  redone  using only  two groups:  those 

participants  who  had  been  scored  “highly  proactive”  or “reactive”.  This  improved  the 

results  significantly  (F=5.861,  p=.023). 

In  other  words,  there  was  a  significant 

difference  in  mean  ratings  on  EP1:  My  management  wants  me  to  step  out  and  be 

creative.  People who were coded highly proactive by the researcher felt this statement 

was  more true  than  people  who  were coded by  the researcher as  reactive (Xs=3.94 and 

3.30 respectively).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 3 0

When  the  data  was  analyzed  by  status,  EP3,  DP3.  and  EP2  were  significant 

(F=6.3I.  p=.016;  F=5.26.  p=03;  F=4.34,  p=.04). 

In  the  case  of  EP3.  "I'm  able  to 

publicly  admit  I've  made  a  mistake  without  fear that  it  will  have  a  negative  impact  on 

my  job/career,"  it  was  the  group  of  foremen  interviewed  who  agreed  with  this 

statement  more  strongly (Xs=4.15  and  3.45  respectively).  With  respect to  DP3,  “We 

do  too much  micro-managing around  here.”  it was the group of engineers  who agreed 

with  this  statement  more  strongly  (Xs=3.95  and  3.40  respectively).  Regarding  EP2. 

"There's  always  an  opportunity  here  to  give  your  ideas,"  the  engineers  rated  this 

question higher than the foremen (Xs=3.95 and 3.45 respectively).

It is interesting to note that three out of these four culture variables were found 

to be significant in terms of their relationship with job affect:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 3 1

Table  14: Elements of Culture which May Encourage or Discourage Proactivity 

and their Relationship  to Job Affect

Culture Element*

EP1 

EP2

EP4

(.32*) 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

(.37*)

(.42**)

(.33*)

(-.33*)

(-.39*)

(-.36*)

-

-

(.33*)

-

-

-

-

Job Affect:

In Control 

Good 

Cheerful 

Motivated

Angry 

Frustrated 

Trapped 

Note:  EP1  -  “My management wants me to step out and be creative.”
EP2 -  ‘T here’s always an opportunity here to give your ideas.”
EP4 -  “I’m able to make the kinds of decisions that are important

to me to be able to make.”

In summary,  the  more participants  reported  that  "My  management  wants  me  to 

step  out  and  be  creative,"  the  more  they  also  reported  feeling  in  control.  The  more 

participants  reported  that,  "There’s  always  an  opportunity  here  to  give  your  ideas,"  the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 3 2

more people reported feeling  in control,  feeling good,  and  feeling  cheerful,  and the  less 

they  reported  feeling  angry,  frustrated  or  trapped.  Furthermore,  the  more  participants 

reported. "I’m able to publicly admit  I've  made a mistake without  fear that it will have a 

negative  impact  on  my job/career,"  the  more  they  reported  feeling  cheerful  on  a  daily 

basis.

There were  also some  differences found between the engineers and the  foremen 

on some of the items from the  Year-End Survey (see Appendix El).  The following table 

highlights these differences:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 3 3

Table  15: Status Differences on Aspects of Culture

Items that the engineers tended to agree more strongly than the foremen include: 

Item 

Most of the people in this plant are
committed to its well-being. 

We do too much micro-managing around
here. 

There's a lot of apprehension about 
what redesign will look like for the
organization. 

Correlation

(r=.48, p=.01)

(r=.40, p=.01)

(r=.34, p=.05)

Items  that  the foremen  tended  to  agree  with  more  strongly  than  the  engineers  did 
include:

Item 

The way changes in the pay structure 
were handled has caused a lot of morale
issues. 

Correlation

(r=-.33, p=.05)

It is interesting to note that although the engineers as a group perceive that there  is more 

opportunity  to  be  proactive  in  the  organization,  they  also  feel  greater  apprehension 

about what redesign would look like for the organization.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 3 4

Proposition #8 and Related Findings

It  was  proposed  that  the  management  o f the  change  process  affects  one's 

coping  style;  the  more  empowering  the  process,  the  more  proactive  one's  coping 

style.  Data  related  to  this  proposition  were  collected  via  participant  observation 

throughout the research process, and two  Year-End Survey items are reported.

In  a plant steering  committee  meeting  at  the beginning of  1996.  it was  decided 

that  the  two  Operations  Managers  and  the  Human  Resources  Manager  (a  former 

operations  manager)  would dedicate  at least half of their time  to planning a redesign  to 

be  implemented  by  the  end  of the  year  throughout  the  organization.  A  room  in  the 

Operations  Department was dedicated to the effort so that the  three-person design  team 

would  have  a place  to  meet.  The  redesign  process  evolved  as  members  of the  design 

team began  having one-on-one conversations throughout the plant with supervisors  and 

operators, so that detailed documentation of the work flow could be done.  The shape of 

the  redesigned  plant  began  to  take  form  as  the  design  team  worked  to  put  together  a 

picture  of the  ideal  organization  given  new  business  requirements,  and  the  new  plant 

vision.  For  most  of  1996,  the  design  team  room  was  left  open  for people  to  go  in  at 

their leisure  and see  how plant redesign was developing.  Once a rough  structure of the 

new plant organization  was complete,  the  design  team presented their work back  to  the 

plant steering committee  for their feedback.  In December of  1996, the first of the  focus 

group meetings began and design team members presented the proposed structure to the 

section  superintendents  for  their  feedback. 

In  a  series  of  meetings  with  them,  the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


proposed redesign was modified.

1 3 5

At  the  beginning  of  1997.  a  series  of  small  group  meetings  was  held  by 

members of the design  team,  in conjunction with the section superintendents, so that by 

the  middle  of  the  first  business  quarter  of  1997  everyone  in  the  plant  had  had  the 

opportunity to  sit  in  on  at  least  one  meeting.  These  meetings  were  approximately  two 

hours  in  duration  depending  on  the  group  and  how  much  discussion  ensued.  The 

rationale  for plant redesign  was  given,  the  new plant  vision was  reviewed,  and  the  new 

organization  structure  was  presented.  People  were  then  given  the  opportunity  to  write 

down  positives  and  negatives  on  sticky  notes  which  they  posted  on  the  map  of  the 

redesigned  organization.  With  each  focused  group  meeting,  the  plant  redesign  was 

somewhat modified.  While most of the engineers reported that the focus group meeting 

they  attended  made  sense,  whether  they  agreed  with  what  was  being  proposed  or  not. 

many of the  foremen said that the focus group meetings did not give them enough detail 

to  understand  the  redesign.  Many  foremen  reported  feeling  confused,  and  unsure  of 

how redesign would actually work out in a practical sense.

Concurrently  with  these  focused group  meetings,  the  Plant  Manager held series 

of  "state  of  the  business  meetings"  to  review  key  plant  metrics  and  reinforce  the 

importance  of  the  redesign.  He  discussed  the  nomination  process  by  which  people 

would  have  the opportunity  to  nominate  themselves  and others  to  new  positions  in  the 

redesigned  organization.  He  told  people  that  the  intent  was  to  have  a  position  for 

everyone after redesign:  that there would be a place for everyone,  and that there was no 

intent  to  downsize  through  redesign.  At  this  meeting,  new  department  heads  (direct-

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


1 3 6

reports  to  the  Plant  Manager)  were  announced  to  fill  key  positions  before  the  general 

nomination  process  was  to  take  place:  Finance,  Human  Resources.  Information 

Systems.  Purchasing,  Order  Fulfillment.  Supply  and  Distribution,  and  Customer 

Support.  Later  in  February,  nominations  began  for  "Facility  Management  team" 

positions:  Asset  Services.  Manufacturing.  Facility  Scheduling,  Systems  Improvement 

and  Quality  Assurance.  Technical  Support,  New  Business  Champion,  and 

Environmental/Health  and  Safety.  These  were  also  department  head  positions.  Copies 

of these  "facility  management  team"  positions  with  brief job  descriptions  were  made 

available  along  with  copies  of the  nomination  form.  Persons  in  the  organization  who 

had  the  requisite experience  and expertise  were encouraged to  nominate  themselves  to 

these positions.  Likewise, anyone in the plant could nominate the person/s they thought 

would best fit those positions.  It is important to note that the selection of key leaders for 

these positions had  the  potential  to make  or break the credibility of the  redesign efforts 

done throughout  1996.  Because  there  had been dissatisfaction  with some  of the people 

who had been in department head level positions, many people in the plant were waiting 

to see  if things would change or not.  Approximately thirty-six people applied for these 

seven  positions.  The  Plant  Manager  personally  met  with  each  person  who  was  not 

selected  for  one  of  the  seven  positions  to  give  them  personalized  feedback.  As  I 

interviewed  people  a  second  time  for  purposes  of  this  research,  I  was  told  without 

exception 

that  the  people  chosen  were  good  choices:  furthermore,  people  had 

confidence  that  they  would  work  well  as  a  group  toward  the  best  interest  of the  plant 

and the corporation.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


At  the  beginning  of March,  general job  descriptions  for the  more  than  seventy 

1 3 7

positions  in  the  redesigned  organization  were  made  available  to  all  plant  personnel. 

Anyone  was  able  to  nominate  him/herself  or  another  person  to  any  of  the  posted 

positions. 

Instructions  were  to  nominate  oneself  for  no  more  than  three  positions, 

ranking them in order of interest; the  first position  listed being that position which most 

closely resembled  the one s/he was currently  in  unless  s/he absolutely didn't want to do 

what s/he  had  been doing  most recently.  Underneath  each  position  listed, people  were 

asked  to  indicate  at  least  two  outstanding  attributes  (e.g.  leadership  characteristics, 

knowledge, skills, etc.)  with examples they  felt qualified the  nominee.  Members of the 

plant  steering  committee  then  took  all  the  forms  and  selected  people  for  each  of  the 

positions available in the redesign.  People were notified of the new positions on May  I, 

1997.  They  began  assuming  their new job titles  as of July  1,  1997.  From there,  it was 

the responsibility of the department  managers  to  facilitate  negotiation of new roles  and 

responsibilities within their new work units.

Because  Stmctured  Interview  #2  was  conducted  while  people  were  in  the 

nomination, 

it  was  an 

ideal  time  to  ask  them  about  their  perceptions  of  the 

organizational  changes.  An  analysis  of the  various  comments  made  by  foremen  and 

engineers  reveals  the  following  themes  (see  Appendix  VIII  for  the  complete  list  of 

comments):

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 3 8
Potential Benefits o f Redesign

•  Redesign has the potential to put the focus back on  manufacturing; supply 
more technical support to the shifts; and. unify the plant around a common 
vision, goals, and procedures, breaking down section barriers and promoting a 
more flexible workforce.

•  Redesign may open up career opportunities for operators and foremen, and get 

the best qualified people into leadership positions at all  levels in the plant.

• Redesign will decrease the number of supervisory positions plant-wide, 

leading to a more self-directed work force and allowing engineers to do more 
traditional engineering functions.

• Redesign will require people to work in different "team configurations”, to 

leam new skills, and to participate in the redefinition of roles and 
responsibilities, as the organization works toward making redesign a success.

Points o f Concern

•  As redesign takes shape, there is fear that work details will fall through the 

cracks and productivity will decrease.

•  There is a concern that the same "people-issues"  that have existed for years 

will continue to exist (lack of trust and accountability),  and that some people's 
self-esteem will be hurt if they are not well placed in the new organization.

•  In the redesigned organization, there are no "foremen" or "superintendent" 

positions -  it is not clear what the career paths are anymore; dual career 
ladders  for engineers still do not exist and there are fewer opportunities  for 
supervision.

•  Although the organizational structure has changed, the organization’s culture 

remains much the same:  paternalistic and hierarchical  versus participative; it is 
not clear that top management have the people skills for the redesigned 
organization.

These  comments  show  that  while  there  are  many  logical  reasons  for  the  redesign  and 

potential  benefits,  there  are  also  many  unanswered  concerns  regarding  details  of  its 

implementation  and  regarding  people-issues:  accountability,  career  development,  and

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


the culture changes redesign would require.

1 3 9

It  is  helpful  to  review  once  again  suggestions  from  the  literature  on  how  to 

successfully manage organizational change projects:

•  They begin by giving people credible data on the importance of engaging 
in major organizational change (recognizing that people may need to hear 
the same thing in different ways;  learning style and communication style 
differences need to be planned for), and providing ways for people to
get questions answered in a timely manner.

•  They model teamwork at the top and leaders model “deep change”.

•  They anticipate stress on  individuals:  change will affect the way in which 

personal needs are  fulfilled (needs for self-actualization, context and 
meaning, managing uncertainty).

•  They anticipate that there will  be an increase in role conflicts and role 

ambiguity, encouraging people to take the extra time to build relationships 
and come to mutually beneficial agreements over issues.

•  They create a culture for change; one that is empowering -  some o f the 

qualities of empowering cultures include:

Creating esprit de corps, caring attitude and concern  for employees 
(Beach.  1993:  Kotter and Heskett.  1992)

Fostering decision-making authority, accountability, alignment 
of direction, and  “ableness” (Brower,  1995)

Attending to psychological bases: meaning, competence, self- 
determination,  and ability to have impact (Spreitzer,  1995)

Attending to social characteristics: span of control, sociopolitical 
support,  access to information and resources, and participation 
(Spreitzer,  1996)

Enhancing self-esteem and positive job affect, and providing social 
support (Spreitzer and Quinn,  1996)

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 4 0

Fostering "‘hardiness”:  increasing commitment, control and 
challenge (Maddi and  Kobassa,  1984)

Promoting life-long learning and encouraging proactivitv.

While  there are  some clues  as  to  how well  the  organization  under study  managed  their

change  process  according  to  these  recommendations,  additional  research  would  much

more  adequately  address  these  issues  now  that  people  have  had  some  time  to  actually

work out more of the details of the redesign.

Although  the  data  available  from  participant  observation  are  inconclusive

regarding  the  proposition,  there  were  also  two  Year-End  Survey  items  relating  to

“vision" which are relevant to this proposition:

“Management could have handled the changes better over the past year; they 

could have better prepared us to move toward the vision statement.”

(N=40; range (2-5; X=3.75; S.D.=.707)

“This company knows how to manage the people side of change.”

(N=40; range (1-4; X=2.75; S.D.=.874)

According to these data, up until  December,  1996. the  implementation of redesign does 

not seem to have  been  well-received.  This  would suggest that the  organization  had yet 

to encourage proactivity through the change management process up to that point.

[f we refer back to the data suggesting shifts in proactivity (see Tables 7a and b), 

for the people  whose  proactivity  ratings  did  increase  across  interviews,  we can  assume 

that  the  way  the  change  process  was  managed,  for  them,  encouraged  proactivity  and 

increased  people's  sense  of  OBSE.  This finding  highlights  the  notion  that  change

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


management may be well planned and progress logically but may not have the intended 

1 4 1

impact on proactivity if people's OBSE is not affirmed in the process.

During the time in which I was doing participant observation, cartoons began to 

appear  on  the  informal  bulletin  boards  in  the  plant.  A  particularly  poignant  example 

(Adams.  1996) read as follows:

Boss: 

"I've decided to use humor in 
the workplace. Experts say humor
eases tension,  which is important when the  work force is being
trimmed.  Knock-knock."

Employee: 

"Who’s there?"

Boss: 

"Not you anymore."

Yet  more  evidence  of  peoples’  concern  about  management’s  motives  despite  having 

been  reassured  by  the  Plant  Manager  that  there  would  be  a  place  for  everyone  in  the 

redesigned  organization. 

In  fact,  the  steering  committee  members  involved  worked 

diligently  to  make  sure  everyone  was  well  placed  in  the  redesigned  organization, 

matching  talents  and  interests  to  new job descriptions.  Further research  would need  to 

be done to determine how effective management was in accomplishing this objective.

Additional Emergent Research Findings

A significant correlation was found between Propensity for Proactivity scores on 

the  revised  measure  and  coping  styles.  Sum  total  scores  on  the  revised  Propensity  for 

Proactivity  measure  were  correlated  with  each  person's  proactivity  rating  from 

Structured Interview #1  (r=-.343;  p=.03).  The higher the Propensity  for Proactivity, the 

more  proactive  the  coping  style  (l=highly  proactive;  2=moderately  proactive;  and

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


1 4 2

3=reactive).  Tnis  finding gives  further evidence  that  the  use  of the  code  developed to 

assign  proactivity ratings to  interview transcripts  from Structured  Interviews #1  and #2 

was  valid.  Furthermore,  participants  responses  to  the  role  conflict  scenarios  (see 

Appendix  III.  Part  III)  were  also  significantly  correlated  at  the  p=.05  level  with  both 

Propensity  for  Proactivity  scores  on  the  revised  measure,  and  proactivity  ratings  from 

Structured Interviews #1  and #2.

A  significant  positive  correlation  was  found  between  people’s  general  job 

satisfaction  as  measured  by  the  Year-End  Survey  with  the  question.  “Overall,  my job 

satisfaction  is  pretty  high”  (N=40;  range=2-5;  X=3.73:  S.D.=.877),  and  job  affect. 

Propensity for Proactivity, and their OBSE scores:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 4 3

Table  16: Correlations Between General Job Satisfaction and Other Variables

Item

Job Affect:

Successful

Good

Frustrated

Trapped

Challenged

Cheerful

Propensity  for Proactivity

OBSE

Correlation

(.748). p=.01

(.619), p=.Ol

(-.469),, p=.01

(-.458),,p=.01

(.452). p=.01

(.439), p=.Oi

(.381), p=.05

(.342), p=.05

General  job  satisfaction  was  most  highly  correlated  with  feelings  of  success,  and 

whether or not people  felt good about  their jobs.  It was also positively correlated with 

feeling  challenged,  and  cheerfulness.  General  job  satisfaction  was  related  to  some 

negative job  affect  as  well;  feelings  of frustration  and  feeling  trapped.  The  higher  the 

negative job  affect on  these  two dimensions,  the  lower the general job  satisfaction  and 

vice versa.  General job  satisfaction  was  also significantly correlated  with scores on  the 

revised  Propensity  for Proactivity  measure  (see  Appendix  EX).  The  higher the  general 

job  satisfaction,  the  greater  the  Propensity  for  Proactivity. 

Lastly,  general  job 

satisfaction  was  also  significantly  correlated  with  scores  on  the  OBSE  measure;  the

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


higher the  general job  satisfaction,  the  higher the  Organization-Based Self-Esteem  and 

1 4 4

vice versa.

Lastly, profiles of the "proactive” versus "reactive" organizational  mindset were 

developed.  When  Year-End  Survey  items  (see  Appendix  III)  were  correlated  with 

participants'  proactivity  scores  from  Structured  Interview  #1  (l=highly  proactive. 

2=moderately  proactive.  3=reactive). 

there  was  a  marked  difference  between 

participants  who  were  coded  "1"  or  "2"  and  participants  who  were  coded  "3".  The 

following tables show which of the Year-End Survey items were significantly correlated 

with  those people  whose  interview transcripts  contained primarily proactive  statements 

and those people whose interview transcripts contained primarily reactive statements:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 4 5

Table  17a: Correlations Between Proactivity Scores from Structured Interview #1 

and Year-End Survey Items (Proactive)

Item

Changes around here are usually for
the better.

I see the big picture and my role in it.

I feel people recognize me for a job
well-done.

I think I'm in a position to influence
the plant's future and well-being.

I feel valued by this organization.

I'm ready for a change; I'm looking
forward to redesign, whatever it will
mean for me and my job.

I like to move from job to job; I like
change.

Correlation with
Proactivity Rating

(r=-.48. p=.01)

(r=-.45, p=.01)*

(r=-.42, p=.01)

(r=-.42, p=.01)

(r=-.39, p=.05)

(r=--39, p=.05)

(r=-.36, p=.05)

* Note:  This item is an exception; the correlation was done on data from the

second interview (the correlation between this item and participants’ scores
in the first interview was not significant).

Note:  The negative correlations have to do with the scorin g of  proactivity

(l=highly proactive, 2=moderately proactive and 3==reactive).

These  data  show  that  for  those  people  whose  interview  transcripts  contained 

primarily  a  lot  of  proactive  statements,  several  of  them  report  feeling  valued,  are

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


prepared for change and feel pretty positive about it. understand the big picture and their 

role in it, and feel that they're in a position to influence the plant's future and well being.

1 4 6

Table  17b: Correlations Between Proactivity Scores from Structured Interview #1 

and Year-End Survey Items (Reactive)

Item

Correlation with Proactivity

I'm afraid of being pigeon-holed after
redesign.

I don’t feel I can have an impact on the
outcome of redesign.

I’m preoccupied with the changes because of
what they are doing to my daily life now.

People's stress levels have increased
in the past year; there have been
arguments/errors made/accidents that
probably wouldn't have happened in the
past due to the extra stress at work.

I get bypassed in decision making around here.

Only a few people have important
resources to offer (around here).

We are very paternalistic in the way
we make decisions; we don’t see how
our decisions affect the plant as a whole.

(r=.65, p=.01)

(r=.47, p=.01)

(r=.42, p=.01)

(r=.37, p=.01)

(r=.34, p=.05)

(r=.34, p=.05)

(r=.33. p=.05)

Note:  The direction of the correlation was determined by the coding of

proactivity (l=highly proactive, 2=moderateIy proactive. 3=reactive).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 4 7

We can see from these tables that the two perspectives are very different.  In contrast to 

those people whose interview transcripts contained mostly proactive statements,  several 

of the  participants  whose  transcripts  contained  mostly  reactive  statements  report  that 

they  are  concerned  for their  own  roles  after  redesign,  that  they  do  not  think  they  can 

influence  its  outcome,  that  they  get  bypassed  in  decision  making,  and  feel  that  the 

people’s stress  levels  in  the  organization  are  increasing such  that there  have  been  more 

arguments/errors made/accidents as a result of the increased stress.

Research Question # 1

At the close  of the research, another interesting issue became apparent.  “What 

is  the  relative  importance  o f different  coping  style  correlates  in  accounting fo r   a 

person's  coping  style  in  the present?" 

In  order  to  answer  this  question,  the  scores 

from  the  following  measures  were  entered  into  a  stepwise  regression  analysis  with 

ratings of proactivity  from  Structured  Interview #1  as  the  dependent variable:  OBSE 

scores,  role  conflict  scores  from  the  Year-End  Survey  (see  Appendix  III.  Part  I). 

Propensity for Proactivity scores  from the revised measure, and each person’s average 

score  across  the  four  role  conflict  scenarios  (see  Appendix  III.  Part  III).  The 

following correlation  matrix shows the relationship among coping style correlates:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 4 8

Table  18: Correlation Matrix Between Coping Style Correlates

Proactivitv 
Ratings (T2)

OBSE

Role

Conflict
Scenarios

Job  Sat. 

Role 
Conflict 

Propensity

for

(experienced)

Proactivity

.585**

-.398*

.393*

-.213 

.273

-

-.146

.323*

-.102 

.225

-

-.095

-.342 

-.569

-

-.318 

.136

-.381*

-

Proactivity 
Ratings (T I )

Proactivity 
Ratings  (T2)

OBSE

Role Conflict 
Scenarios

Job Sat.

Role Conflict 
(experienced)

Propensity  for 
Proactivity

-.343*

-.388*

-.327

-.347

.381

-.508**

-

Results  of stepwise  regression  analysis  show  that  OBSE  scores  accounted  for 

most of the variance  in the model,  with how people  report they have responded to prior 

situations of role conflict also accounting for a small additional portion of the variance:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


1 4 9

Table  19:  Results o f a Stepwise Regression  with Proactivity Ratings from Structured 
Interview #1  as the Dependent Variable (SPSS  for Windows:  Version 7.5)

Unstandardized 

Coefficients 

Unstandardized 

Coefficients

Model

B 

Std.  Error 

Beta

(Constant)

6.066 

1

OBSE

-.101 

1.568 

.038

(Constant)

4.735 

1.546

OBSE
Role Conflict 
Scenarios

-9.21E-02 

.570 

.035

.222

Excluded Variables

Beta In

1

~)

1

2

Role Conflict
Scenarios 
Job Sat.
Role Conflict 
(Experienced)
Propensity  for 

Proactivitv

.

Job Sat 
Role Conflict
Propensity  for 
Proactivity

R

.398

.534

.358
-.087

.069

-.238

.031
.026

-.126

*)

R

.158

.258

t 

3.829 

-2.673 

3.063 

-2.605 

2.566 

Sig. 

.014 
.588 

.707 

.132 

.843 
.879 

.428 

Sig.

.000 

.011

.004

.013

.014

Partial Correlation 

.398
-.090

.062

-.246

.033
.026

-.133

-.398

-.364

.358

t

2.566
-.547

.378

-1.541

.199
.154

-.802

■>

Adjusted R

Standard  Error o f the 

Estimate

.136

.247

.7556

.7055

This  finding  suggests  of all  the  correlates  of proactivity  examined  in  this  research  that 

organization-based  self-esteem  was  the  most  predictive  of proactivity  as  measured  by

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


coding Structured  Interview #1, with the way in which people responded to scenarios of 

role conflict contributing a small amount in addition to OBSE in explaining the variance 

1 5 0

in the data.

Research Question #2

A  second  research  question  logically  followed  the  first,  “ What  is  the  relative 

importance  o f  different factors  in  accounting  fo r  a  person's  coping  style  in  the 

future?”  In  order  to  answer  this  question,  the  scores  from  the  following  measures 

were  entered  into  a  stepwise  regression  analysis  with  ratings  of  proactivity  from 

Structured  Interview  #2  as 

the  dependent  variable: 

proactivity  ratings  from

Structured  Interview  #1,  OBSE  scores,  job  satisfaction.  Propensity  for  Proactivity 

scores  from  the  revised  measure,  role conflict  scores  from  the  Year-End  Survey  (see 

Appendix  III,  Part  I),  and  each  person’s  average  score  across  the  four  role  conflict 

scenarios  (see  Appendix  HI,  Part  HI).  Results  of  the  analysis  show  that  proactivity 

ratings from Structured Interview #1  accounted for most of the variance in the data:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


151

Table 20:  Results of a Stepwise Regression  with Proactivity Ratings from Structured
Interview #2 as the Dependent Variable (SPSS for Windows: Version 7.5)

Unstandardized

Coefficients

Unstandardized
Coefficients

B

.810

.561

(Constant)

Structured
Interview#!

Excluded Variables

Role Conflict
Scenarios
Job SaL
Role Conflict
(Experienced)
OBSE
Propensity for
Proactivity

Std. Error

Beta

251

.128

Beta In

.121
.020

.053
.104

-211

.585

t

.840
.145

313
.711

-1.564

t

3.146

4389

Sig.

.406
.866

.711
.482

.127

Sig-

.003

.000

Partial Correlation

.139
.024

.062
.118

-252

R

385

2

R

342

2

Adjusted R

325

Standard Error of the

Estimate

.6404

Model

1 

1 

I

The following cross-tabulation shows the nature of the relationships between 

proactivity ratings from Structured Interviews #1 and #2:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


1 5 2

Table 21:  Cross-Tabulation of Proactivity Ratings  in Structured Interviews #1  and #2

Structured  Interview #2

I 

12 

2 

1 

2

3

8 

4

Total

16

13

10

1

3

5

1 

2 

3 

Structured 
Interview # 1

Note: 

l=highly proactive:  2=moderately proactive; 3=reactive;  (N=39)

The other factors entered did not explain significant amounts of the remaining variance 

This finding lends support to the supposition that people develop a coping style which 

reflects a general orientation to life and change.  In situations of major organizational 

change, people tend to cope in the way they have always coped; some people naturally 

tend to be more proactive, seeing work life as a positive challenge, while others tend to 

be more reactive, seeing work life more as an uncertainty.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


CHAPTER 5

DISCUSSION

This dissertation  addresses  how  middle  managers  cope  with organization  change,  and 

also  identifies  both  elements  of the  person  and  his  or  her environment  which  covary 

and  presumably  are  causally  linked  to  coping  styles.  Coping  style  is  conceived  in 

terms  of a  continuum  from  highly  proactive  and  enthusiastic  toward  a  given  change 

project  to  highly  reactive,  even  to  the  point  of  antagonism.  While  none  of  the 

research  participants  demonstrated  extreme  reactivity,  a  sample  of  managers  was 

identified  which  was  fairly  evenly  distributed  across  three  levels  of  intensity,  from 

generally reactive to moderately proactive or cooperative to highly proactive.

I. 

Review of the Propositions

Support  was  found  for  a  number  of  propositions  derived  from  inductive 

analysis of the data set in combination with a literature review.

Review of Proposition #1

The  literature  reviewed  in  Chapter 2  indicated  that  role  conflict  is  an  inherent 

part  of organizational  life;  furthermore,  that  we  can  look  at  organizational  change  as 

creating  large  scale  role  conflict. 

It  was  also  noted  that  people  tend  to  develop  a 

coping style which  is relatively consistent across  time  as a function of life experience. 

Support was  found  for the  proposition  that  how people  have  coped  with  role  conflict 

in the past is indicative o f how they cope with organizational change in the present.

153

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


154

Specifically, people’s self-ratings of how  they  handled different kinds of role  conflict 

situations  in  the  past  was  somewhat  consistent  with  their  proactivity  ratings  in  the 

present. This  finding  is  useful  in  a number o f ways.  It suggests  that  people  who  tend 

toward proactivitv as  a general way of dealing with  work relationships,  will  also  tend 

toward  proactivity  in  times  of major organizational  change 

It  suggests  that  there  is 

continuity  in  people’s  coping  styles  across  settings  and  conditions,  a  fact  that can  be 

used  to  anticipate  particular  problems  and  opportunities  in  the  planning  of  major 

organizational change.  By  doing  so,  it also  qualifies  the  extent  to  which  leaders  can 

expect  to  be  able  to  generate  mutually  satisfying  change  processes  by  the  way  they 

manage their people.

The amount o f variance accounted for by this  relationship in the present study 

was  modest,  thus  leaving  the  door  open  for  the  supposition  that  the  quality  of  the 

management of the  change  process  can  make  an  important  difference.  Nonetheless, 

the idea that people’s coping styles are  fairly stable over time does encourage caution. 

To  the  extent  that  proactive coping  styles  are  called  for  in  today’s  turbulent  business 

environments, people  with  fairly stable and reactive styles  face a major challenge  and 

may  require  extra  effort  in  unlearning  their  old  ways  of  coping  and  learning  new 

ones.  There  is  nothing  in  the  data  to  suggest  that  such  people  cannot  change  in  this 

way;  rather,  the  finding  stands  as  a  warning  that  organizational  change  can  require 

individual  change  at  a  fairly  fundamental  level,  and  the  costs  of  re-education  at  a 

personal  level  need  to  be  taken  into  account  in  decisions  to  shift  organizational 

strategies  that,  in  turn,  require  shifts  in  individual  coping  styles.  This  finding  also

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


155

suggests that the  way people  cope  with  role conflict can  be  used  as  a  predictor of the 

way  people  will  cope  with  organizational  change.  For example,  personnel  selection 

specialists  for organizations  committed  to ongoing organizational  change  might  want 

to find ways to build this knowledge  into selection testing.

Review of Propositions #2

No  support  was  found  for  the  proposition  that  the  amount  o f role  conflict 

experienced in one’s job is significantly and positively correlated with reactive 

coping styles.  Specifically, coping styles did not vary with the amount of role conflict 

people reported experiencing.  This  finding does  lend  further support to  the notion  of 

consistency of coping styles.

When particular items  from the  16-item role conflict  measure  were examined, 

however,  some  significant  results  appeared.  The  item  which  was  most  highly 

correlated  with  proactivity  related  to  how  much  one  participates  with  others  in 

helping  set  the  way  things  are  done  on  one’s  job.  This  finding  speaks  to  the 

importance  of  participation  as  an  underlying  principle  for  organization  change 

management  that  is  likely  to  foster  proactivity.  It  is  important  to  remember  that  the 

data collected on  the  amount of role  conflict experienced  in  one’s job  were collected 

at  the  end  of  1997  before  people  had  actually  been  affected  by  the  change  process. 

Holdorf (1975) suggested  that role conflict has a deteriorating impact on relationships 

over  time.  Further  study  over  time  might  still  indicate  a  correlation  with  coping 

styles in situations of prolonged role conflict; that ongoing  role conflicts or increasing 

amounts  of  role  conflict  which  are  typical  when  people  are  going  through  major

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without perm ission.


156

organizational  change  may  adversely  affect  proactivitv.  Although  the  results  of this 

research  did  not  support  the  proposition,  it  seems 

important  for  managers  of 

organizational  change  to  be  aware  that  change  creates  role  conflicts  as  people  are 

going  through  a  period  of transition  from  old  roles  to  new  ones.  Furthermore,  it  is 

particularly  important to  support  people  in taking the  time  to  resolve  role conflicts  as 

openly  and  quickly  as  possible.  Results  of  this  research  clearly  demonstrated 

significant  relationships  between  role  conflict  and  organization-based  self-esteem 

(OBSE),  Propensity  for  Proactivity,  general  job  satisfaction,  and  job  affect.  The 

greater the  role  conflict  reported,  the  less  the  OBSE.  Propensity  for  Proactivity,  and 

job  satisfaction;  the  more  frustrated,  pulled,  irritated  or  annoyed,  the  less  motivated 

and  in  control  people  report  feeling.  Clearly,  role  conflict  in  organizational  life  is 

wisely  attended  to.  N eilsen’s  (1984)  concept  of  “co-inquiry”  where  problems  are 

shared  and  solutions  are  mutually  determined  is  an  important  model  of relationships 

for  people  to  learn;  one  that  will  foster empowering  work  relationships  and  create  a 

“change-capable” organization culture.

Review of Proposition #3

One  of  the  most  outstanding  research  findings  was  confirmation  of  the 

significance  of one’s  sense  of organization-based  self-esteem,  especially  in  times  of 

major  organizational  change. 

It  was  proposed  that  a  person's  level  o f  OBSE  is 

significantly correlated  with  his  or her coping  style:  the  higher  the  OBSE,  the  more 

proactive  the  coping  style.  Participants’  OBSE  scores  were  significantly  correlated

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


157

with  the  amount  of  proactivity  found  in  transcripts  from  Structured  Interview  #1. 

People  who  were  scored  as  more  reactive  tended  to  have  lower  OBSE  scores,  and 

people  who were  more  proactive  tended  to  have  higher OBSE  scores.  While  we can 

not  infer causality  here,  it  may  be  that  the  more  OBSE  one  develops,  the  more  cues 

one is given  that boost one’s OBSE.  Pierce, et al.  (1986) claimed that  people come to 

the job  with an established sense of OBSE.  Yet. over time, this  is surely modified by 

the environment as  a new  employee  is  socialized  and develops  in  his  or  her job  role. 

What  is  most  interesting  is  that  in  times  of  major  organizational  change,  people’s 

flow  is  interrupted  (Weick,  1995),  and  they  begin  “sensemaking”,  searching  their 

environment for cues.

The  data  from  this  research  indicate  that  coping  styles  remained  the  same  in 

most  people  across  the  two  interviews,  separated  by  a  four-month  period  in  which 

some  major  organization  changes  began  to  be  implemented.  However,  for  fifteen 

people  whose  interview  transcripts  were coded  "proactive” (“ 1”  or "2”)  in  Structured 

Interview  #1  or  "reactive” 

("3” )  in  Structured  Interview  #2  and  whose  ratings 

switched  from one  to the other during this  period  (see Tables  13a and  b),  it  was clear 

that  the  management  cues  thev  were  either  getting  or not  getting  as  thev  engaged  in 

"sensemaking”  affected  their  expressed  levels  of  proactivity  or  reactivity  to  the 

changes  that  were  being  implemented.  Among  the  fifteen,  those  who  received 

management  cues  that  they  were  supported,  listened  to,  and  were  valued,  and  those 

who  were  asked  for  their  input,  demonstrated  more  proactivity  in  the  second 

interview  than  in  the  first.  Likewise,  those  who  felt  their  input  had  been  ignored,  or

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


158

who  had  unaddressed concerns,  or felt  "left out” or that  they  had  little  ability to  give 

their input on the organization's  redesign,  demonstrated  more  reactivity  in  the second 

interview  than  in  the  first.  Unfortunately,  I  did  not  readminister  the  OBSE  measure 

during  Structured  Interview  #2. 

It  is  important  to  know  if  people's  OBSE  scores 

covaried with changes  in proactivity between Structured  Interview #1  and #2.  Pierce, 

et  al.  (1986), claimed  that  OBSE  is  relatively stable  unless  something  changes;  these 

qualitative  data  suggest  that  organizational  change  probably  does  affect  OBSE  in 

some significant ways.

It  is  important  to  note  that  OBSE  was  also  significantly  positively  correlated 

with  several  other  variables:  general  job  satisfaction.  Propensity  for  Proactivity, 

positive  job  affect;  and  significantly  negatively  correlated  with  experienced  role 

conflict,  and  negative  job  affect.  And.  when  these  variables  were  regressed  on 

proactivity  ratings  from  Structured  Interview  #1,  OBSE  accounted  for  most  of  the 

variance  in  the  dependent  variable.  Clearly,  OBSE  is  an  important  construct  for 

managers  of  change  to  understand. 

In  times  of  major  organizational  change,  it  is 

critical  to  remind  people  that  they  are  valued,  important,  and  trusted.  One  of  the 

participants  who  had  high  OBSE  scores  conveyed  the  following  in  Structured 

Interview #2,

You  need self-satisfaction -  it comes  from being  proactive  at  work.  .  . 
I  want  to  see  results.  .  .  I  want  to  do  something  I’m 
I  try  to  be  proactive. 
convinced  is  worthwhile  for  the  company.  A  lot  of people  feel  stuck.  .  .  As 
for me,  I  have confidence.  I  feel  that  I have  backing here -   I’ve  never gotten 
slammed  for trying things  without asking while other people  have been.  They 
know what  I can do  and what  I can’t.  .  .  If this  plant needs  to  be  shaken  up  a 
bit.  then let’s do it!  Put me where you think I’ll do best.  ..

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


159

This  person  has  obviously  developed  a high  degree  of OBSE  over  time.  One  of the 

participants  who  had  low  OBSE  scores  conveyed  the  following  in  Structured 

Interview #2:

I've been left out of the  information loop.  .  .I just feel  like  I've been 

left aside.  .  .whatever's going to happen is going to happen..  .they don't care 
what  I think.  If I had more information,  I might be able to see some of the 
positives  [of redesign], but I don’t know what’s going on.  I want to know step 
by step what’s going to happen;  I've been here a long time and  I don’t want to 
see what I've done go to waste.

Future  research  assessing  the  long  term  impact  of systematically  addressing  OBSE 

issues  with  people  going  into  a  major  organizational  change  might  yield  very 

practical  and  fruitful  results.  For  the  high  OBSE  person,  a  reminder  that  s/he  is 

important,  valued and trusted  might  be  enough to keep  one's  OBSE  high  through  the 

ambiguities  and  stresses  of  change.  For  the  low  OBSE  person,  some  in-depth 

dialogue  might  be  necessary.  To  explore  the  relational  and  performance  issues  that 

lead to low OBSE would be important.

When  the  OBSE  measure  was  converted  to  a  critical  incident  interview  in 

Structured  Interview #2, we  found  that “important”,  “trusted”,  “valued” and “like  you 

counted”  are  all  highly  intercorrelated  for this  research  sample.  The  common  theme 

across  these  four OBSE components  seems  to  be  related  to  being given  a position  of 

responsibility  in  the  organization.  Because  the  redesign  eliminated  the  roles  of 

"foreman”  and  “superintendent” 

(top  engineering  role 

in 

the  manufacturing 

organization;  central  to  plant  operations),  many  of the  participants  were  left  feeling

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


160

that they would no longer have the opportunity to be  in a position of responsibility, as 

they had been  in the past.  We see  from Chapter 4,  Proposition  # 8   that there are  many 

“points of concern"  (see also Appendix XIII);  for example:

“As  men,  we  feel  a  need  to  take  ownership  for  our  positions  -  

whatever they may be; redesign  is stripping us of this."

"The  men  who  are  the  most  discouraged  are  the  ones  who  don't  see 

their jobs on the new organization chan."

“I  thought  I'd  mapped out  a career path  for  myself,  but  now  that’s  all 

changing."

“With  a  third  less  supervisory  positions  in  the  redesign,  they  should 
have created a technical  ladder first.  .  .they’ve been talking  about the  need  for 
this for twenty years; now they’re saying, “trust us”. .  .”

“How  are  the  people  who  won’t  have  supervisory  positions  anymore 

going to handle that? How are they going to maintain  ‘self-esteem’?”

Although  we  can describe  this  research  population  as being characterized,  overall,  as 

proactive,  most  of the  people  in  this  research  sample  did  not  describe  themselves  as 

involved  in  the  redesign.  Many  people  in  this  research  sample  did  not  perceive  that 

they  had  access  to  the  information  or  invitation  to  participate  in  redesign  beyond  the 

few  group  meetings  which  were  coordinated  by  members  of the  design  team  and/or 

plant  manager  (June  1996  introduction  to  redesign  concepts,  leadership  interviews 

with  corporate  HR  personnel,  focus  group  meetings  in  December  1996  and  January 

1997,  January  1997  state  of the  business  meeting  to discuss  the  nomination  process). 

Thus,  there  was  a  lot  of ambiguity  in  people's  minds  as  to  what  the  redesign  would 

actually change, and how the changes would affect them personally.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


161

Future research related to OBSE should address the issue of Locus o f Control 

(Rotter,  1966).  Locus of Control (LOC)  is a psychological construct that has  been 

defined as  follows.

When  a  reinforcement  is  perceived  by  the  subject  as  flowing  from 
some action of his own but  not being entirely contingent upon his action, then, 
in  our culture,  it  is  typically  perceived  as  the  result  of  luck,  change,  fate,  as 
under the control  of powerful  others,  or  as  unpredictable  because  of the  great 
complexity  of the  forces  surrounding  him.  When  the  event  is  interpreted  in 
this  way by an  individual,  we  have  labeled this  a belief in external  control.  If 
the  person  perceives  that  the event  is contingent upon  his  own  behavior or his 
own  relatively  permanent  characteristics,  we  have  termed  this  a  belief  in 
internal  control.  It  is  hypothesized  that  this  variable  is  of major significance 
in understanding the nature of learning processes  in different kinds of learning 
situations  and  also 
individual  differences  exist  among 
individuals  in  the degree  to  which  they are  likely to  attribute  personal  control 
to  reward  in  the  same  situation.  In  its  simplest  form,  our  basic  hypothesis  is 
that  if  a  person  perceives  a  reinforcement  as  contingent  upon  his  own 
behavior,  then  the  occurrence  of either  a  positive  or  negative  reinforcement 
will  strengthen  or  weaken  potential  for  that  behavior  to  recur  in  the  same  or 
similar  situation. 
If  he  sees  the  reinforcement  as  being  outside  o f  his  own 
control  or  not  contingent,  that  is  depending  upon  chance,  fate,  powerful 
others,  or  unpredictable,  then  the  preceding  behavior  is  less  likely  to  be 
strengthened  or  weakened.  Not  only  will  there  be  a difference  of degree  but 
also  a difference,  in  some  instances,  in  the  nature of the  function  as  the  result 
of a series of trials (p.  1 . 5).

that  consistent 

Rotter et al.  found support for their hypotheses  in a number of studies over a period of 

years.  Several versions of the  LOC  measure have been developed and  modified over 

time.  The  idea here  is  that the  impact  of what  is  called “reinforcement”,  or reward of 

a  person’s  behavior  depends  upon  their  LOC,  or  “the  extent  to  which  the  person 

perceives  the  reward  as  contingent  on  his  own  behavior  or  not.”  This  work  has 

important  implications  for  the  management  of organizational  change.  To  the  extent 

that  one  thinks  his  or  her  future  in  the  organization  is  dependent  upon  fate,  versus

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


162

something s/he  has  some control over, one  may naturally tend more toward  reactivity. 

Future  research should test the relationship  between  LOC,  proactivity,  and  Propensity 

for Proactivity,  as  well  as  the  relationship  between  LOC  and OBSE.  since  we already 

know  that  there  is  a  significant  correlation  between  proactivity.  Propensity  for 

Proactivity  and  OBSE  (see  Appendix  XIV  for  a  version  of  LOC  which  I  have 

modified  for use  in  future  research).  In  trying to understand how  to  affect  a person’s 

OBSE,  knowledge  of  LOC  may  be  an  important  factor.  For  those  people  with  an 

external  LOC,  it  may  be  even  more  important  to  give  explicit  information  that  the 

person is  important,  valued, and trusted when going into major organizational change.

Another  related  construct  is  called  “Inner-  versus  Outer-Directed”  (Cowen, 

1998).  A person’s “directedness”  is defined in  terms  of “self value.” and whether the 

source of that value  comes  from inside or outside of one’s self.  In other words,  inner 

directed  people  derive  their  self  value  from  sources  within  themselves,  while  outer 

directed  people  derive  their  self  value  from  sources  outside  themselves.  Cowen 

recognized  that  each  of  us  is  somewhere  along  the  continuum  between  inner-  and 

outer-directed.  However,  he  claimed  that  each  of us  tends  more  toward  one  end  of 

the spectrum or the other.  Accordingly,

Outer-directed  people  may  feel  personally  attacked  by  anything 
impacting  their  source  of  value.  For  example,  if  a  person’s  source  of  self 
value comes  from their work, then changing what they do might be interpreted 
as  "I’m  unworthy.”  This  may  result  in  the  person  resisting  organizational 
change in order to preserve his or her sense of self value.

The  key to moving individuals toward being inner-directed lies  in  their 
realizing  that  the  world  does  not  unilaterally  act  on  them.  For  the  outer- 
directed  person  (victim  mentality),  this  attacks  the  very  foundation  on  which

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


163

they have built their interactive lives.  Getting them to empty their glass of old 
truths  and refill  it  with new ones  is  a  major  first  hurdle.  Once  moved  toward 
inner-directedness,  the  individual  will  become  a  more  fluid contributor to  the 
organization.  A  workforce  of  fluid  individuals  will  make  for  a  change- 
capable workplace.

As was reviewed  in  Chapter 2, a cognitive approach to change has been  found 

to  be  successful  in  the  management  of  emotions,  attitudes  and  behavior.  Further 

research  to  address  the  relationships  between  OBSE.  LOC.  Inner-  and  Outer 

Directedness  on  proactivity  in  times  of  major  organizational  change  could  be  very 

helpful  to  better  management  of change.  As  was  also  reviewed  in  Chapter  2,  the 

importance of being a lifelong learner can not be underestimated.

Lastly,  another  important  area  for  future  related  research  is  one’s  religious 

faith.  Several  of  the  research  participants,  both  foremen  and  engineers,  described 

themselves  as  Christians  having  a  personal  relationship  with  God  through  faith  in 

Jesus Christ.  It is interesting to note that all of these people were also given proactive 

ratings  for  their  Structured  Interview  # 1   and  #2  transcripts,  and  had  high  OBSE 

scores.  More research needs to be done on  the nature of these  relationships, however. 

One of the research participants described himself in the  following way,

I always  try  to  understand  the other person’s  position:  Why does  s/he 
feel  and  act  in  a  particular  way?  What  kind  of  home  did  s/he  come  from? 
Who  hurt  him  or her  last  year?  Some  of the  guys  I’ve  known  a  long  time.  I 
know  how  they  were  raised  and  how  they’ve  been  treated. 
I  know  if  their 
marriages haven’t worked out.  ..  I try to be  an  anchor point (in going through 
these  changes).  I’ll  make  it  as  good  as  I  can  for  the  guys.  I’ll  do  my  best. 
Micah1  6 : 8   means  a lot  to  me,  “He has  shown  you,  O  man,  what  is  good;  and

1  From the Old Testament book of Micah, one of the Minor Prophets.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


164

what  does  the  LORD  require  of you  but  to  do justly,  to  love  mercy,  and  to 
walk humbly with your God”.

There  is  a weekly  Bible  study group at the  plant.  One o f the  members  gave  a 

presentation  at  the  Christmas  fellowship  luncheon  last  year  in  which  he  talked  about 

the  exponential  rate  o f change  people  have  to cope  with  in  organizational  life  today. 

On  the  heels  of  the  redesign  described  in  this  dissertation,  the  company  has  been 

implementing  a  software  package  which  provides  comprehensive  management  of 

systems  for  manufacturing  organizations.  It  requires  a  tremendous  amount  of study 

on  the  part  of employees,  and  generates  a  lot  of extra  work  since  everything  in  the 

plant  has  to be  renumbered  and  entered  into the database.  About this,  the  fellowship 

luncheon presenter elaborated,

I  don’t  know  but  you  bet  there  will  be  something. 

Change  is  the one constant in our society,  in our workplace  and  in our 
churches.  The rate  of change is  increasing.  We  work harder,  play harder and 
we  had  better  be  praying  harder.  The  pace  of our  lives  has  become  frenetic. 
This year it  was  redesign,  next year it’s the  software  roll  out.  What  will  it be 
in  1999? 
In  the  twenty 
years  I  have  been  in  the  workforce  I  have  seen  the  rate  of  change  increase 
dramatically.  A  project  like  the  software  conversion  would  have  been  a  five 
year plan  implemented  in  seven  to  ten  years.  When  I  arrived  here  two  years 
ago, they were just starting to look at the package.  Twenty years ago, payrolls 
were  so  fat  that  there  was  time  to  stand  around  the  water  cooler  and  chat. 
People  got  to  know  each  other personally  at  work.  You  dressed  for business 
and  behaved  casually.  Now  there  are  the  same  number  of  people  or  less 
trying  to  do  twice  as  much  or  more.  There  is  not  as  much  time  for  casual 
chats,  there  is  far  too  much  work  to  be  done.  We  dress  casually  but  our 
behavior  is  all  business.  Many  of us  still  try  to  get  to  know  the  people  we 
work  with  personally  but  it  is  getting  much  harder  as  there  is  less  time  for 
“socializing.”  The  problem  is  compounded  by  reorganizations  that  cause 
frequent changes to who you work with.  All  the projections are  for the rate of 
change to increase!  These changes place pressures on each o f us.  As changes 
take  place  dissention  and  disagreements  arise. 
It  is  easy  for  dissatisfaction, 
negative  attitudes  and  even  depression  to  set  in.  How  do  we  deal  with  this?

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


165

In  the  book of Philippians2,  Paul  said.  "Live  your life  in  a  manner  worthy  of 
the gospel of Christ (1:27)."

In  Ephesians,  Paul  said,  "Render  service  with  enthusiasm,  as  to  the 
Lord  and  not  to  men  (6:7).”  In  Colossians,  Paul  said.  "W hatever  your  task, 
put yourselves  into  it as  done  for the  LORD  and  not  for  man  since  you  know 
that  from the  Lord  you  will  receive  the  inheritance as  your  reward  (3:22-24).'" 
At  the  time  of Paul’s  ministry,  the  Philippian  church  was  going  through  it's 
own "redesign”.  Philippians 4:2-9 reads.

I  plead  with  Euodia  and  I plead  with  Sxntyche  to  agree  with  each 
other in  the Lord.  Yes,  and I ask you,  loyal yokefellow help  these women  who 
have contended at m y side in  the cause o f the gospel,  along  with  Clement and 
the rest o f my fellow   workers,  whose names are in  the book o f life.  Rejoice in 
the Lord always.  I will say  it again:  Rejoice!  Let your gentleness be  evident 
to all.  The Lord is near.  Do not be anxious about anything,  but in everything, 
by prayer and petition,  with  thanksgiving, present your requests to  God.  And 
the peace o f God,  which  transcends all understanding,  will guard your hearts 
and  minds  in  Jesus  Christ.  Finally  brothers,  whatever  is  true,  whatever  is 
noble,  whatever  is  right,  whatever  is  pure,  whatever  is  lovely,  whatever  is 
admirable -  if anything  is excellent o f praiseworthy -  think about such  things. 
Whatever you have  learned or received or heard from  m e or seen  in  me -  put 
into practice.  And the God o f peace will be with you.

Lessons:  Mediate  tensions,  live  in unity,  be  positive,  respond  in  love, 
live  by  intercession  through  prayer,  focus  on  the  positive,  keep  a  Biblical 
orientation, and live  your faith.  If we follow this advice  the God of peace  will 
be  with  us.  We  will  encourage  unity.  We  will  be  a positive  force  within  the 
workplace dealing with change  well  ourselves  and  helping others  to  deal  with 
it.  We will be like the trees of the Lord in Psalm  104:16.  “Well-watered" .

Another of the research  participants commented over the  course of  Structured 

Interview #2,

I thank God for a relationship with Him that keeps  me balanced...  you 
definitely  come  in  each  day  with  your heart  pumping  -   "W hat  will  be  going 
on  today???”  It can  be  very  stressful.  Trust  is  a  big  issue.  Recently  one  of 
the guys  laid into me  with some pretty foul language.  It’s  hard not to  retaliate.

2 New Testament letters written by Saul of Tarsus  to the churchs at 

Philippi,  Ephesus, and Colosse.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


166

but  as  a  Christian  you  know  that’s  not  how  Christ  would  want  you  to  act.  .  . 
We  dealt  with  the  issue  so  that  our  self esteem  was  maintained.  .  .I've  spent 
the  last two days talking with  guys  about spiritual  matters over lunch -  people 
who  are  on  the  point  of breaking.  .  .there’s  an  increased  tension  level  around 
h ere...

While  it  is  not  possible  within  the  scope  of  this  dissertation  to  further  discuss 

theological  issues, the role of religious  faith  is an  important one for future research on 

coping  styles  and  their  correlates. 

In  this  group  of  research  participants,  several 

people  found  their  faith  helpful  in  maintaining  a  proactive  coping  style.  This  raises 

the hypothesis that one’s religion can  have  a major impact on coping.

Review of Proposition #4

It  was  proposed  that  a person's jo b   ajfect  is  significantly  correlated  with  his 

or her coping  style;  the more proactive  the  coping style,  the more positive  o n e’s job 

ajfect,  and  the  more  reactive  the  coping  style,  the  more  negative  o n e ’s job  affect. 

While the data did not support the proposition with respect to positive job affect,  they 

did  show  a  significant  relationship  between  negative  job  affect  and  reactivity. 

In 

Chapter 2.  the  role of emotions  was discussed.  It  was  noted that emotions  can  play  a 

powerful  role in our disposition to the events  we experience.  Weick (1995)  noted that 

when people’s work is  interrupted, it can generate negative affect (p. 49),

People  remember  events  that  have  the  same  emotional  tone  as  what 
they  currently  feel.  Anger  at  being  interrupted  should  encourage  recall  of 
earlier events  where  feelings of anger were  dominant.  These earlier moments 
of anger should stand out when  people  look back over their past experience to 
discover “similar” events and  what  those  previous events  might suggest  about

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


167

the  meaning of present events.  Past events are  reconstructed in the  present as
explanations,  not because they look the same but because they feel the same.

This  suggests  that  people  with  a  reactive  posture  toward  organizational  change  may 

be  construing  the  situation  as  having  worse  implications  than  it  actually  does. 

Therefore,  it  is  important  for  managers  of  change  to  recognize  the  usefulness  of 

recommending  a  cognitive  approach  (Bums.  19S0)  to  helping  people  overcome 

negative  emotions  in  working  toward  developing  a  more  proactive  coping  style;  one 

that is healthier for both the individual and the organization.

Review of Proposition #5

It was proposed that one's status in the organization is significantly correlated 

with  coping  styles. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  while  there  was  no  relationship  between 

status  and  coping  styles  going  into  the  change,  there  were  significant  differences  as 

the  changes  were  beginning  to  occur;  i.e.,  in  Structured  Interview  #2  engineers 

demonstrated more  proactivity than  foremen  overall.  Furthermore,  it  is  interesting to 

note  that  Propensity  for  Proactivity  scores  were  significantly  higher  for  engineers 

also.  In  the  Year-End  Survey,  the  engineers  also  reported  more  often  than  foremen 

that  they  take  part  in  making  decisions  which  affect  them.  These  findings  highlight 

the  importance  of  recognizing  that  the  hierarchy  which  large  organizations  tend  to 

create  can  have  an  impact  on  people’s  perceived  ability  to  be  proactive  in  times  of 

major organizational  change.  While an  organization  may be  encouraging  proactivity 

in  the  present,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  hierarchical  organizations  tend  to 

distribute  the  opportunity  for  proactivity  toward  the  top  of the  organization.  This  is

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


168

not  a  criticism  of  hierarchy  so  much  as  a  caution  to  those  who  are  managing 

organizational  change.  If it  is  important  to  have  people  across  different  levels  of an 

organization  participate  in  a  organizational  change  in  a  proactive  manner,  past 

barriers  to  participation  due  to  the  specifics  of  hierarchical  norms  will  need  to  be 

identified and taken into consideration.

Review of Propositions # 6

It  was  proposed  that  how  well  one's  individual  needs  are  being  met  going 

through the change process is significantly correlated with  coping style.  Some study 

data  do  support  this  relationship.  However,  the  data  available  were  limited  to  only 

three  Year-End Survey questions.  Anecdotal data also suggested that some reactivity 

did  stem  from  people’s  lives  being  affected  in  ways  that  were  at  fundamental  odds 

with  their  personal  life  goals  and/or  plans;  in  particular,  concern  over  what  the 

changes  would  mean  for  their  career  future.  Additional  research  regarding  the 

specific  issues  highlighted  in  Chapter  2  around  the  need  for  self-actualization, 

establishing career anchors,  and  recreating ’’context”  or  meaning  in  new job  roles  in 

mid-career  life  would  be  helpful  for  better  understanding  this  research  population, 

because major organizational  change seems  to  be  much easier for younger employee. 

Managers  of organizational  change  will  find  that  the  real  challenge  lies  in  helping 

people  who  are  in  mid-to-late  career  life.  While  these  data  do  not  offer  particular 

insights  in  this  area,  they  do  highlight  the  importance  of considering  mid-career  life 

implications of organizational change in the planning phase.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


169

Review of Proposition #7

It  was  proposed 

that  people  who  perceive  the  organization 

to  have  a 

supportive culture fo r change are  more likely to have a proactive coping style.  Data 

available  from  the  Year-End  Survey  items  indicated  that  the  item  which  best 

differentiated  people  who  were  rated  highly  proactive  from  those  rated  reactive  was, 

“My  management  wants  me  to  step  out  and  be  creative."  It  is  important  to  note  that 

at  least  65%  of  the  participants  surveyed  agreed  with  this  statement  which  would 

indicate,  in general, that encouraging creativity  is  a part of the  organization's  culture. 

Within  this  middle  management  group,  however,  those  people  who  demonstrated 

greater  reactivity  in  the  interviews  were  more  unsure  that  their  management  wanted 

them to “step out and be creative”.  One interpretation  for these  findings might be that 

status  was  involved;  however,  no  significant  correlation  was  found  between  status 

and  responses  to  this  survey  item.  A  second  interpretation  for  these  findings  is  that 

while  there  was  a  lot  of  cultural  support  for  change,  people  also  perceived  the 

organization  as "top down”;  in  fact,  65%  of the  participants  surveyed  agreed with the 

Year-End  Survey  item,  “The  company  is  very  hierarchical;  decisions  are  made  top- 

down.” 

In  addition,  it  may  be  that  those  in  authority  directly  above  mid  level 

managers  set  the  boundaries  for  empowerment  and  participation  in  a  much  more 

salient way  than  “culture".  Perhaps  this  is  why  Quinn  (1996)  emphasizes  that "deep 

change" at the top is so  important.  These results highlight a dilem m a for traditionally 

managed,  hierarchical  manufacturing  firms  trying  to  make  the  transition  toward 

increased  employee  empowerment  and  participation.  Change  management  that  does

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


170

not start at the  top so as  to become  a model  for the organization  is  likely to  fail.  And 

top-down  cultures  that  have  existed  for  a  number  of  years  need  to  be  slowly 

reoriented  toward  proactivity  if  this  stance  is  to  become  the  norm  among  middle 

managers and their subordinates.

Review of Proposition  # 8

Managing organizational change such as to promote proactivity among middle 

managers  is  important.  In  the  fast  pace  of today’s  manufacturing  world,  people  who 

are closest to the work need to be  in a position to generate the best solutions  to quality 

problems  and  customer  requests.  Top  managers  simply  can  not  “tell”  middle 

managers  how  to  get  work done.  The  empowerment  trend  is  clearly  the  trend  of the 

future.  It was  hypothesized  that  the management o f the change process affects one's 

coping style;  the more empowering the process,  the more proactive his or her coping 

style.  While  there  were  no  comparative  data  available  from  other  companies,  this 

research  suggests  that,  in  this  case,  there  were  people  who  perceived  management 

cues which either helped or hindered their sense of proactivity (see Tables  13a and b). 

This  finding  suggests  that  in  order  for  planned  organizational  change  to  encourage 

proactivity,  it needs not only to  follow  a logic which promotes proactivity,  but also to 

be perceived as promoting proactivity by employees.  Managers of change  must make 

a  number  of  choices  about  how  to  empower  people.  As  this  research  suggests, 

managing cues related to OBSE is an  important starting point.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


171

Review of Additional Research Findings

It  was  found  that job  satisfaction  (“overall  I’m  pretty  satisfied  with  my job") 

was correlated with job affect.  Propensity  for Proactivity and OBSE. The correlations 

between  these  variables  were  all  very  strong  as  well.  The  average  job  satisfaction 

rating  in  the  research  sample  was  high  (X=3.73)  approaching  "agree";  only  five 

participants  marked  "disagree",  and  seven  marked  "I don’t  know”.  Five  of the  latter 

twelve  were  also  coded  "reactive”  in  Structured  Interview  #1.  As  one  would  expect, 

job  satisfaction  correlates  with  feelings  of  being  successful,  good,  challenged  and 

cheerful.  Lack  of job  satisfaction  relates  to  feelings  of  frustration  and  of  being 

trapped.  What  is  more  interesting  is  that job  satisfaction  is  correlated  with  OBSE. 

We  would  infer that  one’s  level  of OBSE does  affect job  satisfaction  and  vice  versa. 

Job  satisfaction  also  affects  Propensity  for  Proactivity  and  vice  versa.  As  was 

mentioned  in  Chapter  2,  the  causal  relationship  between  attitudes  and  behaviors  is 

difficult  to  determine  (Breer and  Locke,  1965).  It  is  most  likely  that  low  Propensity 

for Proactivity, describing people who did not think that they had much of a part in or 

could  influence  the  redesign,  affected  people's  job  satisfaction. 

In  summary,  it  is 

important to recognize the  importance of these  inter-relationships.  People tasked with 

the  management  of  change  could  use  job  satisfaction,  job  affect,  and  OBSE  as  a 

rough take on people’s propensity for proactivity.

Finally,  correlations  between  specific  Year-End  Survey  items  and  those 

people  who  had  "proactive"  ratings  for  Structured  Interview  #1  versus  "reactive” 

ratings  showed  interesting  contrasts.  Survey  items  that  were  significantly  correlated

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


172

with proactivity demonstrated a generally positive orientation to change.  People  rated 

as  "proactive”  also  stated  that  "changes  around  here  are  usually  for  the  better"  and 

reported that they were “ready for change and looking forward to redesign", they "see 

the  big  picture  and  their  role  in  it”,  they  "feel  recognized  for  a job  well-done  and 

valued  by  the  organization",  and  they  "think  they  are  in  a  position  to  influence  the 

plant’s  future  and  well-being". 

In  contrast,  survey  items  that  were  significantly 

correlated with  reactivity  showed  a  more  fearful  orientation  to  change.  People  rated 

as  "reactive”  also  stated  that  they  were  "afraid  of  what  the  changes  would  mean  to 

them personally",  that  they  “didn’t  feel  they  could  have  an  impact on  the outcomes”, 

and  that  they  "get  bypassed  in  decision  making”  (see  Tables  17a  and  b).  These 

results are helpful  for managers of change to be aware of.  The kinds of conversations 

about  change  which  are  necessary  to  have  with  employees  in  order  to  ensure  that 

people as a group are  willing and able to work toward a new vision statement are very 

different  depending  on  which  perspective  they  are  coming  from.  These  results 

confirm  what  was  reviewed  in  Chapter  2   about  having  to  "push"  or  “pull”  people 

along  with  desired  organizational  changes  (Robins  and  Finley.  1996).  One  strategy 

for helping employees to change will not be sufficient.  Those "reactives” will need  to 

have  their fears  allayed,  and  to be  helped to  find ways  to  feel  included in and have  an 

impact  on  the  organization  of  the  future  and  can  impact  their  own  futures  in  the 

organization.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


173

Review of Research  Question #1

When  a  number  of  coping  style  correlates  were  entered  into  a  regression 

analysis  in  an  attempt  to  see  which  of them  was  most  predictive  of coping  styles,  it 

was  found 

that  only  organization-based  self-esteem  (OBSE)  accounted  for  a 

significant  amount  of the  variance  in  the  data.  This  finding  is  significant  in  that  it 

indicates  that  the  higher  a  person’s  OBSE.  the  more  likely  s/he  is  to  be  proactive  in 

times  of  major  organizational  change.  But.  perhaps  even  more  important,  if 

management wishes to encourage  proactivity  from particular people,  addressing  their 

OBSE directly may be one o f the most important sources of influence available; even 

moreso  than  attempting  to  address  people’s  current  levels  of  job  satisfaction. 

Likewise,  managers  of change  can  assume  that  the  higher  the  OBSE  in  the  general 

workforce, the more proactive the workforce will be.

Review of Research Question #2

When  the  relative  importance of different  factors  in  accounting  for a  person’s 

coping  style 

in 

the  future  were  considered,  results  of  a  regression  analysis 

demonstrated that the best predictor of future coping style is past coping style.  This  is 

consistent with the finding in Proposition # 1   that the way in which people have coped 

with  past  situations  of  role  conflict  is  correlated  with  current  coping  styles.  The 

finding  is also consistent  with  the  literature  reviewed  in  Chapter 2  on  the consistency 

of coping  styles  as  a  function  of our development  over the  course  of our  lives.  This 

highlights  the  importance  of  teaching  proactivity  and  “change  capability”  to  people 

early  in  life,  and  emphasizes  the  importance  of  lifelong  learning  and  development.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


174

Often,  employees  are  hired  for  what  they  can  provide  in  the  short  term.  These 

findings  emphasize  the  importance  of  hiring  people  who  demonstrate  signs  of 

proactivity  and  “change  capableness”,  especially  in  industries  which  demand  these 

qualities in an employee.

II. 

Study Limitations

Development of a Proactivity Code

The focus of this research was on understanding proactivity, recognizing that 

some people tend to be more proactive  in times of major organizational change  while 

others  tend to be  more  reactive.  Rather than develop an apriori  rating scale  designed 

to  measure  proactivity,  I decided  to  conduct  in-depth  interviews  and  content  analyze 

them  to  develop  a  coding  scheme  for  proactivity  based  on  the  content  analysis. 

Because  other  authors  (Holdorf,  1975;  Neilsen,  1984)  have  hypothesized  a  two- 

dimensional  framework,  I  began  with  the  same.  However,  no  codeable  data  were 

found  for  quadrant  #4.  Furthermore,  dimensionalizing  the  proactivity  construct  in 

terms  of  emotion  and  behavior  did  not  exactly  fit  the  data  which  were  used  to 

inductively develop  the  code.  M ore  work  needs  to  be  done  on  the  framework,  and 

the  code  would  need  to  be  revised  accordingly  to  reflect  improvements  for  future 

research.  The  distinction  between  emotional  and  behavioral  proactivity  is  still  an 

important  one  to  consider,  however.  While  not  orthogonal  dimensions  of  the 

construct, they each contribute  to differently to our understanding.  As was  discussed 

in  Chapter  2,  often  in  times  of  major  organizational  change  many  people  are

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


175

emotionally supportive of  the changes  yet perceive  that they  lack the  resources  to  be 

behaviorally  proactive.  The  question  remains.  'Ts  this  a  valid  code?" 

I  offer  the 

suggestion  that  it  is,  but  that  it  is  just  an  initial  attempt  at  a  code  for  this  kind  of 

research.  Because  scores  on  the  revised  Propensity  for  Proactivity  measure  were 

significantly  correlated  with  ratings  of  proactivity  from  Structured  Interview  # 1 ,  I 

have  some  confidence  that  the  code  which  I  developed  has  some  construct  validity. 

In  fact,  scores  on  the  revised  Propensity  for  Proactivity  measure,  the  ratings  of 

proactivity  from  Structured  Interview  # 1 ,  and  the  average  score  for  participants’ 

responses  to  the  role  conflict  scenarios  were  all  significantly  correlated  at  the  p=.05 

level.

Development of the Propositions

This  research  began  with  the  supposition 

that 

there  was  variation 

in 

proactivity  in  the  participant  group,  and  with  the  hypothesis  that  organization-based 

self-esteem  would  be  positively  correlated  with  proactivity.  The 

remaining

propositions  and  research  questions  were  inductively  derived  over  the  course  of 

research  as  data  were  analyzed  and  compared  with  the  literature  reviewed. 

It  is 

important 

that 

future  research  with 

larger  and  more  diverse  populations  be 

systematically done to test the generalizeability of these results.

Longitudinal Stability of Proactivity

This  study  does  not  address  the  stability  of  proactivity  over  long  periods  of 

time.  The  more  stable  this  characteristic  is  in  people,  the  more  managers  o f change 

need  to recognize  the bounds of “change capability” within the workforce  as  a part of

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


176

planned  organizational  change.  Future  research  needs  to  address  the  stability  of 

proactivity  over  time,  and  also  look  further into  situational  moderators  of proactivity 

beyond OBSE which  may be important to attend to.

Relationship Between OBSE and Proactivity

This  research  demonstrates  a  correlation  between  OBSE  and  proactivity 

which seems  promising.  However,  it  will  be  important  that  future  research  measure 

OBSE over time  in addition to measuring proactivity over time.

Understanding Reactivity

These  study  findings  did  not  include  any  cases  of  extreme  reactivity  going 

into  the  change  process.  These  findings  are  consistent  with  this  organization’s  mid­

level  management  culture.  However,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  assume  variation 

across  a  variety  of  companies  and  industries,  and,  therefore,  that  the  dynamics  of 

extreme reactivity need to be explored.

1U. 

Concluding Remark

For many people, work life is built on trusting, affirming relationships.  While 

change  programs  need  to  fit  the  cultural  context  o f  the  organization  as  well  as  be 

logically  designed  to  meet  organization  vision  and  goals,  a change  program  may  not 

have  the  intended  impact  if people  do  not  understand  the  need  for  the  changes  and 

people’s  value  is  not  reaffirmed  during  the  change  process.  While  some  claim  that 

trust  in management  is  the glue that keeps  a change  program  moving  forward,  results 

of this research show that management cues which tell people  they are valued, trusted 

and important to the organization’s  future are also elements of that glue.  Managers of

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


change may become so preoccupied with achieving worthy change goals, ones  which 

may be critical to the survival of the organization in  its  business environment, yet lose 

sight  of the  people  who  are  involved.  People’s  proactivity  and  willingness  for  “co­

inquiry”  (Neilsen.  1984)  may be  causally related  to  affirmation  of their organization- 

based self-esteem as the stress of major organizational change sets  in.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


APPENDIX I:  Organization-Based Self-Esteem 

Note:  This measure was directly taken from Pierce,  et al., 1989.

ORGANIZATION-BASED SELF-ESTEEM

3

4

Strongly 
Disagree

Disagree 

Neither 

Agree 

■5

Strongly
Agree

The following ten questions relate to how valued you  feel by your organization.  Think 
about the messages you receive from the attitudes and behaviors of the managers closest 
to  you  in  your organization  and answer the  following questions using  the  5-point scale 
above:

1.  I count around here._____

2.  I am taken seriously around here._____

3.  I am important._____

4.  I am trusted around here._____

5.  There is faith in me around here._____

6 .  I can make a difference around here._____

7.  I am valuable around here._____

8 .  I am helpful around here._____

9.  I am cooperative around here._____

1 0 . 1  am efficient at my jo b .____

178

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


1 7 9

APPENDIX II:  Structured Interview # 1

1. Tell me about your job: How long have you worked here? In what kinds of jobs?

What was it like in your early days here? Has it changed? If so. how?

2. Tell me about the company:  People?  Atmosphere?  Way things are organized?

How has it changed since you've been here? What’s the same?

What's different?

3. Tell me about decision making around here:

How do you make decisions? Give me some examples that are typical for you in 

Do others make them similarly?
If you could change the way decision making takes place, what would you 

your work.

change?

4. Tell me about how conflict is managed around here:

What kinds of issues cause conflict for you in your job?
How do you handle conflict? -With your boss? Peers?
How do others handle conflict?

5. Tell me what you think of the new vision statement:

What was your response to it when it was presented in June ?
Where is the company going and how are you preparing yourself?
What kinds of skills will you need and do you have them?
Are you currently involved in redefining your job to meet the vision statement? 

Explain.

How are you coping with the changes?  Are they hard on you? Others? Explain. 
Do you see differences in the way people try to deal with the changes?

6 . What does the word "empowerment'' mean to you? Have you heard it used in the

organization? If so, in what context?

How  do  you  see  yourself as  an  "empowered  leader"  given  your position?  Are 
there things you would like to do in your leadership role that you’re not currently 
doing?

7. What will this place be like 5 years from now?  What will your role look like?

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


180

APPENDIX HI: Year-end Survey

Note:  This  survey  has  been  retyped as  an  appendix:  spaces fo r  responses  have  been 
eliminated fo r simplification  and  Part IV rating  scales  are  not  repeated at  the  top  o f 
each new page.

Part  I: Job Roles - Conflicts can occur in  any job.  How often do  you face problems  in 
your work like the ones listed  below?  Please  use  the  following  rating  scale  to  answer 
each item:

l=Never 

2=Rarely 

3=Often 

4=Always

1. How much of the time are your work objectives well defined?
2. Different people ask you to do things which conflict.
3. How often are you not clear on what your job responsibilities are?
4. How often are you clear about what others expect o f you on the job?
5. People in a good position to see if you do what they ask give you things to do which

conflict with one another.

6 . How much do you take part with others in making decisions that affect you?
7 .1 can be as open and honest as I’d like to be with my subordinates.
8 . To what extent are you and the interface support departments within the company

committed to the same goals ?

9. My supervisor agrees with my own assessment of my readiness for promotion.
10.  People whose requests should be met give you things which conflict with other

requests you receive.

11. How often can you predict what others will expect of you on the job?
12. To what extent are you and your manager committed to the same goals?
13.  How much do you participate with others in helping set the way things are done on

your job?

14.  How much do you decide with others what part of a task you will do?
15.1 can be as open and honest as I'd like to be with my peers.
16.  People whose requests should be met give you things which conflict with other 

work you have to do.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix ID. continued

Part  II: Job Attitudes  - The  following  items  relate to  how  you  might  feel  on  your job 
Think about you  in your job and how often you feel this way.  Please  use the  followin 
rating scale to respond to each item:

l=Notm uch 

2=Sometimes 

3=Often 

4=Most o f the time

1.  I feel frustrated.
2.  I feel challenged. 
3.. I feel confused.
4.  I feel cheerful.
5.  I feel irritated or 

annoyed.

6 .  I feel good.
7.  I feel motivated.
8 .  I feel in control.

9 . 1 feel angry.
10.  I feel drained.
1 1 . 1 feel pulled in different 

directions

1 2 . 1 feel tense.
13.1 feel relaxed.
14.1 feel successful.
15.1 feel trapped.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Appendix III, continued

182

Part  III: Adaptive Strategies - The  following  scenarios  represent different  kinds  of role 
conflict.  For each  scenario, circle  the  letter of the  option  that  you  think  best  describes 
how you dealt with that kind of conflict:

1.  Think of a time when a supervisor asked/told you to do something you thought was 

not the best thing to do.  Which  option best describes how you responded?

a. I was uncertain about how to handle our differences so I just let it slide.
b. I just did what s/he wanted because s/he wanted it done his/her way.
c. I kept talking with him/her about my ideas/opinions until we were able to 

come to some meaningful agreement.

d. I found a way to just do it the way I thought it needed to be done regardless of 

what s/he thought.

e. Other:

2.  Think of a time when you wanted more of a role in deciding what job/task you would 

be doing in the future.  Which option best describes how you responded?

a. I voiced my opinion so loudly that people had to take notice of what I wanted.
b. I didn’t know how to make my interests known so I didn't say anything.
c. I initiated discussions with the right people to find out how I could best 

contribute to the organization goals and objectives.

d.  I told people what I wanted but went along with what my supervisor wanted 

in the end.

e. Other:

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Appendix III, continued

1 3 3

Part III:  Adaptive Strategies,  continued

3.  Think of a time when you felt your work objectives weren’t clearly defined.  Which 

option best describes how you  responded?

a.  I worked with my supervisor to come to some mutually agreeable 

understanding of what my objectives were no  matter how much discussion  it 
took.

b.  I didn't say anything to anyone, but did what was best for me under the 

c. I didn't know how to bring it up to my supervisor so I just waited for him/her 

circumstances.

to give me some direction.

d. I brought it up to my supervisor, but when s/he didn't give me as much 

direction as I thought I needed to have, I just did the best I could.

e. Other:

4.  Think of a time when you felt you and your supervisor weren't committed to the same 

goals.  Which option best describes how you responded?

a.  I thought a lot about it. but I didn't know just how to resolve our differences 

so I just let it go.

b.  I found a way to work on the things  I thought were  important regardless of

what my supervisor thought.

c.  I worked hard to discuss goals with my supervisor so that we could resolve 

our differences and begin to work toward  the same things.

d.  I waited for him/her to realize it and do something.
e. Other:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix III, continued

18 4

Part  IV:  InterviewThemes - The  following  are  themes  that  came  out  of the  interviews 
you participated  in.  I’ve added some  statements  to  the  themes so  that  I can  understand 
your views better.  Note that some statements are worded more positively than others.  I 
tried to come up with a balance; not all the themes are worded in the  way  that they were 
stated in the interviews.  Please rate how much you agree with each statement using the 
following rating scale:

1--------------------- 2-----
Disagree

Strongly 
Disagree

I don't 
know

. . . 4 —
Agree

5 

—

Strongly 
Agree

People-to-people relationships:

1.  This company recognizes that people are  it's most important asset.
2.  This company cares about me.
3. 
I have the respect of my peers.
4.  We talk "at" each other instead of "with" each other.
5.  We don’t understand what we're putting people through with the changes we’re 

making in the plant.

6.  I have the respect of my subordinates.
7.  Trust between management and operators  has been hurt over the  years by a general 

breakdown of communication.

8 .  People around here hold it against you when you tell them what you think.
9.  The way changes in the pay structure were handled has caused a lot of morale 

issues; people feel unappreciated/offended.
I have the respect of my co-workers.

10. 
11.  We hold people accountable for their job performance.
12.  Flattening the organization may create unhealthy competition among employees in 

the plant.

13.  The company knows how to manage the people side of change.
14.  The company's management is very control-oriented.
15.  This is a good company; the pay is good and they treat people well.
16.  The well-being of this plant and the people here mean a lot to me.
17.  People here are team players.
18. 
19.  I've seen people with performance problems here that don’t get addressed.

I feel like I'm in competition with my peers in an uncertain job environment.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix III, continued

185

Part IV:  Interview Themes,  continued

Plant Culture:

1.  Over time, the different sections of the plant have become their own 

"cultures'Vplants".

2.  What gets measured gets done: everything else goes away.
3.  Lots of things get started and don't get finished around here; everybody’s too busy.
4.  The company culture is very paternalistic.
5.  We walk the talk with the programs we adopt.
6 .  The company doesn’t have a participative environment:  it’s always been very 

hierarchical.

7.  The company has a very strict, analytical orientation; we are not very people- 

8 . 

9. 

oriented.
If you try to do something creative around here, you get many reasons why you can’t 
do it that way.
I would describe this organization as one that values people’s learning and 
development.

10.  In the past, when changes were made in the plant, people used 

to sit down and 

discuss things more.

11. After going to  12-hour shifts, people quit doing things together informally: this 

had a negative impact on relationships in the plant.

12. Around here, we focus on understanding what caused a problem  rather than  what 

causes successes.

their own countries.

our own.

13.  We used to all identify with the company; now different sections have become 

14. We don't need a consultant to help us through this time of change; we can do it on 

15. Management has gotten very secretive in recent years.
16. We celebrate our successes here in the plant.
17. People here are very open; you can just walk into anyone's office and discuss things.
18.  All the fun has gone out of the work over the years; it used to be fun to come to 

work.

19. We don't do much follow-up on our initiatives.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


13 5

Appendix III, continued

Part IV:  Interview Themes,  continued

Vision:

1.  Management could have handled the changes better over the past year: they could 

have better prepared us to move toward the vision statement.

2.  The vision statement is too abstract, too general - 1 can't use it to set my own work 

priorities by.

3.  We can't worry so much about indirect cost if we're to focus on making new 

products, etc.  we can’t meet these needs and be a lean organization also.

4.  Our vision statement is not new: we’ve been working toward it since the mid ’80s.
5.  L see the big picture and my role in it.
6 .  People haven't been given the knowledge/tools to carry out the plant vision.
7.  Clearly defining this plant’s role  in  the corporation by publishing a vision statement 

was great - it put an end to all the energy spent in competition with other plants.

8 .  We heard a the beginning of the year that.  "By the end of the year, this plant will 

look significantly different,”;  however, I really didn’t know what that  meant or how 
to work toward it.
I think I’m in a position to get the plant to achieve the vision statement.

9. 
10.  I understand the vision statement, but I have no idea how to make it happen/gear up 

11.  I don't have the access to information/tools/support to accomplish the vision.

for it.

Future:

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

I think this plant has a good future.
I'm worried about being able to retire from here.
I think that management is being honest with us about the future of the plant.
I think the company has a good future.
I think our new information system will  help the plant to be more efficient in the 
future.
6 . 
It’s hard to get reliable  information regarding the future direction of the plant.
7. 
I'm preoccupied with the changes because of what they might mean for my future.
8 .  The changes around here aren’t that bad: it's just a matter of getting used to them.
9. 
10.  It's hard to know how to gear up for the future because I don’t really know where 

I'm concerned about the long-term viability of the plant.

11.  My management wants me to be able to step out and be creative  in helping 

we're going.

shape the future of the  plant.

12.  People are afraid they'll lose their jobs at the plant as a result of redesign, 

empowerment, or just by trying to achieve the vision statement.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Appendix III, continued

137

Part IV:  Interview Themes, continued

Future, continued:

13.  People used to come in and do a good job: now. the work ethic has changed.  If we 

14. 

don’t improve our work standards, this place doesn't have much of a future.
I want the plant to have a future, and I'm willing to do whatever I can to make it 
happen.

Conflict:

1.  Conflict at the plant is primarily a result of lack of standard  implementation of 

policies.

2.  I’m overwhelmed by paperwork in my job.
3.  Now you hear, "It's not my job" a lot; people don't want to go work in other areas.
4.  Everyone is pulling in different directions around here - there’s lack of common 

understanding about goals and priorities.

5.  I would like for people to agree to administer policies in a fair, standard way.
6 .  People don't trust each other to administer policies consistently across the plant.
7.  People’s stress levels have increased in the past year; there have been 

arguments/errors  made/accidents that probably wouldn't have  happened  in  the past 
due to the extra stress at work.

8 .  People have conflicting priorities because we’re not all being evaluated  according to 

the same priorities - it’s a function of the lack of having the big picture.

9.  There’s too many conflicting goals; how can we be flexible and not spend money?
10. Policies are currently not administered in a standard way  across the plant.
11. We have common goals in the plant.
12. People feel they can cross section lines to confront issues that arise in the 

organization.

13.1  go to so many meetings that I can't get anything done.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix  III, continued

188

Part IV:  Interview Themes,  continued

Influence:

1.  I  think I’m in a position to influence the future and well-being of  the plant.
2.  I  don't worry about the things I have no control over.
3. 

I'm preoccupied with the changes because of what they are doing to my daily life 
now.

4.  When I want people to consider my ideas. I keep giving them the data that support 

my position until they are ready to listen.

5.  There’s always an opportunity here to give your ideas.
6 . 
7.  We need to get people more involved in decision making so that they can have more 

I  have the freedom to contribute to this organization in the way  I see fit.

of a stake in the outcome.

I’m worried about the impact of redesign on my job.

8 .  The company knows what they want, so just let them do it and let’s  live with it.
9. 
10.  We don't have any way of making suggestions in this organization.
1 1.  I'm worried about the impact of redesign on the people in my area.
12.  When I make a recommendation my management listens and acts on it.
13.  I feel like I'm being pushed aside by the organization:  I have knowledge to 

contribute but there’s no way for me to give my input.

14.  I think I can influence the outcome of redesign so that we’ll wind up a better run 

15.  I can change my job in whatever way I see fit in order to  make the company 

16.  When I don't understand something, I go out of my way to ask questions until  I 

organization in the long run.

successful  in the future.

get answers.

17.  Even when I'm not able to get work done the way I want to,  I keep trying.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Appendix III, continued

Part IV:  Interview Themes, continued

Career development:

1.  When opportunities come up to get involved with special projects or assignments. I 

am able to get involved if I want to.

2.  Career development here is very political.
3. 

I’m able to publicly admit I’ve made a mistake without fear that it will have a 
negative impact on my job/career.

4.  I've been satisfied with my career here so far.
5.  I feel that my management knows me well enough to know my  strengths and 

weaknesses, and can capitalize on my strengths/develop my weaknesses.

6.  My supervisor is available to and able to coach me in my job.
7.  I've had a lot of good opportunities with this company over the course of my career.
8.  We need more manpower available to free people up to go to meetings/leam new 

skills.

9.  My supervisor understands the performance appraisal and development process and 

is good at working with me toward improving my job performance.

10.1 feel that I’ve been able to successfully manage my career here.
11.1 get the support I need to try new things.
12.1 have to manage my own career here; no on looks out for me.

Relationship with the corporation:

1. 

I can trust the decisions that corporate people are making about the  future of the 
plant.
I'm not sure that corporate is telling us the truth about the business picture.

2. 
3.  People at corporate don’t seem to understand the stress they’re putting us through.
4. 
5.  No one at corporate seems to understand the big picture:  the way they're organized 

I understand what the new information system is being designed to do.

6. 
7. 

makes it difficult to get the information that we need.
I understand what the role of the plant is in supporting the corporation as a whole.
I don't understand how decisions about the plant's future get made at the corporate 
level.

8.  One minute one CEO was telling us things were a little slow but fine, and the next 

minute the next CEO tells us we're in a crisis - 1 don't know what to believe.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix III. continued

190

Part IV:  Interview Themes,  continued

Empowerment:

1. 
2. 

If we want to empower the workforce, we need to better  prepare the managers first.
In order for empowerment to work here, we have to be able to hold people 
accountable for the work they are expected to do.

3.  Empowerment has gained a reputation for meaning "no accountability".
4.  This organization is using the best of my talents.
5.  Empowerment won't work here: it's not part of corporate culture.
6.  I don't have as much responsibility in my job as I used to.
7.  Back in the 60s and early 70s, we were empowered.  That’s been  taken away over 
the years as the company has gotten larger and we've divided into separate sections.

8.  "Empowerment" won’t work here: people aren’t willing to take on the extra 

responsibility under the current conditions - there's no incentive for it.

9.  I think empowerment can work here, but we need more support from upper 

management.

Loyalty:

1.  People here care about the company; when something really needs to get done, 

people get it done.

2.  This company means everything to me; it's my life and I want to see the plant stay 

here another 20 years.
I’m  loyal  to the  company;  whether I agree  with the decisions  that are  made  or not. 
I’ll do my best to support the future direction of the organization.

4.  I have a sense of ownership for this plant and I want to do what I can to shape it for 

the future.
I don’t know what I’ll be doing in the future, but I'm willing to do whatever 
management wants.

6.  The company is paying me for my loyalty, but the changes would be a whole lot 

easier to take if I knew the reasons behind what we are doing.
I’m a loyal employee and want  to see the corporation do well even beyond the point 
I  plan to retire.

3. 

5. 

7. 

8.  People have developed an  "entitlement"  mentality over the years that is hurting the 

company.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix  III. continued

191

Part IV:  Interview Themes,  continued

Information Flow:

1.  We hear about successes in other areas.
2.  Foremen tend to get bypassed when  it comes to getting timely information.
3.  Plant-wide communication is good.
4. 

Information comes out specific  to a section/area versus related to the plant as a 
whole.

5.  We don't have very good communication in the plant anymore; people don’t know 

where to get their questions answered in a way they can believe.
It’s easy to get answers to questions around here.

6. 

Training:

1.  There’s hardly any training when people go from one job to another.
2.  When people change jobs around here, often there’s no overlap with the person who 

had the job previously.

3.  People around here want to cross-train.
4. 
5. 

I’ve gotten enough training to do my job well.
I’m given the time and resources to learn to do a new job well.

Leadership:

1.  We’ve seen a lot of management disappear or get shoved aside:  we need to make 

sure that good people get into and stay in  leadership roles in the plant.
I want to be in a position where I can shape the future of the plant.

2. 

Customers:

I know who my customers are.
I understand what the customers want.

1. 
2. 
3.  All of our initiatives fit into the larger whole:  meeting customer service.
4. 

I am able to be customer-focused in my job.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix III, continued

192

Part IV:  Interview Themes,  continued 

Recognition:

I feel that people recognize me  for a jo b  well done.
I feel valued by this organization.
I am able to recognize other for a job well done.

1. 
2. 
3. 
4.  We  have  enough  flexibility  with  administering  pay  and  other  incentives  to  reward 

creativity and productivity in the organization.

Work orientation and values:

I leave here at the end of the day feeling like I've been able to do a good day’s work.
I like having a job that's a challenge.

1. 
2. 
3.  When I get into a stressful situation at work. I ask myself,  "What problem is this 

creating?"  instead of looking at what opportunity it might be presenting.
I like to move from job to job; I like change.
If I have an idea, I tell people about it.
I'm very people-oriented.
I take pride in my work.
I'm very results-oriented.

4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9.  Everything changes - you just have to make the best of it.
10. Overall, my job satisfaction is pretty high.
11.1  feel stressed out by my job.

Organizational relationships:

I'm open in my conversations about my experiences in this organization.

I take personal responsibility for the outcomes of my work in this organization.

1. 
2.  Most of the people here have important resources to offer.
3. 
4.  Most of the people in this plant are committed to its well-being.
5.  People here relate to each other in terms of their formal role more than as people.
6.  People here relate to each other as equals.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix III, continued

193

Part IV:  Interview Themes,  continued

Decision making:

1.  The company is very hierarchical; decisions are made top-down.

rest of the plant.

crews.

decision making.

2. 
3. 

I’m able to make the kinds of decisions that are important to me to be able to make.
I've been lied to in the past: that makes it hard for me to trust the decisions that are 
being made now.

4.  People do things that are best for their own section rather than what's best for the 

plant when conducting daily operations.

5.  People often make decisions without considering/knowing how they will affect the 

6.  Foremen don’t have enough authority to be able to make decisions critical to their 

7.  People second-guess the decisions I make around here.
8.  Foremen are expected to support management, but they are often not included in 

9.  We have a clear understanding of business metrics and why certain business 

decisions have been made about the plant’s future.

10. We are very paternalistic in the way we make decisions about how to do things in 

the plant; we don’t see how our decisions  affect the plant as a whole.

11.  Instead of worrying about treating policy the same for everyone, I would prefer 

being able to make my own decisions based on each individual's situation.

12.  Engineers and superintendents go straight to the operators and bypass the foremen 

in decision making.

13. We do too much micro-managing around here.
14.1  get bypassed in decision making around here.
15.  People make decisions based on knowledge of their area rather than knowledge of 

the direction of the overall plant.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Appendix III. continued

Part IV:  Interview Themes,  continued

Redesign:

1. 

I don't plan on making any major changes  in my area without knowing what the 
plans for redesign are.

2.  We're spending a lot of time on redesign without knowing if we'll be able to make 

any significant changes in the long run toward the future viability of the plant.

3.  I'm afraid of being pigeon-holed after redesign.
4.  I'm concerned about what my job will be like after plant redesign.
5.  Regardless of the changes that are made in redesign. I’ll probably continue to do 

things pretty much like I’ve always done them.

6.  I'm confident that I have whatever skills I will need for a "redesigned" plant.
7. 

It's not important to do redesign so that empowerment is an outcome: if 
empowerment results from redesign that's great.
In order to see some real changes from redesign, we'll have to have a 'mindshift' 
around here - not just different boxes on paper.

8. 

9.  I don't feel I can have an impact on the outcome of plant redesign.
10. Changes around here are usually for the better.
11. I'm ready for a change;  I'm looking forward to redesign, whatever it will mean for 

12. There’s a lot of apprehension about what redesign will look like for the organization.
13. Our plant manager has the necessary plant experience to help us through redesign.
14. Redesign is being done by too few people; there needs  to be more involvement.
15. We understand our history enough to wisely go about redesigning the plant for the 

me and my job.

future.

16. We can spend a lot of time on redesign - coming up with new ways to organize 

around processes, but it will have to be implemented by people;  if people don't get 
involved up front in the design, they won't work toward making redesign 
successful.

17. The plant has been well run in the past; we'd like to get back to the way things used 

18. We're getting the corporate support for redesign and empowerment efforts at the 

to be organized in the 70s.

plant that we need.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


195

APPENDIX  IV:  Structured Interview #2

1. Tell me about your involvement in redesign since our last interview.

2. Tell me about the focused group meeting you went to regarding the redesign:

What did you learn? How do you see the organization changing?

3. Tell  me about how you see your role changing:

What interests you most about redesign? What concerns you about redesign ? 
How do you see your role in the future?
What are you doing to develop your role in the redesigned organization?
Give me an example of a conversation you've had with another person in the 
organization about redesign.
What skills might you need to be effective in a leadership role in this 
organization ? How do you plan to obtain these skills?

4.  What do you see as the most difficult issues for:

Foremen, superintendents, operators, maintenance, engineers?  Where does each 
group derive its job satisfaction from?  How might redesign affect job satisfaction?

5.  Are you noticing any new conflicts in the organization as people start talking about 

redesign?  What are the nature of the conflicts?  Who in the organization seems 
most encouraged?  Discouraged? Why?

6. Where do you see yourself in  the grid?  Why?  Were you always  there or have things 

changed for you between interviews? Explain.

Emotionally
Proactive

Behaviorally

Reactive

Behaviorally
Proactive

Emotionally
Reactive

7.  Using the OBSE measure as a critical incident interview:  "Think of a time when 

you felt m ost..." (all  10 items).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


196

APPENDIX  V: Organizational Charts

Organizational relationships prior to Redesign (N=40):

Foremen

( 3 9 )   ( 2 9 )  

( n )  

( s D ? )   Q c  1 4 ,2 7 }   ( 2 2 j 7 )  

.21,15,25
1^23,35,16,38

~~26~i  Hoi  rioi  rm   rm  
(PSD 
(MP) 

(BG)  (MT) 

(UT) 

Superintendents

im  
(SI) 

rm
(S2)

EJ

(S4)

rm

(S6&9)

Direct Reports

(EHS)

5&.
(OM)

(HR)

(Lab)

(EN)

_iZJ
(IE)

Manager

KEY: MP=Maintenance Planning/Eng. 

BG=BuiIdings and Grounds 
MT=Maintenance 
UT=Utilities
PSI=Process Systems Improvement 
S=Production Sections 
EHS=Environment, Health & Safety 
OM=Operations Management

P=Purchasing 
CS=Customer Service 
SW=Shipping Warehousing 
HR=Human Resources 
SA=Sales Administration 
Lab=Laboratory 
EN=Engineering Services 
IE=Instrument Eng.

NOTE: 39/40 of the research participants shown here had direct reports/supervisory 
responsibilities of some kind.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Appendix V, continued

197

Organizational  Relationships  after Redesign  (N=37;  participants  #20  and  #31 
reassigned to jobs at corporate headquarters and #6 retired)

were

11.19.21 -L .25.1S ]-, S.35
(ILs) M A M s)  136.15

(HRDS

(HRS)

22.1.14

(Operators)

s & \  
(EHSC)

A

(EHS)

A s

(OF)

(MM)

ASM) (HRD)(HRD)(ESP)(R PS)

(RP)

OBuil-Qo]

(FS) (TCKDIKASPM)

4 *

26  37
(RE)(ET)

M

(FSM)

27. 38
(MSCs)

Direct Reports

(HRM)

Plant Manager

(BC)

(FCS)

KEY:  OF=Order Fulfillment*

MM=Manufacturing Manager* 
ASM=Asset Services Manager* 
HRD=Human Res. Development* 
ESP=Equipment/Systems Perf. 
RPS=Resource Planning Super. 
RP=Resource Planning 
IL=Implementation Leaders* 
AM=Area Management 
RC=Resource Coordinators 
HRDS=HRD Supervisor* 
HRS=HR on Shift*
EHSC=Env.Health/Safety Coord. 
EHS=EHS  Manager

TS=Technical Support 
FS=Facility Support*
TC=Technical Coordinator 
DI=Data Integrity/Control 
ASPM=Asset Support Mgr.* 
RE=Rotating Equipment* 
ET=Electrical Team*
P=Purchasing*
FSM=Facility Scheduling Mgr.* 
MSC=Material Scheduling Coord. 
OE=Organization Effectiveness 
HRM=Human Resources Manager* 
BC=Business Champion* 
FCS=Facility Customer Support

NOTE:  After redesign only  19 of the  remaining 37 participants had superv isory responsibilities (*).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


193

APPENDIX VI:  Research Participation Evaluation Form

Please mark the following questions with a "yes" or a "no":

1. The purpose of the interviews was clear to me.

2.  I felt completely free to express my honest opinion at all times.

3.  I trusted that the interview and survey information would be kept confidential 

as promised.

4.  I fee! that I learned something of value by participating in this research 

process: taking my time to participate was worthwhile.

5.  I would approve of having other graduate students propose research projects 
like the one I just participated in:  I see it as value added to the organization to 
have students engage people in this  kind of research.

Thank you for your feedback!

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


199

APPENDIX VII: Coding Scheme for Interview Transcripts

Each interview transcript contains some codeable information regarding the 

interviewee's orientation to his or her experience of the organizational change process. 

As you read each transcript, underline the statements you consider codeable and 

indicate which quadrant you think each should be placed in by putting the number of the 

quadrant in the margin next to the statement you underlined.  Each statement must be 

placed only in one quadrant:

Emotionally
Proactive

Behaviorally
Reactive

Behaviorally
Proactive

3

4

Emotionally

Reactive

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


200

Appendix VII, continued

Quadrant #1: Behaviorally/Emotionally Proactive

Statements that are codeable for this quadrant include:

•  Descriptions of past or present active behavior which  indicates  that the  interviewee 

took initiative in the organization beyond job expectations.

• 

• 

Indications  that the  interviewee  volunteered for projects, positions, committees,  etc.
in order to play an active role in the organization.

Indications  that  the  interviewee  made  a  suggestion  to  higher  management  and 
followed 
implementation  of  said 
improvement.

the  suggestion 

through  on 

facilitate 

to 

•  Any  indication  that  s/he  has  been  or  is  being  an  active  participant  in  managing 

his/her career in the organization.

•  Statements of future  intentions only if the interviewee has already given an example 

of past proactive action in a similar situation.

•  Any indication of going out on a limb to do what one believed/s in.

•  Any  indication 

that  the  interviewee  is  taking  an  active  role 

in developing

him/herself in response to the organization vision statement or that s/he is mentoring 
his/her subordinates toward meeting the vision statement.

•  Any example of how the  interviewee  has  gone  'out  of the  box'  to creatively  meet a 

customer need.

•  Any  indication  that  the  interviewee  has opted  for a change/new challenge  in  his  or 

her career without knowing the details of how it might directly affect him/her.

Appendix VII, continued

Quadrant #2: Behaviorally Reactive/Emotionally Proactive 

Statements that are codeable for this quadrant include:

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


201

•  Descriptions of intention to act on something without any  indication of follow-up  in 

the organization with appropriate persons.

•  Statements of what someone would like to do or see happen in the future without an 

action plan or follow-up.

•  Expressions regarding the  future such as  "Whatever they want  me to  do.  I’ll  do."  or 
"I’ll  go  with  the  flow.  .  ."  which  indicate  willingness  to  change/grow  with  the 
organization.

• 

Indication  of  the  interviewee  wanting  a  new  challenge  without  any  indication  of 
how the person plans to influence/mold the organization and his/her future in it.

•  Any  comment  that  indicates  the  interviewee  might  engage  in  an  active  role  at 
the 

if  s/he  only  knew  what 

the  organization 

the 

shaping 
possibilities/expectations really were.

future  of 

Note: Comments codeable for this category basically demonstrate a willingness to
work toward the vision statement without signs of being an active participant in shaping
the future of the organization  for whatever reason.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix VII. continued

202

Quadrant M3: Behaviorally/Emotionally Reactive

Statements that are codeable for this quadrant include:

•  Any  indication  that  the  interviewee  is just doing  what  s/he  is  being  told  to  do;  the
tone  of the  statement  might  express  aggravation,  exasperation,  a  sense  of  feeling 
trapped,  or a  sense  of being  perplexed by  the changes  going on  in  the  organization 
or lacking any control over his/her future in the organization.

•  Statements  that  express  confusion  without  an  indication  that  the  interviewee  is 

seeking clarification in the organization.

•  Any  indication that the  interviewee  laments missing an  opportunity  to get  involved 
or  get  his/her  questions  answered  when  there  was  clearly  an  opportunity  to  have 
done so.

•  Comments  that  indicate one’s  health  is  suffering as  a result of job  pressure  without 

any indication that the interviewee is trying to do something about it.

•  Any  indication  that  the  interviewee  feels  that  s/he  or  his/her  job  is  no longer

important or that s/he no longer  feel valued in the organization.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Appendix VII, continued

203

Quadrant #4: Behaviorally Proactive/Emotionally Reactive

Statements that are codeable for this quadrant include:

•  Any  indication  of  passive  aggression  toward  the  organization  either  in  action  or 
intent,  past or present (e.g.  undermining management's goals  in  working  toward the 
vision statement).

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


204

APPENDIX VU3:  Inter-rater Reliability for the Dependent Variable Code

Transcript# 

Number o f Statements

Coded

Identical
Agreement

Overall
Category

Me 

Rater

Me 

Rater

From  First 
Interviews:

4
6
7
*  8
11
*  13
14
16
18
20
23
*24
27
28
31
33
34
36
37
39 

4
9
4
6
8
4
3
3
5
4
4
->
2
2
4
3
4
0
5
2 

From Second Interviews:

I
4
5
*  8
10
11
15
18
19
23

4
2
3
6
3
6
5
2
5
3

7
12
3
6
9
5
3
1
3
4
8
1
4
2
3
3
1
3
3

5
2
2
2
i
3
J
1
3
1

T
5
1
2
0
1
1
0
1
I
I
0
I
0
0
0
1
I
1
1

3
-i
1
0
2
2
2
1
2
I

1
1
1
3

I
3
I
3
2
3
3
3
->
3
I
3
i
I
->

3
1
t
1
3
3
2
->
1
3

*)
*■>

I
3
3
3
I
3
1

i

2

*»
3

2

3
1
2
•y
3
3
2
2
1
3

* Note: In coding these  four transcripts,  the rater and  I had  participants coded in opposite quadrants.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


205

APPENDIX IX:  Propensity  for Proactivity Measure

The  following  items  were  taken  from  the  year-end  survey  (see  Appendix  III) 

and used to create this Propensity for Proactivity scale:

Survey Item and 
Subcategory Number

Surxey Item

.*Vision  5:  I see the big picture and my role in it.

*Vision  9:  I think I'm in a position to get the plant to achieve the vision statement.

Vision  10:  I understand the vision statement, but I have no idea how to make it

happen/gear up for it.

Vision  11:  I don’t have access to information/tools/support to accomplish the vision.

*Future  10:  It's hard to know how to gear up for the future because I really don’t know

where we're going.

^Influence  I:  I think I'm in a position to influence the future and well-being of the plant.

Influence 4: When I want people to consider my ideas, I keep giving them the data that 

support my position until they are ready to listen.

* Influence 6:  I have the  freedom to contribute to this organization in the way I see fit.

Influence  13:  I feel like I’m being pushed aside by the organization:  I have knowledge 

to contribute, but  there's no way for me to give my input.

* Influence  14:  I think I can  influence the outcome of redesign so that we'll wind up a

better run organization in the long-run.

Influence  15:  I can change my job in whatever way I see fit in order to make the 

company successful in the future.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix  IX. continued

Survey Item and
Subcategory Number: 

205

Survey Item

Career
Dev.  1:

Career
Dev. 3:

Career 
Dev.  11:

Rel. w/ 
Corporate 6:

Loyalty 5:

When opportunities come up to get involved with special projects/
assignments.  I’m able to get  involved.

I’m able to publicly admit I’ve made a mistake w/out fear it will have
a negative impact on my career/job.

I get the support I need to try new things.

I understand what the role of the plant is in supporting the corporation.

I don't know what I'll be doing in the future, but I'm willing to do 
whatever management wants.

Training 4:

I've gotten enough training to do my job well.

Decision 
Making 7:

*Decision 
Making  14:

People second-guess the decisions I make around here.

I get bypassed in decision making around here.

Redesign  6:

I'm confident I have whatever skills I’ll need for a "redesigned" plant.

* Redesign  9:

I don’t feel I can have an impact on the outcome of plant redesign.

Redesign  11:

I'm ready for a change; I'm looking forward to redesign, whatever it will 
mean for me and my job.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


207

APPENDIX Xa:  Human Resource Vision Statement

Our vision is to be a benchmarked human resource organization whose products 
and  services  are  aligned  with  the  organization's  business  strategy,  the  needs  of  its 
employees,  and  the  operational  definitions  of  the  14  points  (modified  from  Edwards 
Deming).

Our vision challenges us to become:

•  global  in  our  perspective,  respecting  cultural  differences  and  the  diversity  of  our 

workforce;

•  strategic  in  our  orientation,  balancing  the  interests  of  our  customers,  owners  and 

employees;

• 

leaders  in  the  area  of  change,  including  employee  development,  organizational 
design,  process  improvement  and  the  transferring  of  human  resource  skills  to  the 
line  organization;

•  advocates  for  our  employees,  matching  their  needs  with  the  business’  needs  and 

responding with appropriate management action; and

• 

suppliers  and  consultants  of  choice  for  core  human  resource  services  due  to  our 
ability to arrive at innovative, successful, cost effective solutions.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


APPENDIX Xb:  Human Resource Mission Statement

Our mission is to deliver human resource services and expertise 

to all parts o f (the corporation) through collaborative partnerships 
which are customer focused,  innovative, and which support the 
corporation's  achievement  o f its  strategic  and annual  business plans. 
While doing this,  we demonstrate and promote a leadership style that 
encourages  continual  improvement  and growth fo r  individuals,  teams, 
and the company.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


209

APPENDIX Xc:  Human Resource Objectives

The Human Resource Division's primary objective is to support the organization 
in  its efforts  to continually  improve  the quality  of its  products  and  services, employees 
and  processes.  This  objective  challenges  us  to  identify  the  skill  and  behavioral 
competencies  required  for  success  and  to  develop  support  systems  which  will  enable 
such competencies to flourish in the organization.

We  feel  our  continual 

environment which:

improvement  efforts  are  best  accomplished  in  an 

• 

• 

focuses on the customer and rewards the owner

selectively recruits its employees

•  provides employment security

• 

compensates employees higher than the market

•  provides incentive pay

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

encourages employee ownership of the organization

shares information

encourages improvement of process

fosters participation, empowerment and accountability

emphasizes training and self-development

eliminates symbols that separate people

•  promotes from within

• 

thinks long-term

•  measures the effect of its employee activities and responds appropriately

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


APPENDIX Xd:  Human  Resources Norms o f Behavior

210

•  Seek out  ways  to  support  and  involve  one  another:  ask  for help:  be  willing  to  help 

others.

•  Walk shoulder to shoulder in the organization; voice disagreements  in private.

•  Be truthful with one another: discuss issues honestly and directly.

•  Apologize if you are wrong.

•  Treat others as they would like to be treated.

•  Recognize one another for a job well done: value each other’s contributions.

•  Strive to continually improve your work.

•  Make promises you can keep; under promise/over deliver.

•  Encourage performance planning and take time for personal development.

•  Practice  what  we  preach: 

Management.

the  7  Habits,  the  Customer  Beliefs,  and  Quality

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Appendix XI:  Proactivity  Ratings from Structured Interviews "I  and #2 by Status

Status

Interview#! 

Overall  Category 

Interviev  wj.

Self-Rating in 
Interview #2

proactive
proactive

no answer suven 
proactive 
proactive 
no answer uiven 
proactive 
"I don't know”

proactive
proactive

I'm  now forced to be passive

proactive

proactive
proactive"
proactive"

Note:  Status ( l=foremen:  2=engineer);  (-) denotes  missing data; (*) denotes change  in  ratings.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


212

APPENDIX XII:  Emergent Themes Regarding OBSE

I.  Think of a time when you felt most important in the organization:

Foremen

When was communicated to.
When I was able to see short-term accomplishments.
When I was picked to do a job for my ability: people respected me to do what they’d 
assigned me to.
Being involved in diversity training and addressing  some important issues in the 
organization.
As an "A" operator: working with the men and able to  answer their questions.
When my input was used in promotion decisions.
It all depends on your boss:  I hear "great job" a lot.
Coordinating the start-up of a system.
When I became a foreman, they put me into an area I had never worked in: gave me a 
lot of responsibility.
As an  "A" operator; I had the respect of the operators.
20 years ago; when the plant was growing, there were a lot of opportunities to come in 
with ideas and actually make a difference.
Being made foreman: you were respected for your ability to solve problems and get 
work done.
Struggling to get a man a promotion and being able to do it.
When there are rush orders and you have to go out and do what it takes to get things 
done; solve problems.
Now with redesign; I’ve been getting a lot of good feedback from a lot of different 
levels - "I’m nominating you for such and such a jo b ..." (2).
When you're called in and told. "You've done a good job."
Solving a problem that gets things running again.

Engineers

When  I have had autonomy, authority, and my area of responsibility and results were 
clear.
When  I got an unexpected salary increase, and was told that people 
appreciated what I was doing.
Now, with redesign; being involved in something so far-reaching.
Working on a specific project; I had a lot of autonomy and responsibility.
As a superintendent with a large budget; I had autonomy and the results were great.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XII, continued

213

When  I’m able to work with people on solving problems:  coach people.
When I was able to solve a problem with a particular process.
Being involved with special projects.
When I was given the opportunity to do empowerment in the section:  it was something 
new that hadn't been tried before.
Working with the plant steering committee to develop good group norms.
When I've had to represent the company on a particular issue.
Negotiation of a new contract that hadn't been done before: saved the company a lot of 
money.
When I have more direct control and responsibility.
I used to feel important when people came to me and asked questions; now, it’s when 
people come to me and say. "thank you".
Working on a special project: they felt I’d been around long enough to help design a 
new system.
When I was able to resolve a major problem:  I worked for many years on it.
In getting a special assignment; being part of something that’s recognized as important 
for the plant's  future.
Being given an important project and not being told the how tos.
Being asked to give a presentation to other experts including some VPs.
When I'm depended on for my knowledge in a specific area: feeling of accomplishment 
when you can save money.
In my involvement with SAP; people recognize that if they need answers, they can 
come to me - value my knowledge.

II.  Think of a time when you felt most helpful in the 

organization:

Foremen

Being able to train the younger guys.
As an  "A" operator, being able to support the foreman and the superintendent.
As an "A" operator being able to show people how to do things.
Being able to provide people with the tools, information, etc. that they need to get their 
jobs done.
With the fire fighting I’ve been able to do.
Getting a fire under control;  felt good about the response the guys gave me.
I was able to get one of the guys who was alcoholic dried out; the family was really 
grateful.
Containing a spill  in a customer’s plant;  they put a lot of faith in me.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XII, continued

214

As a fire chief: when the alarm goes off or the outside Fire department calls for help. 
Being able to break down some of the barriers in my crew.
Trouble-shooting; getting things going.
One of our customers was unhappy  with us and I worked really hard pulling a lot of 
different parties together to make sure the customer walked away pleased.
Switching shifts to help resolve some of the problems.
If you can make a suggestion that gets  followed through.
I was able to help a guy who wanted to be on the rescue squad but was afraid of heights. 
When people ask you questions.

Engineers

As a superintendent: working closely with people, doing  training, and doing new 
product/project introduction.
When  I was asked for advice on something sensitive in nature.
I always feel helpful: I like to talk with people and find ways to support them.
As the driver of a specific initiative;  it wouldn't have gotten done if I hadn't taken  the 
ball on it.
It's nice to be able to do things for the guys who work for me: resources, tools, 
information.
When I’m able to be able to work to improve a product, or help another section.
Doing an employee review and helping him to be more productive.
In being able to give input whether it's redesign or  technical improvements.
As a superintendent; you could help people one-on-one.
Coaching/counseling people.
Being in a support department, others depend on me to be able to get their jobs done. 
Bringing on a new technology that sped up the operation and saved a lot of money. 
When  I have the opportunity to talk with employees about personal issues:  ask for 
advice and offer some guidance.
During an explosion;  I was able to mitigate circumstances and minimize losses.
In doing groundwork for a start-up.
When people reporting to me or other peers ask me for advice and use it.
In giving feedback when I’m asked: they know I’ll tell it like it is.
I worked hard to help someone be able to work part-time.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XII, continued

215

III.  Think of a time when you felt most trusted in the organization:

Foremen 

When I get information.
Working alongside of people: they trusted me and knew I wouldn’t lead them astray. 
Training the operators and keeping them on track.
Getting calls from other sections - guys knew that I would tell them the truth.
When I’ve been asked my opinion on someone's promotion.
When I hear "nice job" and not just about the mistakes.
Working weekends and being responsible  for the plant.
When things are shared with me in confidence.
As a fire chief; you’re basically in charge of the plant in an emergency situation. 
Being able to explain to the guys what diversity training was all about and why it was 
important; having them say,"ok, if you say so I'll go".
Most of the time;  I'm honest with people and they're honest with me.
I've always felt trusted; I've never heard anything negative.

Engineers

As a superintendent; people knew me.
When my boss would share information and ask my opinion.
When other people come to me for my opinion.
Despite the conservative views of the corporation.  I’ve always been given a lot of 
autonomy.
Being given a lot of autonomy.
When I’m told that I'm doing a good job by my management.
When people ask for help.
When  I got a promotion.
In discussions with the skill sets.
As a superintendent; I could make decisions without too much micro-managing.
When people have sought my opinion on confidential issues and trusted me to keep 
them confidential.
Having to lead the EPA inspectors around.
Being promoted to the steering committee level; becoming a direct report to the plant 
manager.
As a younger engineer working on start-ups.
In working on a project where there was potential  for high pay-off.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Appendix XII. continued

215

Being made a superintendent: to get capital money spent, there had to be justification - 
they had to trust my judgement.
When you're given a project and you can plan, get the resources, etc. without people 
checking up on you.
On my first large project assignment.
I've always felt this way.

IV.  Think of a time when you felt most taken seriously 

in the organization:

Foremen

During emergencies - as an assistant fire chief, you are given a lot of authority.
When I was responsible for an operation.
When management listened to my concerns.
When management heard my concerns and took action.
When I give a guy a job to do, they know I'll follow up.
In meetings with my boss; he takes me seriously.
When management listens to me.
As a fire chief.
When I've been given a lot of responsibility.
Always; they know I’m not just griping.
Doing merit reviews and backing someone for promotion: having management listen to 
your opinion (2).
When I was made foreman and the guys said, "they've made a good choice."
When management acts on a recommendation.
Reprimanding an operator and being supported by my management: he took notice and 
changed his behavior.
Making recommendations.

Engineers

When management acted on a request I had made, and did it promptly.
In doing redesign.
I’m always taken seriously (4).
When foremen bring problems to you.
In helping to pull a project together.
In doing a presentation on to the steering committee and in the follow-up conversations.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Appendix XII, continued

217

With redesign; the superintendents were included and  they cared about our input. 
Teaching/coaching in front of a class.
In having to tell a section what to do in order to stay in compliance with the EPA. 
Negotiating a new contract for the organization.
Any time we implement new things and people ask me to participate;  take my 
suggestions and implement them.
With my current manager who doesn't want to know all the details; lets me do my job. 
When people listen, ask questions, etc.
In having to let an engineer go; it took a lot of evaluation to make the decision.
Having a VP use some information of mine in a presentation that he had to make.
I’ve always been outspoken; it's becoming more acceptable and I feel people are 
listening to me as the culture begins to change around here.

V.  Think of a time when you felt most valued in the 

organization:

Foremen

Doing equipment upgrades that will save money, time, and people's efforts.
When I was in a position of responsibility.
Working on a particular project.
I’ve always felt valuable.
As a lead operator doing training.
In the fire fighting and decomposition problems we've had.
Catching things the could have become real problems:  odors, spills.
When a policy was changed so that they could put me in a particular position knowing 
that I was the right person for that job.
When I left the workforce and the guys said that I was missed;  "things aren't the same 
without you here."
Things were going wrong;  I found the glitch and found a solution.
When I was asked to work on another shift that was having some problems.
Solving problems.

Engineers

As a superintendent;  I could make significant progress on things important to the 
section.
Working on a start-up.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XII, continued

218

When my group publicly acknowledged me for my leadership.
Being given an assignment that I had no background for.
I've always felt valuable.
In being able to give my opinion to management and opening up their thinking on 
certain issues.
As a superintendent:  the job was valuable and your decisions had an impact on many 
things.
Representing the company to the public on sensitive issues.
In doing start-ups: improving capacity for a product.
On a particular project under a particular supervisor: my input was being shared on a 
particular project.
Being chosen for a special project.
Doing equipment start-ups and instrument design:  I did a lot of the work on my own. 
calling the shots and getting the necessary resources.
Being able to make some huge bottom-line cost improvements.

VI.  Think of a time when you felt most like you counted 

in the organization:

Foremen

When I felt like I was part of the team.
As an "A" operator; people listened/valued my opinion (2).
In meetings when your ideas get used; when people who can make things happen use 
your ideas.
All the time; when I make decisions, I know I’ll have management support.
Under a different supervisor; in a different job.
When I was made "A" operator;  I had the least experience in the group, but was given 
the lead role.
Trying to save a man who was dying: it wasn’t possible, but the hospital and his widow 
were both thankful we were able to try.
Being told by operators, "We want to work with/for you."
Getting good feedback in my reviews.
As a foreman; the engineers come and ask for my opinion.

Engineers

When  I was asked to make a presentation and I was given  support for what I was doing. 
When I was given a lot of responsibility.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


Appendix XII, continued

2 19

When I've had a lot of autonomy and responsibility.
When people ask what you think: especially if it's  something you don't normally get 
involved in.
Straightening out an employee.
Coordinating the effective use of funds: making sure we're not wasting money.
As a superintendent: you could see the impact of your decisions.
When I’m able to lend support to someone to help them succeed.
I always feel this way.
Being in charge of environmental engineering; representing the plant to the community. 
When people acknowledge my overall contributions; that doesn't happen very often 
here.
When people come to me for my opinion.

VII.  Think of a time when you felt most cooperative in 

the organization:

Foremen 

I'm always cooperative (6).
Having to work in a team rather than on my own (2).
When I was asked to go from shift work to days with a cut in pay to a job that was 
unknown.
Participating in ad hoc teams: we had to depend on each other and share a lot of 
information.
I always go wherever I'm needed: whenever there's an emergency I'm right there 
whereas some others don’t go.
It's all the extras: being on the rescue team, getting involved with training, etc.
We have to cooperate around here to get things done: that's the way it is.
In doing all of the little extras that keep the place going.
As an operator having to work with other operators.
In redesigning the engineering organization

Engineers

When I volunteered to get involved in outside organizations as a part of community 
responsibility initiatives.
I'm always cooperative (5).

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XII. continued

220

Working to resolve and issue between groups.
Working together to get a system up and running.
With redesign: I’ll do what they tell me to do and I'll do my best.
Doing what management says is needed for the company even when I may not agree. 
Developing procedures for turning over new projects.
With redesign:  I had to give up valuable people for the good of the company.
Working as a part of a team where there were a lot of varied opinions: it took a lot of 
cooperation/negotiation.
In doing the little things that no one else wants to do. and participating in volunteer 
work.
In getting together with peers to work toward a common goal.

VIII.  Think of a time when you felt most like you could 

make a difference in the organization:

Foremen

When I have the control I need to make decisions.
With the empowerment initiative.
On a particular shift where the superintendent was looking to me for 
guidance/leadership.
When my input was used to create the ERO role in the redesign.
The few times I've had to make a technical decision.
When I first became a foreman: I was given a lot of room to operate on my own and felt 
I could make things happen.
Being put into a position to coordinate across sections and help remove shift barriers. 
Being able to ask the right questions when something's not going quite right.
As a foreman; helping with guys attitudes, needs, etc.
Now with redesign; upcoming events (2) - getting people to do what they're supposed to 
do.
When we get to the end of a shift and nothing's gone wrong.

Engineers

As a superintendent:  I had a lot of autonomy (2).
When I'm given work assignments that have a lot of potential  impact.
Now, with redesign (2).
With a particular project; it was shaping the direction of the future.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XII, continued 

221

When people ask for help.
When I'm able to get things done; more forward on a new project/process.
When I’m relied upon for my technical expertise.
With the empowerment program; the inroads may not be recognized for a while, but we 
made an important difference in the organization.
Any time when I can offer insight on people issues.
In environmental engineering; diversity of responsibilities and was able to achieve a lot 
of results.
In helping people understand the redesign; presenting the changes to people so that they 
can have a positive attitude - having quality conversations with people.
When we were called together to make a key policy decision.
In implementing some of last year's cost controls.
In a specific project assignment.
Now, with redesign;  I've been able to help make a difference in people's attitudes.

IX; Think of a time when you felt most efficient in the 

organization:

Foremen

When I've had direct communication about what's going on.
When I can get things checked off my list.
When my job was more structured.
Once I’d gotten a grip on the computer system.
As a lead operator.
I come in early to get organized so that I can be efficient.
I never feel this way;  I’m always too stretched.
Helping the guys get a spill under control.
Always...
Solving a problem which saved us a lot of work and money.
In the fire chief role; getting things done quickly.
In scheduling maintenance priorities and in emergencies.
When I get a product out the door on time.
As an operator;  I didn't have to deal with such a variety of problems (2).

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


222

Appendix XII. continued 

Engineers 

When I'm able to delegate.
I never feel efficient: there’s always things falling through the cracks: too many 
roadblocks (4).
When I'm able to structure my work.
Prework for meetings.
When my plans get executed as nearly exactly as I have them laid out: all the ducks  fall 
in a row.
In working on long-term projects vs.  in the daily fire-fighting.
In the upgrading of pollution controls.
When I put in a lot of extra hours.
When my boss leaves me alone and lets me do my job.
When I learned how to use the computer.
As an individual technical contributor: supervision has too many distractions.
When I don't stray from my to-do lists.
When I had control of the whole scope of my work.
Using spreadsheets and other tools helps me to be more efficient.

X: Think of a time when you felt most that there was faith in you in the organization:

Foremen

When I hear, "We know you'll get it done."
Being asked to participate in the diversity training: I was requested to be a part of the 
team.
As a lead operator; you knew where you stood - you're one of the men (between them 
and the foreman) plus you're trying to do the right thing for the company.
When I’ve put someone in for a promotion and my recommendation was followed up 
on.
There’s always been faith in me.
With the system start-up; I made a couple of technical  decisions that worked out.
When I first made foreman (2).
After a training session when one o f the managers came up and told me I’d done a good 
job.
When my supervisor says,  "I'm glad you’re here because I know you'll get things 
done/resolved."
People know that I’ll work on whatever needs to be done.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XII. continued

223

As a foreman: you’re responsible for what goes on.
I was made foreman and sent to a section I knew nothing about.
I always have felt this.

Engineers

When people have asked my opinion,  management values my input,  and management 
delegates/shares the credit for accomplishments.
When I'm asked for advice from multiple levels in the organization.
When I’m given autonomy: not micro-managed.
When you're asked to contact a customer:  management has faith that you’ll represent the 
company well.
Being asked for my opinion.
With empowerment: they had faith in me to let me do it.
When I've been asked to facilitate groups.
In having to fill out a large permit application that could have shut us down had it not 
been done well.
Being promoted: they felt I could handle the job.
When the people I work with directly give me this sense;  it goes along with trust and 
respect.
In general people trust me to do my job.
When you're entrusted to make key decisions.
Hearing from management that there’s faith in me to make such and such a decision. 
When management asks your opinion and then uses it.
When I’ve been given assignments over and above what's normally expected.
Through redesign; people come to me for my opinion about their situations.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix X III:  Reactions to Redesign from Second Interviews 

224

Foremen: Potential Benefits

Redesign has put the focus back on manufacturing where it should be: I think it's great.

It's  going  to  open  up  some  career  opportunities  for  non-degreed  people  that  weren't 
available  in  the  past:  once  you  made  foreman,  that  was  it  but  now  things  are  changing 
some.

Finally,  they're  realizing  that  the  operators  need  more  support,  and  redesign  is  putting 
resources (technical personnel) back on shift:  nothing’s more  fmstrating than  to  hurry to 
finish something on midnights only to miss a  deadline because the  lab tells you  they're 
going to wait to analyze something when that day shift comes in.

People  who  have  marked  their  territory  in  the  past  are  going  to  be  in  trouble  (the 
untouchables): territories are getting split apart.

Redesign  is going to get rid of all  the  "little unions"  around here; get us back to being a 
unified plant.

I can  see  that  they  want more  versatile  people  out  there  so  that you  can  downsize  and 
still get the work done; that's ok.

This  redesign  isn't  anything  new;  every  other  company  you  read  about  in  the  paper  is 
doing the same thing. They want a more efficient workforce, so this is what we’re going 
to have to do.

This  is  the  first  time  anyone  has  asked  me  about  my  career  goals;  as  a  foreman,  my 
goals  ended  years  ago  - once  you  become  a  foreman,  your career plateaus.  Now,  I’ve 
got  the  ability  to  reach  another plateau:  it's great.  .  .  I've  always  looked  for something 
more to do to add to my self- satisfaction.

The younger people here need to realize that we're  not going to be a stagnant workforce 
in  the  future  like  we  have  been  in  the  past;  a  lot  of the  older  folks  will  be  leaving  so 
there will be more opportunity.

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


Appendix X III, continued

225

Foremen: Points o f Concern

It's going to require more of a team effort; people  who  don’t want to be a part of a team 
are going to have a hard time.

I see the redesigned organization chart turning us  into  a self-directed  workforce;  I don't 
think we can do that with the people we currently have.

I hope I'll have the time  to learn the new things that will be required of me.

Nobody wants this; they may say so in public, but in private it's another story.

It  concerns  me  that  this  is  all  taking  place  in  such  a  rush:  all  because  someone  said, 
"this plant will look different next year..."

As  men,  we  feel  a  need  to  take  ownership  for  our  positions-  whatever  they  may  be; 
redesign is  stripping us  of this.  .  .  now we’re  in  limbo.  .  .adrift.  .  .we’re all just waiting 
for someone to tell us where we’re going to be.

The  men  who  are  the  most  discouraged  are  the  ones  (plant-wide)  who  don't  see  their 
jobs on the new organization chart.

I don't see where my job fits into the redesign.

I'm  worried about  who's  going to do  my job;  are  they  going to  know  what  it  is  I do  so 
that things don't fall through the cracks?

Redesign can either destroy us or help us; the only way  it will  work is  if we  have good 
attitudes about it.  This redesign is messing with my personal life; I'll end 
up working with an entirely different group of people,  and because  I may wind up with 
a different work schedule, it will change my social  life outside of work as well.

Some people have the idea that this is just another program;  it will come and go like the 
rest of them.

I want to be doing a job  that I’m convinced  is worthwhile  for the company;  I’m not sure 
how this redesign is going to work out.

A lot of people are trying to figure out where they fit in.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix X III. continued

There  are  people  here  who  are  on  the  verge  of breaking  from  an  increase  in  the  stress 
level:  I  think  it’s  that  the  company  has  bent  over  backwards  so  far  for  people  that  it's 
hard for them to run this place like a business now.

The job descriptions for the new roles in the redesign are not detailed enough.

I really do think redesign  is a good idea, but  if you can't trust the people you're working 
w ith.. .you're still going to be working with the same people you haven’t been able 
to trust for years:  I see problems.

The operators are concerned  about who's  going  to  be  in  charge of the  shift.  .  .will  it be 
someone  they  can  go  to  or  will  it  be  someone  who  doesn't  have  a  clue  what  they’re 
talking about?.  .  .Who  will  they actually  report  to -  one  person or four people?.  .  .This 
isn't clear.

I have a feeling there's going to be chaos in the workforce after people get into their new 
positions:  we’re  understaffed,  and  the  people  who  get  bumped  back  are  going  to  feel 
alienated.

Engineers: Potential Benefits

There's a need for consistent goals in the plant: redesign can help with this.

W eil have better leadership and accountability with redesign.

Redesign  will  get  us  out of the  section  mindset  that  we’ve  had  for years  and  give  us  a 
broader understanding of the  facility;  it’s creating a flatter organization which will  make 
things more interesting/keep people motivated.

There's  more  opportunity  for people  who  haven't  been  foremen  in  the  past  to  serve  as 
shift leaders.

We  can  disregard  the  lines  that  have  been  drawn  in  the  past  and get  the  best-qualified 
people into leadership positions.

One  of the  good  things  about  redesign  is  that  engineers  will  be  doing  more  traditional 
engineering versus supervision:  a lot of engineers aren’t comfortable in supervision, but 
it’s been the only way up the career ladder.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XIII. continued

227

Engineers: Points o f Concern

The superintendent role  is one of responsibility:  you can  really  make or break and area 
of the plant in that  position, but that role has been removed from the redesign.
Now  who’s  going  to  take  responsibility  for  what  goes  on  in  a given  section?  (product 
ownership)

I don't see how anybody's going to make anything happen in the new organization: there 
will be a bunch of new handoffs.

There's  going  to  be  a  lot  of  pressure  on  the  shift  leadership  groups:  do  we  have  the 
people out there that can  handle it?

I heard that another facility did a redesign and that the  people who didn’t go along with 
it were let go.

The only constant in redesign is the people; what if you and  I didn’t work well  together 
in the past.. .what's going to make us work together well after redesign?

I thought I'd mapped out a career path for myself, but now that's all changing...

I wonder how  much things  are  really going to change.  .  .a lot of the  problems  we  have 
had are people: how's the  redesign going to change that? If they'd dealt with the  people 
problems, they might not have had to redesign.

Where's the accountability in redesign?  I don't see it: And with redesign, you've got  1/3 
less supervisors in the plant, so how are you going to hold other people accountable?

How are projects going to work? I’d feel a lot better if we could run through how they’re 
going to work.

We had a profitable year last year without redesign, so why redesign?

Who's going to want to hire into this plant with no clear sense of career opportunities? 

Now that the superintendent position no longer exists, what’s there to work toward?

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XIII, continued

228

There's  a  difference  in  responsibility  level  when  you  don’t  supervise  people:  they've 
been talking about developing a technical career ladder, but that hasn't happened yet.

Traditionally,  the  way  you  move  up  here  is  through  supervision:  now  there's  1/3  less 
supervisory roles available.

I  can't  see  the  correlation  between  the  problems  we  have  and  how  redesign  addresses 
them.

We’re still  very paternalistic  in the  way  we do things;  I  don't see  redesign changing the 
culture.

They've put the cart before the horse: with  1/3  less supervisory positions in the redesign, 
they  should  have created a technical  ladder first.  .  .they've  been  talking  about  the  need 
for this for 20 years; now they're saying, "trust us"...

There  are  a  lot  of  implementation  issues  that  we’ll  just  have  to  figure  out  as  we  go 
along; but,  there are a lot of people  who  want to know  now  how  it’s  all  going to  work 
(lots of confusion).

It seems  like we’re changing  for the  sake of changing;  not  for specific  reasons.  It's got 
the whole place  upside-down.

This  is a very dramatic redesign and there's a lot of risk involved; a lot may fall through 
the  cracks  now  that  there  won’t  be  superintendents  and  foremen  responsible  for 
following up on the details.

There are people who are letting work ride while they wait to see how redesign is going 
to play itself out;  or letting problems go and saying, "redesign will take care of it."

We  used  to  pride  ourselves  on  getting  exposure  to  a  broad  range  of  things:  now  the 
approach  is  the  exact  opposite  -  with  redesign,  they've  taken  the  approach  of 
specialization and efficiency through specialization.

We have a system that took years to evolve: there are reasons  for all of the little changes 
that  were  made  slowly.  Now,  with  redesign,  it’s  getting  all  shuffled  around:  it’s  likely 
that a lot of things will fall through the cracks.

Things  have and always  will  continue  to  work via the  hierarchy;  it's  not a participative 
environment  here,  it's  a  dictatorial  one. 
If  that's  the  way  they  choose  to  run  the 
organization, fine but call it for what it is - don't call it self-directed.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XIII, continued

229

There  are  some  people  who  do  a good job.  but want to  be  told  what  to do:  now there's 
one third less supervision..  .

I don’t know that we have the culture to support the change.

Lots  of  the  engineers  really  want  this  to  work,  but  they're  afraid  to  jump  in:  the 
Implementation  Leader role  is critical  to  the success of redesign,  but  who's going  to go 
out  on  a  limb over  it?  There's  a  lot  of "work  order"  mentality  around  here:  guys  who 
wait  to be  told  what  to  do.  That's  getting  better,  but  it  may  be  hard  to  get  the  guys  to 
buy in to redesign.

A  big  concern  is  that  managers  haven't  gone  through  any  training  for  redesign:  some 
have the people skills already, but it's a pretty big culture change. Now. the human side 
of change is being talked about whereas we used to only focus on the procedural aspects 
of organization change.

We  have to make  all  these changes  in the  process of running a business;  I'm concerned 
that  we'll  lose  good  people  in  the  process  of redesign  which  will  make  it  hard  to  do 
business.

I’m afraid there’s going to be a real lack of productivity while all of the redesign changes 
are  taking  place;  furthermore,  there  won't  be  as  much  process  ownership  in  the  new 
system - who's going to make sure things get done?

How are people who won't have supervisory positions anymore going to handle that.

How are they going to maintain self- esteem?  Around here people don't get feedback on 
their leadership...

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


APPENDIX XIV:  Modified Locus of Control Measure (Rotter.  1966)

230

For each o f the following items, please choose the option which best represents your 
views and circle either "a " or "b

1. a.  Many of the unhappy things  in people's lives are partly due to bad luck, 

b.  People’s misfortunes result from the mistakes they make.

2. a.  In the long run people get the respect they deserve in this world.

b.  Unfortunately, an individual's worth often passes unrecognized no matter how hard 

s/he tries.

3. a. No matter how hard you try some people just don't like you.

b. People who can't get others to like them don't understand how to get along with 

others.

4.  a.  I have often found that what is going to happen will happen.

b. Trusting to fate has never turned out as well for me as making a decision to take a

w 

O

definite course of action.

5. a. Becoming a success is a matter of hard work, luck has little or nothing to do with

it.

b. Getting a good job depends  mainly on being in the right place at the right time.

6. a. When I make plans, I am almost certain that I can make them work.

b.  It is not always wise to plan  too far ahead because many things  turn out to be a 

matter of good or bad fortune anyhow.

7. a. In my case, getting what I want has little or nothing to do with luck.

b. Many times we might just as well decide what to do by flipping a coin.

8. a. Who gets to be the boss often depends on who was lucky enough to be in the right

b. Getting people to do the right thing depends upon ability, luck has little or nothing 

9. a. Most people don't realize the extent to which their lives are controlled by accidental

b. There really is no such thing as  "luck".

place first.

to do with it.

happenings, 

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Appendix XIV, continued

2 3 1

10.a. One should always be willing to admit mistakes, 

b.  It is usually best to cover up one's mistakes.

11 .a.  In the long run the bad things that happen to us are balanced by the good ones, 

b. Most misfortunes are the result of lack of ability, ignorance, laziness, or all three.

12.a. A good leader expects people to decide for themselves what they should do. 

b. A good leader makes it clear to everybody what their jobs are.

13.a. Many times I feel that I have little influence over the things that happen to me.

b. It is impossible for me to believe that chance or luck plays an important role in my 

life.

14.a. What happens to me is my own doing.

b. Sometimes I feel that I don't have enough control over the direction my life is 

taking.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


LITERATURE CITED

Adams. Scott.  1996. The Dilbert Principle. HarperCollins:NY.

Alien. Jon G.  1995. Coping with Trauma. American Psychiatric Press. Inc.: 

Washington. D.C.

Arrien. Angeles.  1991. Lessons from Geese. A speech given at the annual 

National Organization Development Network meeting.

Axelrod. Dick.  1992. Getting Everyone Involved. The Journal of Applied Behavioral 

Science. 28(4), 499-509.

Beach, Lee Roy.  1993. Making the Right Decision:  Organizational Culture. Vision, and 

Planning. Prentice Hall, Englwood Cliffs:  NJ.

Belasco, James A and Stayer, Ralph C.  1993. Flight of the Buffalo, Warner Books, Inc.: 

NY.

Breer, Paul E. and Locke, Edwin A.  1965. Task Experience as a Source of Attitudes. 

Dorsey Press:  Homewood. DL.

Brower, Michael J.  1995. Empowering Teams: What, Why and How. Empowerment in 

Organizations.  3( 1).  13-25.

Bums. David D.  1980.  Feeling Good. Signet/New American Library: NY.

Byham, William C.  1988. ZAPP. Development Dimensions Intl. Press:  Pittsburgh, PA.

Byrne, John A.  1993. The Horizontal Corporation. Business Week. December 20, 

76-81.

232

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Champy, James.  1995. Reengineering Management: The Mandates  for New Leadership. 

HarperBusiness - HarperColIins Publishers: NY.

2 3 3

Covey. Stephen R.  1989. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People:  Restoring the 

Character Ethic. A Fireside Book - Simon and Schuster:  NY.

Covey. Stephen R.  1991.  Principle-Centered Leadership. A Fireside  Book - Simon and 

Schuster:  NY.

Cowen, David.  1998. "Inner — and Outer-Directed Sources of Self Value and their 

Impact on "Change Capableness", a presentation being prepared for the 
upcoming Organization Development Network's national meeting.

Cox. Julie R. Wolfram.  1997. Effects of Organizational Change on Interpersonal 

Relationships: The Interplay of Identities and Emotions in a Manufacturing 
Environment.  Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH.

Culbert, Samuel, and McDonough.  1985. Radical Management:  Power Politics and the 

Pursuit of Trust. The Free Press: NY.

Deming, W. Edwards.  1986. Out of the Crisis. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.

Folkman, Susan. Chesney, Margaret. McKusick, Leon, and Coates, Thomas J.  1991. 

Translating Coping Theory into Intervention.  In "The Social Context of 
Coping.". John Eckenrode (ed.). Plenum Press:  NY.

Frohman, Mark.  1992. The Aimless Empowered. Industry W eek. April 20, 64-66.

Garvin, David A.  1987. Competing on the Eight Dimensions o f Quality. Harvard 

Business Review. 65(6).  101-109.

Geber, Beverly.  1992. From Manager to Coach. Training. February, 25-31.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Glaser, Rollin (ed.)  1992. Classic Readings in Self-Managing Teamwork. Organization 

Design and Development. Incorporated.  King of Prussia: PA.

2 3 4

Goleman. Daniel.  1995. Emotional  Intelligence.  Bantam Books:  NY.

Hackman, Richard J and Wageman.  Ruth.  1995. Total Quality Management:  Empirical. 
Conceptual,  and  Practical  Issues.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly.  40(June). 
309-342.

Hammer, Michael, and Champy, James.  1993. Reengineering the Corporation: A 

Manifesto for Business Revolution.  HarperBusiness-HarperCollins 
Publishers: NY.

Heckscher, Charles.  1995. White Collar Blues. BasicBooks - HarperCollins, Inc.: NY.

Hobbs, James B.  1987. Corporate Staving Power: Cultural Characteristics of the

Organization (Ch. 5L Lexington Books, D.C. Heath and Co.:  Lexington, MA.

Holdorf. Peter Mathews.  1975. Stress and Role Relationships in an Organization: A 

Study of Coping Behaviors.  Unpublished Doctoral  Dissertation, Case Western 
Reserve University.  Cleveland, OH.

Hughes. Bob.  1991. 25 Stepping Stones for Self-Directed Work Teams, Training. 

December, 44-46.

Ishikawa, Kaoru.  1985. What is Total Quality Control?  "The Japanese W av". Prentice- 

Hall: Englewood Cliffs. NJ.

Kanter, Rosabeth Moss.  1983. Change Masters. Simon and Schuster,  Inc.:  NY.

Katz. Daniel, and Kahn, Robert L.  1978. The Social Psychology of Organizations. John 

Wiley and Sons, Inc.:  NY.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Kemper, T.D.  1990. Social Relations and Emotions:  A Structural Approach.  In T.D. 

Kemper (Ed.), Research Agendas in the Sociology of Emotions. State 
University of New York Press:  Albany, NY.

2 3 5

King David, c. 300 b.c. Psalm 40,  King James Version of The Holv Bible.  World 

Publishers, Inc.: Grand Rapids. MI.

Kizilos. Peter.  1990. Crazy About Empowerment? Training.  December, 47-56.

Klein, Janice A.  1984. Why Supervisors Resist Employee Involvement. Harvard 

Business Review. Sept-Oct. 87-95.

Kotter. John P., and Heskett, James L.  1992. Corporate Culture and Performance. 

The Free Press:  NY.

Kotter, John P.  1995. Leading Change: Why Transformation Efforts  Fail. Harvard 

Business Review. March-April, 59-67.

Kotter. John P.  1996. Leading Change. Harvard Business School Press: Boston, MA.

Korman. A.K.  1970. Toward a Hypothesis of Work Behavior. Journal of Applied 

Psychology.  54.31-41.

Korman, A.K.  1971. Organizational Achievement, Aggression and Creativity:  Some

Suggestions Toward an Integrated Theory. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance.  6,593-613.

Korman, A.K.  1976. Hypothesis of Work Behavior Revisited and an Extension. 

Academy of Management Review.  1(1), 50-63.

Larkin, T.J. and Larkin. Sandar.  1996. Reaching and Changing Frontline Employees, 

Harvard Business Review. May/June, 95-104.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Lawler. Edward E., HI.  1980. Creating High Involvement Work Organizations. CEO

Publication  G  80-3  (3).  Center  for  Effective  Organizations,  USC  School  of 
Business Administration: Los Angeles. CA.

2 3 6

Lawler. Edward E..  HI.  1986.  High Involvement Management. Jossey-Bass: San 

Francisco. CA.

Lawler. Edward E, HI.  1987. Transformation from Control to Involvement.  CEO 
Publication G 87-3 (94). Center for Effective Organizations.  USC School 
of  Business Administration:  Los Angeles, CA.

Lawler. Edward E.,  HI.  1988. Substitutes for Hierarchy.  CEO Publication G 88-2 (115). 
Center  for  Effective  Organizations,  USC  School  of  Business  Administration: 
Los Angeles, CA.

Lawler, Edward E., HI.  1991. Managing Empolyee Involvement.  CEO Publication 
G 91-3 (188). Center for Effective Organizations, USC School of Business 
Administration:  Los Angeles, CA.

Lawrence, Paul R.  1954. How to Deal with Resistance to Change. Harvard Business 

Review,  May/June. 49-57.

Lazarus. Richard S.  1976. Patterns of Adjustment (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill: NY.

Ledford. Gerald E., Jr.  1991.  Employee Involvement:  Lessons and Predictions.  CEO

Publication  G  91-1  (186).  Center  for  Effective  Organizations.  USC  School  of 
Business Administration:  Los Angeles, CA.

Lorsch, Jay W.  1986. Managing Culture: The Invisible Barrier to Strategic Change. 

California Management Review. 28(2), 95-109.

Lund, Frederick H.  1930. Emotions of Men. Whittlesey House/McGraw-Hill Book Co.. 

Inc.:  NY.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Maddi, Salvatore, and Kobasa. Suzanne C.  1984. The Hardv Executive: Health Under 

Stress.  Dow Jones-Irwin:  Homewood.  EL.

2 3 7

Margolis. Bruce L. and Kroes. William H.  1973. Occupational Stress and Strain. 

Occupational  Mental Health Journal. 2(4). Winter.

Mariotti. John.  1996. Troubled by Resistance to Change? IndustrvWeek. Oct. 7. p. 30.

iVlcCormack, Mark H.  1997. Horizontal Structure Simplified. The Plain Dealer. Tues.. 

Jan.  14, 6-C.

McClelland, David C.  1985.  Human Motivation.  Scott, Foresman and Company: 

Palo Alto. CA.

McGee, Robert.  1990 (2nd ed). The Search for Significance.  Rapha Publishing: 

Houston, TX.

Miles, Robert H.  1987. Managing the Corporate Social Environment: A Grounded 

Theory.  Prentice-Hall, Inc, Englewood Cliffs: NJ.

Mirvis, P.H., and Berg, D.N. (eds).  1977. Failures in Organization Development and 

Change. Wiley Interscience: NY.

Mishra, Aneil  K.  1993.  Breaking Down Organizational Boundaries During Crisis: The 

Role  of  Mutual  Trust.  Academy  of  Management  Review  Meeting 
presentation),  Atlanta. GA.

(a 

Mohrman, Susan A.  1982.  Employee Participation Programs:  Implications for

Productivity Improvement. CEO Publication G 82-12 (31). Center for Effective 
Organizations,  USC School of Business Administration:  Los Angeles. CA.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Mohrman, Susan A., and Lawler, Edward E.  1988. Parallel Participation Structures,

CEO Publication G 88-3 (116). Center for Effective Organizations, USC School 
of Business Administration:  Los Angeles. CA.

2 3 8

Mohrman, Susan A.  1993. A Perspective on Empowerment. CEO Publication G 93-6 

(226), Center for Effective Organizations. USC School of Business 
Administration:  Los Angeles. CA.

Morley. Louise.  1995. Theorizing Empowerment in the UK Public Services. 

Empowerment in Organizations. 3(3), 35-41.

Neilsen. Eric H.  1984. Becoming an O P Practitioner. Prentice-Hall. Inc.: Enghvood 

Cliffs, NJ.

Neilsen, Eric H.  1986. Empowerment Strategies:  Balancing Authority and

Responsibility.  In S. Srivastva and Associates (eds.) Executive Power. 
Jossey-Bass:  San Francisco.

Neumann, Jean E.  1989. Why People Don't Participate in Organizational Change. 

Research in  Organizational Change and Development. Vol.  3,  181-212.

Oakley. Ed, and Krug, Doug.  1991. Enlightened Leadership: Getting to the Heart of 

Change. Simon and Schuster: NY.

Paluch. Jim.  1996. 5  Important Things. Executive Books, Mechanicsburg:  PA.

Pasmore. William A.  1994. Creating Strategic Change. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.: NY.

Pierce, Jon L., Gardner, Donald G., Cummings, Larry L. and  Dunham, Randall B.  1989. 

Organization-Based Self-Esteem: Construct Definition, Measurement, and 
Validation. Academy of Management Journal. 32(3). 622-648.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Porter, Lyman W.  1961. A Study of Perceived Need Satisfactions in  Bottom and 

Middle Management Jobs. Journal of Applied Psychology. 45(1).  1-10.

2 3 9

Pyle. Laura Anne.  1989. Resistance to Participative Work Systems: A Test of the

Threat-Risiditv Hipothesis.  Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.  University of 
Michigan.  Ann Arbor. MI.

Quinn.  Robert E.  1996. Deep Change:  Discovering the Leader Within.  Jossey-Bass 

Publi: hers: San Francisco. CA.

Robins. Harvey, and Finley. Michael.  1996. Whv Change Doesn't Work.  Peterson's: 

Princeton.  NJ.

Rokeach, Milton.  1960. The Open and Closed Mind:  Investigations into the Nature 

of Belief Systems and Personality Systems. Basic Books. Inc.:  NY.

Rotter. Julian B.  1966. Generalized Expectancies for Internal Versus External Control 

of Reinforcement. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied.
80(1).  1-28.

Schein,  Edgar H.  1978. Career Dynamics. Addison-Wesley: CA.

Schein. Edgar H.  1985. Organization Culture and Leadership.  Jossey-Bass Publishers: 

San Francisco, CA.

Spreitzer, Gretchen M.  1995.  Psychological Empowerment in the Workplace:

Dimensions. Measurement, and Validation. Academy of Management Journal. 
38(5),  1442-1465.

Spreitzer, Gretchen M.  1996. Social Structural Characteristics of Psychological 

Empowerment. Academy of Management Journal. 39(2), 483-504.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


Spreitzer, Gretchen M., and Quinn, Robert E.  1996. Empowering Middle Managers to 

be Transformational Leaders. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 32 (3), 
237-261.

2 4 0

Stewart. Forrest.  1996. Transfer Benchmarking Strategies from Other Industries. Power. 

March, pp. 44,46. 97.

Walton. Richard E., and Schlesinger. Leonard A.  1979. Do Supervisors Thrive in 

Participative Work Systems?  Organizational Dynamics. Winter, 25-38.

Weick, Karl E.  1995. Sensemaking in Organizations. Sage Publications:  CA.

Weidenbaum. Murray.  1995. A New Social Contract for the American Workplace. 

Challenge, January-February. 51-55.

Wellins, Richard and George, Jill.  1991. The Key to Self-Directed Teams, Training and 

Development Journal. April, 26-31.

White, Robert W.  1975. Lives in Progress.  Holt, Rinehart and Winston:  NY.

Wilson. John P.  1989. Trauma. Transformation and Healing.  Brunner/Mazel, Inc.: NY.

Zell, Deone.  1997. Changing by Design:  Organizational Innovation at Hewlett-Packard. 

ELR Press:  Ithaca, NY.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


241

VITA

Education 

B.S..  Psychology:
University of Maryland. College Park.  MD,  1985 

M.S.,  Applied Psychology:
Stevens  Institute of Technology,  Hoboken, NJ.  1988 

Ph.D.. Organizational Behavior:
Case Western Reserve  University. Cleveland.  OH.  1998

Honors 

Psi Chi

Phi Beta Kappa 

Sigma Xi

Golden Key National  Honor Society

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


242

Eric H.  Neilsen
P 'Z tesscr of C ’g jr.tza r.cn c.i  Beks'.:cr 
D :rc::oi:  M aster c;  scien ce  :r.  Jrgsr.izsr.cn  
O c. e.c rm em   sr.d  Ar.ai-. its  P r o -a m

3.A.  Prr.ceren  University  1965 
MA.  Harvard  U'r.iversttv.  1970 
PhD  Harvarc  University  1970

R e s c -tic i  in te rests

Crgsnaaticr.  development and change 

'.ndesir.a.  histcrr  US.  Linn  America.  Europe)

Management  interfaces  between  North and  South America 

Teaer.tng  rtteiests

iccta.  anaivsts  -  large  scale  social change  and  social theory 

Management  of crgar.tcanon developm ent ar.d change 
Htstcrv  at  incustnai  er.terpnse 

Selected  rutw.aiioits

'M ecem tsn .  Postmodernism  and  Managerial  Competencies:
A  M cctcisccurse  Reading."  in  Postmodern  Management and 
Or;ar.:zar.sn  Theory  -D  3oje.  R.  G ephan and T.  Thatchankery. 
Editors  Thousand  Oaks. CA.  Sage  Publications.  1996 

An  Err.cgv  ::  Agency .Arrangements:  Mortality of Savings and 
'-car.  Associations  1960-67”  .w ith  M.  Rao1. A.dm:r.isirar.\e 
i.te -o :  Quartern..  Volume  37.  1992

Creating  a  aureau-Adhocracy  Integrating  Standardiced 
an.c  Innovative  rer.ices  m a  Professional Workgroup'  '.-.nth 
D  Eai.ev  Ht.ir.ar. Reianora.  Volume  *5.  Num ber 7.  1992

'? inoi.ng an.c  Developing Tomorrows  Top  Managers"  .'with  H. 
Ccher.  Come::  Herei ana Restaurant Admmtstrar.cn  Quarterly. 
C cm eil  University  Spr.r.g  1988

The  r im e r   beginmacv  Nexus:  A  Thick  D escnpnon'  'with M. 
Roc  Acc-iem'.  .■• Mar.agcmerr Review  12  i3). Julv  1987

•..:.:'e"-:.  t” ."essi.'v.i:  .tern mes.

A c .: . —  Scare 

'■■:np'c:'tt .Management  and  Leadership 

Scare  o:  Direriors  Crgar.icatior.ai  Behavior  Teaching Society 
Ediicr.ai  Scare  \".nrc:  of O rgsmzar.cnai  Change Management

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without  perm ission.


243

Donald M. Wolfe
? rj/e s ijr  c f C r iz K Z s z o n d .  S tk a v tjr

3A.  L'.uversitv of Illinois.  1952 
5.1A.  University  of Michigan.  1955 
PhD.  University of Michigan.  I960

Rcscarcii  internes.

Conflict  resolution

Personal grouch

Social intervention
Care:: patterns

T e a c h in g   in te rests

Career anc self-assessment

Personaiitv thecrc and  developm ent  processes

Researcr. design  ar.d technique  of data  collection  and  analysis

S e le c te d   p u b lic a tio n s

The  Contextua.  impact  of Social  Support Across  Race  and 
Gender  Implications  for Afr.can-Amer.can  '.Vomer,  in  the 
Adrxpiace"  ,»*.th  D  Saiiev  and  C.  Wolfe;. Journo:  at Sloa n 
Studies.  26  ,3'  1996

Toward Gicbai  Integnty  Ethics  Challenges  for the  Field  of C D ’ 
■•v.m  ?  Johnson-.  Drjamcancn  Development Journal.  '.a  -■ 
Winter  1996

Career  Development.  Personal  Grouch and  Experiential 
Learning  ■ u-.th  D  Kolb)  in  Issues  in  Careers and  Human 
R esource Den-iermcr: -J  Spr.r.ger.  Editor';.  W ashington.  DC 
A5TD  Sesearcr.  ier.es  15).  i9 6 0

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


244

Vanessa U.  Druskat
A ssista n t  Protestor or  O rgan ization al  Eehavior

3A.  Indiana  University.  1562 
NLA.  Colum bia  University.  1566 
PhD.  3oston  University.  1555

Research  interests:

Effectiveness  m  self-managing work  teams 

Leadership  o f self-managing work teams 
Effective  group  processes 

W om en  m  leadership

Psychological  sen se o f ownership  in organisations 

Teaching  interests:

Organisational behavior 
Managerial assessm ent and developm ent 

Work  team effectiveness 
Interpersonal  skills  for managers 

Selected publications:

'Ge.ncer and  Leadership  Style.  Transformational and 
Transactional  Leadership m the  P.oman  Cathoiic C hurch.' 
Leadership Quarterly.  12  v2).  155-

"Team  C om petencies  m Self-Managing  Work  Teams:
Processes  That  Make  a  Difference.'  mar.uscr.pt submitted 
for publication.  199T

'Consequences  and  Timing of Deveiopir.er.tui  Peer Appraisals 
in  Seif-Managing  Work Groups'  . with  S  Wolff),  manuscr.pt 
submitted  for  publication.  1597
'Effectiveness  m  Self-Managing  Work  Teams.  Increasing  Team 
Viabthtv Through  Internal and  External  Boundary  Management, 
unpublished  m anusenpt.  1997

i"  unis

Recipient.  1592  h'enr.eih  E.  Clark  ?.esearch  Award.  Center for 
Creative  Leacersnip  -.for  Ger.cer and  Leadership  Styie  '

R eproduced  with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited without perm ission.


A.  Dale  Flowers 
A ssociate  professor  c<  Operations  M anagem ent 

£i

*

SS.  Indiana  University.  1967 
MBA.  Indiana  ITmverstv.  1970 
DBA.  Indiana  L’mversitv.  1977

Research  interests:

O perations  planning ar.d  control  systems 
Quality control ar.d  management 

Applied operations  management 

Operational  forecasting 

Production  planning  and  scheduling 
Enterprise  resource piannmg

Teaching  interests:

Production/operations  management 
Quality m anagem ent  and  control 
M anagement  scter.ee 

Operations  research

Selected publications:

'The  M odernization  o f Mer.t  Brass.  '  Interfaces.  Special  Issue 
for Edeiman Atvard  Papers. Volume  23.  Number  1. January - 
February  1993

"An Application  of Computer  Simulation  to Quality Control  m 
M anufacturing’  •.utth J  Cole'.  i7E  Transactors.  Volume  17. 
September  1985.  repr.r.ted in  •Questfar Quaiit:  Managing the 
Total System  iM .  Sepehn.  Editor',  industrial  Er.gmeenng and 
Management  Press.  1957
The STORM  Mir.i  R e'cerce Manual  ’or  Personal  Version 3 2  (.with 
H.  Em m ons.  C.  Kkct  and  K.  Matr.urh  Prentice  Hail.  i996
'A  Sim ulauon  Studv o f Sm oothing Constant  Limits  for an 
Adaptive  Forecasting  Svstem.’ journal  of Operations  Management. 
Volume  1.  Novem ber  1950

Awards:

Franz  Edeim an  Emails;  Award.  1992

I IE  Transactors  D evelopm ent  and  Application Award.  1981
Nominated  for  Lar.chester  Pnze  for  STORM  software.  1989
lusted  in  Whos  lin o  :n  TeTr.noiog.  Today.  Arr.er.car.  Men 
and  Women  o f Science:  W e e s   Wno  :n   E n r.n e e n n g ;  Leading 
Consultants  in  Technoice-.

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.


IMAGE  EVALUATION

TEST  TARGET  (Q A -3 )

L i  _
L.

1.0

l.l

1.25

1.4 

I 2.5

2.0

.8 '

1.6

150mm

IM/1GE . Inc
1653 East Main Street 
Rochester. NY 14609  USA 
Phone: 716/482-0300 
Fax: 716/288-5989

O 1993. Applied Image. Inc.. All Rights Reserved

R eproduced with  perm ission  of the  copyright  owner.  Further reproduction  prohibited  without  perm ission.

