 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTERNATIONAL REVIEW, 2004, 

53

 (2), 311–327

5321000Original Articles
SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY
Subramony ET AL.
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Oxford, UK
APPSApplied Psychology: an International Review
0269-994X
© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004
April 2004

Employee and Customer Perceptions of 

Service Quality in an Indian Firm

Mahesh Subramony, Terry A. Beehr* and 

C. Merle Johnson

Central Michigan University, USA

Nous présentons un modèle complétant les conceptions existantes de la rela-
tion entre employés et clients dans la domaine des services qui propose que la
perception de l’efﬁcacité du service par l’agent comme prédictive de l’efﬁcacité
du service perçue par le client. L’efﬁcacité du service se réfère à la perception
qu’ont  les  agents  de  répondre  ou  même  d’aller  au-delà  des  attentes  relatives
au  service  de  la  part  de  l’organisation  et  des  clients  exteriors.  Nous  avons
enquêté  la  relation  entre  l’efﬁcacité  du  service,  la  maturité  de  l’équipe,  et  la
qualité du service dans la ﬁliale indienne d’une organisation internationale de
produits de bureaux. Les agents de service appartenant à 18 équipes autonomes
ont classé leur propre efﬁcacité à répondre aux attentes de la direction et des
clients extérieurs. Les donées préexistantes sur la maturité de ces équipes étaient
recueillies  auprès  l’organisation.  114  clients  de  la  même  société,  choisi  au
hazard, évaluaient la qualité du service fourni, leur satisfaction de ce service et
les effets attendus par le client. Nous avons trouvé des liaisons positives entre
l’efﬁcacité du service, la maturité du groupe et la qualité de service. Ces result-
ants servent à enrichir la littérature reliant les comportements des employés aux
effets sur les clients pour les sociétés operant dans les economies émergeantes.

We proposed a model complementing existing conceptions of the relationship
between  service  employees  and  their  customers,  that  proposes  service  effect-
iveness  as  an  employee-level  predictor  of  customer-perceived  service  quality.
Service  effectiveness  refers  to  employees’  perceptions  of  meeting  or  even
exceeding  the  service-related  expectations  of  the  organisation  and  external
customers.  We  investigated  the  relationship  between  service  effectiveness,
team  maturity,  and  service  quality  in  an  Indian  branch  of  an  international
ofﬁce products organisation. Service employees belonging to 18 self-managed
teams  rated  their  own  effectiveness  in  meeting  the  expectations  of  manage-
ment and external customers. Pre-existing team maturity data for these teams

* Address for correspondence: Terry A. Beehr, Director, PhD Program in I/O Psychology,

Central Michigan University, Mt. Pleasant, MI 48859, USA. Email: beehr1ta@cmich.edu

The  authors  thank  Gerald  R.  Ferris,  Steve  M.  Jex,  and  Stephanie  Morlan  for  their  advice
and suggestions on the study. Some of these data were presented at the annual meeting of the
Midwest Academy of Management. Mahesh Subramony is now at the University of Wisconsin
at Oshkosh.

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published by Blackwell Publishing,
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.


 

 
 

 

 
 

312

SUBRAMONY ET AL.

were obtained from the organisation. Simultaneously, 114 randomly selected
customers  of  the  same  company  evaluated  the  quality  of  service  provided,
their satisfaction with the service, and intended customer outcomes. We found
positive  links  between  service  effectiveness,  group  maturity,  and  service
quality. These results also help extend the literature linking employee behaviors
with customer outcomes to companies operating in emerging economies.

INTRODUCTION

There is an increasing body of empirical research supporting the notion that
customer  evaluations  of  service  quality  are  inﬂuenced  to  a  large  extent  by
the way they are treated by front-line service employees. Speciﬁcally, there
is evidence that (a) employees in front-line or external boundary roles and
their customers perceived the quality of service similarly, and employee per-
ceptions  of  organisational  service-related  practices  and  procedures  (service
climate) are strongly correlated with service quality (Schneider, Wheeler, &
Cox, 1992; Schneider & Bowen, 1985, 1995; Schneider, Parkington, & Buxton,
1980; Johnson, 1996), and (b) employee attitudes such as customer focus and
quality  emphasis  are  positively  related  to  customer  satisfaction  (Johnson,
1996; Ryan, Schmit, & Johnson, 1996). However, the directionality of this
relationship is not as clear. For instance, Ryan et al. (1996) warn that there
is  insufﬁcient  support  for  the  “popular  wisdom”  that  employee  attitudes
cause customer satisfaction. On the other hand, regardless of the inadequate
evidence for this hypothesis, organisations have been designing and imple-
menting  employee-level  interventions  while  aiming  at  improving  customer
outcomes (e.g. Albrecht & Zemke, 1985; Berry & Parasuraman, 1994).

Both  common  sense  and  research  (e.g.  Rafaeli,  1989;  Rafaeli  &  Sutton,
1990)  testify,  however,  to  the  fact  that  customers  and  employees  inﬂuence
each other’s attitudes and perceptions. In the simplest case, employee atti-
tudes  and  behaviors  inﬂuence  customer  responses,  which  in  turn,  further
inﬂuence employee attitudes and behaviors. For example, an employee who
has  a  positive  “customer-oriented”  attitude  might  act  in  ways  that  satisfy
the customer. The customer’s positive reactions (“thank you” or a smile) are
likely to reinforce this attitude, or the lack of a positive reaction from the
customer could negatively inﬂuence this employee’s attitude.

While there is evidence demonstrating the link between employee variables
and  service  quality  among  Western  European  and  North  American  busi-
nesses, there are few empirical studies generalising this link to countries with
emerging economies. Consistent with a global trend, India has experienced
steady  growth  in  the  service  sector.  The  service  sector  accounts  for  more
than half of India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), increasing from 43.7 per
cent in 1990–1 to 51.2 per cent in 1998–9 (ﬁgures based on studies by the
Reserve Bank of India; IndiaOneStop, 2000). This rise in the service sector’s
share  in  GDP  marks  a  structural  shift,  from  a  primarily  agriculture-based

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY

313

to an industrial- and service-based economy. Service quality is, therefore, an
issue  with  strategic  importance  in  India.  This  study  was  conducted  in  an
Indian ofﬁce products ﬁrm within the context of extensive market reforms in
that country (see Kaushik, 1997; Vaghul, 1994). At the time of this study, the
ofﬁce  products  business  in  India  was  experiencing  signiﬁcant  competition
from new foreign entrants. Customer satisfaction was, therefore, becoming
a  key  focus.  In  addition  to  testing  a  particular  model,  an  important  con-
tribution of the study is that it tests the generalisability of the link between
organisational  and  customer  outcomes  to  emerging  economies  in  non-
Western cultures.

SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND SERVICE QUALITY

In  this  study,  we  investigated  the  relationship  between  service  effective-
ness and service quality. Employees’ service effectiveness can be deﬁned as
their perceptions of meeting and exceeding the service-related expectations
of both external customers and the organisation. Service effectiveness is a
relatively  new  way  of  conceptualising  the  organisational  or  employee  pre-
dictor of service quality that has theoretical grounding in role theory (Ilgen
& Hollenbeck, 1991), which views organisations as systems of roles (Katz &
Kahn,  1978).  Roles  are  sets  of  expectations  confronting  every  employee.
The  sources  of  these  expectations  are  various  role-senders  or  constituents
both within (e.g. managers, other employees) and outside the organisation
(e.g. customers). The service providers in the present study dealt with both
intra-  and  inter-organisational  boundaries  (Cross,  Yan,  &  Louis,  2000).
Effectiveness,  then,  is  the  employees’  perceptions  of  meeting  or  exceeding
the expectations of relevant customers both inside and outside the organisa-
tion, i.e. internal and external effectiveness. In our view, service effectiveness
goes beyond existing conceptualisations of the employee end of service quality
by (a) specifying that customer perceptions of service quality can be predicted
by a comprehensive employee measure that takes into account both customer
and  organisational  expectations,  (b)  deﬁning  this  employee  measure  in  a
way that reﬂects the role played by “expectations”, consistent with service
quality literature (note that service quality is popularly deﬁned as meeting
and exceeding customer expectations), and (c) avoiding the difﬁculties posed
by the measurement of employee attitudes, which could be reﬂections rather
than predictors of customer attitudes/behaviors (Ryan et al., 1996).

Internal Service Effectiveness
Zeithaml, Parasuraman, and Berry (1990) report that organisations provid-
ing high quality service have service expectations from their employees that
are  congruent  with  customer  expectations.  These  companies,  then,  design

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 
 
 

314

SUBRAMONY ET AL.

and  implement  service  delivery  systems  that  are  consistent  with  customer
expectations. There is also evidence that human resources policies of organ-
isations that provide high quality service, support and reinforce customer-
focused  employee  behaviors  (e.g.  Schneider  &  Bowen,  1992;  Schneider,
Gunnarson,  &  Niles-Jolly,  1994).  It  can  be  inferred  that  in  such  organ-
isations,  employees’  effectiveness  in  meeting  organisational  goals  and
expectations would positively inﬂuence customer perceived quality of service.
Meeting internal management expectations would in a sense mean meeting
customer expectations. Conversely, in companies where management goals
and  expectations  are  not  congruent  with  customer  expectations,  employee
behaviors  generally  would  not  be  positively  related  to  positive  customer
affect and outcomes. Thus, a good employee-level predictor of service quality
is  the  extent  to  which  employees  meet  and  exceed  their  organisation’s
customer satisfaction and service quality goals and expectations. A positive
relationship between employees’ internal service effectiveness and customers’
service  quality  perceptions  indicates  that  the  organisation  has  service
expectations  from  employees  that  are  in  tune  with  customer  expectations.
In  this  case,  high  service  quality  might  indicate  that  the  organisation  has
employees who have the ability to meet these expectations and/or provides
enough support and resources to enable employees to meet and exceed cus-
tomer expectations. Low service quality would mean the opposite. However, it
is important to remember that other parts of the service delivery system, such
as use of technology and other operational components, need to be effective
as well for ultimate service to be of high quality (Chase & Bowen, 1991).

Hypothesis 1
. Employee perceptions of effectiveness in meeting service-related
expectations  of  the  organisation  will  positively  predict  customer  perceptions
of service quality.

Organisations aiming for high service quality have increasingly used self-
managed work teams (Hackman, 1986). These teams possess the discretion
to  set  operational  goals,  distribute  tasks  and  responsibilities  among  team
members,  and  receive  feedback  and  rewards  based  on  group  rather  than
individual performance (Polley & Van Dyne, 1994). The combination of the
motivational  and  social  support  characteristics  of  these  teams  has  been
theorised to result in superior performance outcomes (Bettenhausen, 1991).
In general, teams have been viewed as going through predictable and linear
stages of development or maturity. For instance, Tuckman’s (1965) model
in its most basic form views teams as going through four stages of develop-
ment. These stages are: (1) forming, characterised by preliminary agreement
on  core  goals  and  roles;  (2)  storming,  which  involves  disagreements  and
conﬂicts  related  to  the  execution  of  these  goals  and  roles;  (3)  norming,
involving coming to a consensus regarding roles and responsibilities as well

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY

315

as goals and strategies; and (4) performing, which is the endpoint where the
group  is  operating  at  the  level  of  optimal  effectiveness.  Although  linear
models  of  team  development  have  been  criticised  for  representing  team
development as a set of rigid chronological stages (Hackman, 1990), there
is  little  doubt  that  teams  go  through  some  kind  of  developmental  stages.
This  development  might  not,  however,  be  either  strictly  chronological,  i.e.
some  teams  might  reach  higher  levels  of  maturity  than  others  within  the
same time period, or be rigid, i.e. all teams might not go through all stages.
Regardless of the existence of predictable team development stages, the way
the team functions is expected to be important for its effectiveness.

There  is  very  little  literature  relating  team  development  to  customer
outcomes. We propose that more mature teams, i.e. those in later stages of
development,  would  provide  employees  with  social  support,  mentoring,
guidance, and feedback. This would result in the achievement of team goals,
which in turn would reﬂect positively on the employee’s own performance.

Hypothesis  2
.  Team  maturity  will  positively  predict  employee  perceptions  of
service  effectiveness  in  meeting  the  service-related  expectations  internally  in
the organisation

.

External Service Effectiveness
Service employees occupy external boundary-spanning positions that allow
them to understand customers’ service expectations (e.g. Schneider & Bowen,
1995).  Employee  perceptions  of  meeting  and  exceeding  these  expectations
can  be  termed  external  service  effectiveness.  High  external  effectiveness
would  indicate  that  employees  perceive  themselves  as  meeting  customer
expectations. The reverse is true when external service effectiveness is low.
If these effectiveness perceptions predict service quality, it could be inferred
that employees are aware of customer expectations. In this case, high service
quality might indicate that employees, in addition, have the abilities and the
resources  to  meet  customer  expectations,  while  low  service  quality  would
mean the opposite. This is so even though other factors such as the perform-
ance of competing organisations, and organisational factors besides service
employee behaviors, play a very important role in inﬂuencing service quality
perceptions and customer satisfaction (Zeithaml et al., 1990).

Hypothesis 3
. Employees’ perceived effectiveness in meeting the service-related
expectations  of  external  customers  will  positively  predict  customers’  percep-
tions of service quality

.

Based  on  ﬁndings  from  service  marketing  literature,  we  propose  that
customer perceived service quality will, in turn, positively impact customer
satisfaction and key customer outcomes such as loyalty, referral, and value

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

316

SUBRAMONY ET AL.

FIGURE 1. Conceptual model of the relationship between service effectiveness 
and service quality.

for  money  (Rust,  Zahorik,  &  Keiningham,  1994;  Taylor  &  Baker,  1994;
Zeithaml, Berry, & Parasuraman, 1996).

Hypothesis 4
customer satisfaction and key customer outcomes

. Customers’ perceptions of service quality will positively predict

.

Customer  satisfaction  is  expected  to  result  in  important  customer  out-
comes such as the belief that they received good value for their money, future
customer loyalty (e.g. repeat business), and in customers recommending the
ﬁrm to others.

Hypothesis 5

. Customer satisfaction will predict important customer outcomes.

A  conceptual  model  summarising  all  ﬁve  hypotheses  is  presented  in
Figure  1.  It  has  a  single-arrow  for  each  hypothesis.  In  addition,  although
not  a  formal  hypothesis,  the  double  arrow  between  internal  and  external
effectiveness  indicates  that  these  two  forms  of  effectiveness  are  correlated.
This acknowledges that organisations intend and try to have these two types
of effectiveness congruent with each other.

METHOD

Research Site
This organisation was the Indian division of a US ﬁrm, and manufactured
document-related machines (e.g. copiers, fax machines, and printers). In the
language of the company, the front-line employees who repair and maintain
the customers’ machines were called service engineers. These service engineers
were organised into self-managed teams of 6–12 people, each team reporting
to a customer service manager. Each service engineer was responsible for a

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY

317

geographic customer patch and tended to have “service relationships” with
their  customers,  i.e.  each  customer  tended  to  deal  with  the  same  service
employee  during  each  service  episode  (Gutek,  Bhappu,  Liao-Troth,  &
Cherry,  1999).  All  135  employees  participating  in  the  present  study  were
male. The study’s sample size was limited by the number of customers who
participated, however (
n

=
 114 customers).

 

Procedure
Two weeks before questionnaire administration, letters were sent from the
=
 20), explaining the purpose
n
 
ﬁrst author to all customer service managers (
of  the  study  and  seeking  cooperation.  They  were  then  mailed  a  packet
consisting  of  a  letter  outlining  the  study,  the  two  survey  instruments,  and
cover  letters  for  the  customers.  They  were  asked  to  (1)  read  the  letters  to
their  service  engineer  teams,  (2)  distribute  surveys  to  the  engineer  teams,
(3)  randomly  select  10  customers  from  their  local  company  database,  and
(4) allot one or two customers to each group member for administering the
customer survey, ensuring that no service engineer administered the survey
to his own customer.

Service  engineers  completed  their  own  surveys  and  administered  the
customer  survey  (writing  the  name  of  their  group,  its  maturity  level  as
assessed by quality audit teams, number of group members, and customer
patch  name  on  each  survey).  These  surveys  were  then  sealed  in  envelopes
and given to a designated member of the team, who put all of them into a
packet, sealed it, and mailed it to the ﬁrst author. Responses were received
from 18 of the 27 groups (67%) to which they were sent. The response rate
at  the  individual  level  was  about  60  per  cent.  Thus,  the  response  rates  at
both the group and individual level met or exceeded the 60 per cent norm
and  was  within  the  range  recommended  by  Baruch  (1999).  A  total  of  135
service  engineers  and  114  customers  responded  from  the  four  customer
patches in the sample.

Measures

Data from Service Employees.

We conducted separate preliminary focus
group  interviews  with  four  service  engineer  groups  (
  7–10)  to  identify
the various components of service. Sample questions were: “What do your
external customers expect from you in your day to day work”, “What does
your customer service manager expect from you in your day to day work”,
“What do your senior managers expect from you in your day to day work?”
In  addition,  we  interviewed  three  customer  service  managers  to  whom  the
groups  reported  and  three  senior  managers  above  the  customer  service
managers to understand their expectations from the service engineers.

=

n

 

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

318

SUBRAMONY ET AL.

On  the  basis  of  these  interviews,  an  instrument  was  designed  to  assess
employee perceptions of effectiveness in meeting both internal and external
expectations. The External Effectiveness Scale consisted of 16 items assess-
ing service engineers’ perceived effectiveness in meeting the expectations of
external customers. This was measured using a seven-point Likert scale with
the  endpoints  labeled  “not  effective”  and  “very  effective”.  Sample  items
were  “attending  to  customer  complaints  at  the  promised  time”,  “overall
knowledge  of  machine  repair  and  maintenance”,  and  “behaving  politely
with the customer”. Cronbach’s alpha for this subscale was .83, indicating
good internal consistency. The arithmetic mean of all responses on the items
in this scale was calculated to obtain an external service effectiveness index.
The Internal Service Effectiveness scale consisted of seven items assessing
service  engineers’  perceived  effectiveness  in  meeting  the  expectations  of
their  immediate  managers  and  of  senior  management,  and  they  were  also
rated on a seven-point “effectiveness” scale. Sample items include “achiev-
ing performance targets” and “reducing cost of quality”. Coefﬁcient alpha
was  .90,  indicating  good  internal  consistency.  The  arithmetic  mean  of  all
responses  on  the  items  in  this  scale  was  calculated  to  obtain  an  internal
service effectiveness index.

Data from Quality Audit Teams.

The company was focusing on the use
of  team-style  organisation,  and  internal  “quality  audit  teams”  routinely
rated each service group on a four-point group maturity index developed at
the  company.  The  index  was  based  on  Tuckman’s  (1965)  maturity  stages:
forming, storming, norming, and performing. The quality audit teams had
been  trained  to  recognise  group  maturity  levels  in  the  company’s  group
organisation development (OD) program. These ratings were done as part
of the company’s normal operations and were known to each team. Overall
ratings of each team’s group maturity level were obtained from the teams.
The  audit  teams  did  not  have  access  to  any  survey  data  from  external
customers, and their ratings were dictated by their own observations of the
team’s performance and other internal organisational measures.

Data from Customers.

Data on customers’ perceptions of the quality of
service provided by the company, overall customer satisfaction with service, and
customer behavioral intentions were assessed using a second questionnaire.
The Service Quality Scale consisted of 19 items adapted from Parasuraman,
Zeithaml, and Berry (1994). This scale assessed customer perceptions of the
extent  to  which  the  company  met  their  service-related  expectations  in  ﬁve
service  quality  categories:  tangibles,  reliability,  responsiveness,  assurance,
and empathy. Sample items included “perform service right the ﬁrst time”,
“be  ready  to  respond  to  customer  requests”,  “provide  a  sense  of  safety
and  assurance  in  all  transactions”,  “understand  the  speciﬁc  needs  of  the

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY

319

customer”, and “have modern looking equipment”. Responses were made on
a  seven-point  Likert  scale  with  the  endpoints  labeled  “very  characteristic”
and “very uncharacteristic” (of company service representatives). The items
did not factor well into the ﬁve subscales, however, and the median correla-
tion  among  them  was  quite  high  (
  .54),  therefore  it  was  decided  to
combine them into a single index. The alpha was .92. The arithmetic mean
of all responses on the items was calculated to obtain a service quality index.
Customer satisfaction was measured by the item, “Overall, how satisﬁed
are  you  with  the  services  provided  by  (company  name)?”,  using  a  seven-
point response scale with the endpoints labeled “very dissatisﬁed” and “very
satisﬁed”. The use of only one item for this measure is a possible limitation
of the study, but it should be noted that this variable has often been meas-
ured with only one item in previous studies (e.g. Zeithaml et al., 1996).

=

r

 

The  Customer  Outcomes  Scale  assessed  customers’  intentions  to  remain
loyal to the company (“Given an option would you still like to do business
with  __”),  their  intention  to  recommend  the  company  to  others  (“Would
you recommend __ to a friend seeking products/services of the kind offered
by  the  company?”),  and  customers’  estimates  of  receiving  value  for  their
money (“Do you think __ offers value for money?”). These were measured
on three-point scales labeled “yes”, “maybe”, and “no”. Alpha for this scale
was .81. The arithmetic mean of all responses on the items in this scale was
calculated to obtain a customer outcomes index.

n

Analyses
The 
  for  the  analyses  was  the  number  of  customers  (114).  Anonymity
prevented  the  identiﬁcation  of  the  individual  service  engineers  in  the
study.  They  did  identify  their  teams,  however,  and  we  knew  which  team
each customer’s service engineer belonged to. For analyses relating service
engineers’  data  to  customer  data,  anonymity  posed  a  problem.  Out  of
necessity, the solution was that each customer was assigned the mean score
from questionnaires of all service engineers who were members of the team
serving  that  customer.  This  probably  introduced  some  error  into  the  data
from service engineers, possibly reducing the strength of some correlations.
Some  consistency  of  responses  of  service  engineers  within  teams  was
indicated,  however,  by  a  mean 
  of  .76  for  internal  effectiveness  and  a
mean 

 of .86 for external effectiveness among the 18 groups.

r
wg

We tested a path analysis model based on the conceptual model in Figure 1.
Analysis  was  carried  out  using  AMOS  3.6  (Arbuckle,  1997).  In  addition
to parameter estimates, we estimated model-ﬁt indices to compare the pro-
posed  or  implied  model  with  (1)  the  observed  set  of  relations  between  the
same variables in the obtained sample, and (2) a baseline model (a model of
no-relations or a fully saturated model). The standardised Root Mean Square

r
wg

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 
 
 

320

SUBRAMONY ET AL.

Residual  (RMSR)  estimates  the  discrepancy  between  the  proposed  model
and the observed relationships between the variables in the sample. It is the
square root of the average squared discrepancy between the estimated and
sample  variance/covariance.  The  chi-square  test  was  used  to  assess  the
signiﬁcance  of  the  discrepancy  between  the  hypothesised  model  and  the
sample covariances. Both the RMSR and the chi-square need to be small,
with  the  latter  being  non-signiﬁcant  in  order  to  reﬂect  good  model-ﬁt.  On
the other hand, three other goodness of ﬁt indices calculated here: Goodness
of Fit Index (GFI), Parsimonious Goodness of Fit Index (PGFI), and the
Comparative  Fit  Index  (CFI),  are  considered  better  as  they  increase  to
approach unity.

RESULTS

Hypothesis Testing
Descriptive  statistics  and  correlations  between  all  the  employee-perception
variables are in Table 1. Group maturity is correlated with internal service
effectiveness, internal effectiveness is correlated with service quality, service
quality is correlated with customer satisfaction and customer outcomes, and
customer satisfaction is correlated with customer outcomes, supporting Hypo-
theses 1, 3, 4, and 5. The correlation between external service effectiveness
and service quality was not signiﬁcant, however, lending no support to the
second  hypothesis.  As  expected,  internal  and  external  service  effectiveness
were positively correlated, suggesting that the company may have achieved
some  congruence  between  internal  and  external  service  expectations  and
effectiveness. In addition, group maturity was related to service quality, cus-
tomer satisfaction, and customer outcomes.

Descriptive Statistics, Alphas, and Correlations between Variables 

 TABLE 1

in the Study (N = 114)

Variable

Standard 
Deviation

Mean

1

2

3

4

5

6

1. Internal service effectiveness
2. External service effectiveness
3. Group maturity
4. Service quality
5. Overall customer satisfaction
6. Customer outcomes

5.67
5.88
2.46
5.68
5.78
2.72

.37
.28
.83
.87
1.05
.43

.90
.33**
.43**
.23*
.03
.04

.83
.13
−.02
.07
.17

Note: Coefﬁcient alphas are on the diagonal, in bold.
* p < .05; ** p < .01.

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.

−

.26** .92
.19*
.19*

−

.52**
.37** .58** .81


 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY

321

FIGURE 2. Parameter estimates for path analysis of the model of the 
relationship between service effectiveness and service quality. 
** p < .01.

Path analysis was also used to test the hypotheses. The standardised path
coefﬁcients for the path model are presented in Figure 2. Again, four of the
ﬁve hypotheses were supported—all except for the hypothesis that external
service effectiveness predicts service quality.

Model Fit
If the hypotheses and associated reasoning are correct, not only should the
path coefﬁcients support the hypotheses, but the model as a whole should
ﬁt  the  data.  We  used  ﬁve  indices  to  assess  model  ﬁt:  Chi  Square,  Root
Mean Square Residual (RMSR), Goodness of Fit Index (GFI), Parsimonious
Goodness of Fit Index (PGFI), and Comparative Fit Index (CFI).
=
 13.644, 

.05;
RMSR of .04 approaches zero; and GFI (.96) and CFI (.95) approach unity.
Thus,  interpreting  the  pattern  of  ﬁt  indices,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the
hypothesised model adequately ﬁts the obtained sample. It should be noted
that PGFI, a parsimonious goodness of ﬁt index was low (.32), perhaps due
to the fact that this index penalises small numbers of degrees of freedom.

The hypothesised model ﬁts the data: 

=
 114) 

χ
2
(df 

=
 7, 

N
 

> 

p
 

DISCUSSION

Overall, the results support the proposed model. The data are consistent with
a model proposing that group maturity predicts internal service effectiveness,
that  internal  and  external  service  effectiveness  predict  service  quality,  and
that  service  quality  directly  predicts  customer  satisfaction  and  indirectly
predicts customer outcomes such as loyalty and recommending the company
to  others.  The  model  ﬁts  the  data  and  indicates  that  a  focus  on  group,

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

322

SUBRAMONY ET AL.

effectiveness,  customer,  and  quality  variables  may  result  in  favorable  out-
comes for the company. Furthermore, the speciﬁc results regarding internal
service effectiveness and group maturity suggest that the way employees act
toward  each  other  is  important  in  achieving  outcomes  that  the  customer
likes,  consistent  with  employee  group  development  theory  (e.g.  Tuckman,
1965). This is one of the few times this type of model has been shown to be
feasible  outside  the  United  States  and  Western  Europe.  It  suggests  the
viability of customer-oriented theories and programs in countries with emer-
ging  economies,  even  ones  undergoing  economic  reform  as  in  the  present
study (Kaushik, 1997). This is an important step in generalisability.

Internal service effectiveness predicts service quality better than external
service  effectiveness,  however.  A  positive  relationship  between  employees’
internal  service  effectiveness  and  customers’  service  quality  perceptions
indicates that the organisation has service expectations from employees that
are in tune with customer expectations. It is ironic that the results indicate
a probable discrepancy between the service expectations of front-line service
employees and their customers. Meeting the external or customer expecta-
tions  as  the  service  employee  perceives  them  does  not  result  in  customer
satisfaction,  while  meeting  higher  level  management’s  expectations  does.
This is contrary to expectations based on the fact that the front-line service
employees have external boundary-spanning roles (Katz & Kahn, 1978) in
which they deal directly with the customers. Although the study supports the
overall model, this speciﬁc result was not expected.

One  explanation  is  that  employees  seem  to  understand  and  meet  the
expectations  of  their  management,  which  may  actually  be  in  tune  with
customer expectations, but the employees probably view customer expecta-
tions differently from the way they really are. The organisation was facing
new competition at the time of the study, and management was promoting
a focus on both interpersonal processes with customers and service quality
(especially  service  reliability  and  speed;  as  in  Parasuraman,  Zeithaml,  &
Berry, 1994) in order to compete better. It may be that the customer focus
had been taken very seriously in upper management. This scenario presents
a favorable prognosis for customer and quality programs, because it would
mean  it  is  feasible  for  such  programs  to  succeed  in  informing  upper-level
decision-makers about their customer environments.

There  are  multiple  implications  of  the  ﬁnding  that  meeting  upper
management’s  expectations  is  a  better  predictor  of  customer  satisfaction
than the employees’ beliefs that they have met the customers’ expectations.
Common  wisdom  regarding  customer  orientation  suggests  that  employees
need to be in close contact with the customers. Taking this view, we might
suggest  that  the  service  engineers  need  more  frequent  or  closer  working
relationships with the external customers, so that they will understand the
customer expectations better. This will allow them to provide better quality

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY

323

service  and  satisfy  the  customers  better.  In  addition,  the  data  suggest  that
upper  management  might  also  have  important  knowledge  of  customer
desires. This would occur if upper management has processes in place that
allow  them  to  get  accurate  information  about  customers.  For  example,
quality  improvement  processes  and  the  company’s  market  research  efforts
may perform this function. The company had, at the time, some established
market research and customer feedback processes in place, consistent with
this interpretation. It could not be ascertained from the data whether or not
this  is  the  answer  to  the  most  puzzling  ﬁnding  of  the  study,  but  it  is  one
logical explanation.

The  service  employees  who  deal  directly  with  customers  and  actually
perform  the  service,  usually  at  the  customers’  location,  have  an  important
impact on customer evaluations of the service and the product. Good service
and  good  face-to-face  relations  with  the  customer  are  bound  to  have  an
impact on the customers’ overall evaluations of the company and its product,
and will affect their loyalty as repeat customers and as people who refer the
company  to  others.  Given  the  results  of  this  study  and  the  importance  of
customers  to  business,  future  research  on  this  topic  seems  warranted  and
timely.  Research  such  as  this,  done  in  ﬁeld  settings,  allows  researchers  to
learn from observation of practice, but the research also has relevance for
improving practice (e.g. Latham, 2001).

One  future  direction  for  research  concerns  the  impact  of  service  climate
(Schneider & Bowen, 1995). Elements of such climates have been shown to
be related to customer satisfaction in US studies, especially in service organ-
isations  (e.g.  Johnson,  1996).  The  present  study  did  not  include  climate
variables, but they might have been able to show why management’s expecta-
tions were well linked to customer satisfaction. If upper management held
stronger customer service oriented values, for example, this might have been
the key factor in explaining this result. Future research should address this
topic.

=
 6, 

Although  the  model  was  supported  by  the  data,  multiple  models  can
often  be  supported  in  a  single  data  set  (Loehlin,  1992).  Post-hoc  analyses
indicated that, although not hypothesised, the data would support a model
with a direct relationship from group maturity to service quality. This post-
=
 114) of 9.799, which was signiﬁcantly
hoc model had a chi-square (df 
better  than  the  chi-square  for  the  original  model  (difference  chi-square
with df = 1, N = 114, was 3.845, p < .05). The new path was also signiﬁcant
(.21,  p  <  .05).  This  suggests  a  greater  role  for  group  maturity  than  was
originally envisioned for predicting service quality. The maturity of the teams
may have a direct effect on the quality of service received by the customer,
conﬁrming  the  emphasis  that  some  companies  have  given  to  teamwork  in
recent years. Given the post-hoc nature of this relationship, it needs to be
conﬁrmed  by  future  research.  It  is  notable,  however,  that  a  relationship

N
 

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


324

SUBRAMONY ET AL.

between  group  maturity  and  service  quality  is  unlikely  to  be  explained  by
common  method  variance,  because  the  people  in  the  company  who  rated
the teams’ maturity had no contact with the customers who rated the service
quality. On the other hand, the people rating group maturity had access to
information  on  previous  customer  complaints  and  turnaround  time.  In
recent decades, businesses have increased the emphasis on group and team
work in their operations, but there has been little research on the importance
of team maturity for effective outcomes in real-world business organisations
(Guzzo  &  Shea,  1992).  These  data  suggest  that  future  research  on  work
teams should be directed toward the concept of group development.

Limitations and Strengths
The  research  method  was  neither  experimental  nor  longitudinal,  making
inferences  about  causality  tentative.  The  ﬁt  of  the  data  to  a  rational
theoretical model, however, tempers this limitation. The model makes sense
and comes from existing theory, belief, and practice in service industries. An
even  better  method  would  be  a  ﬁeld  experiment  in  which  the  company
would introduce service quality emphases to different parts of the company
at different times. While we were not able to inﬂuence the company to take
such measures, the model ﬁtting approach was a reasonable second choice
of method and provides some empirical evidence supporting our model.

Many factors might directly or indirectly impact service quality. However,
as  is  the  case  in  most  scientiﬁc  research,  we  tested  only  a  subset  of  these
variables.  The  variables  that  we  chose  as  predictors  of  service  quality  are
more “proximal” variables, i.e. those with relatively more direct relationships
with  service  quality.  In  our  judgment,  the  variables  in  this  study  have
explanatory and predictive power without compromising on the criterion of
parsimony. However, a larger research program in this area requires testing
the “distal” variables indirectly affecting service quality as well. One set of
such distal variables is the work design and human resource policies of the
organisation.  These  elements  of  the  organisation  might  affect  several  vari-
ables  in  the  model,  including  internal  and  external  effectiveness  and  the  rela-
tion between team maturity and effectiveness. Future research could examine
this  possibility,  ideally  by  examining  multiple  organisations  (because  that
would be necessary to test effects of different types of human resource pol-
icies). If such variables prove to be explanatory, it would help in designing
applications  to  improve  customer  service  (e.g.  by  altering  human  resource
policies).

One value of the study is that it extends the knowledge  about  customer
focus  to  countries  outside  the  North  American  and  Western  European
business communities. It is always possible that research and practices taken
from  one  part  of  the  world  will  meet  with  unexpected  problems  when

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY

325

exported around the globe (Triandis, 1994), but that did not happen in this
case. This suggests that there are some globally relevant business practices,
and this would make life easier for international companies such as the one
in  the  present  study.  Secondly,  it  suggests  that  an  organisation’s  external
boundary members, be they customer service workers or upper management,
can attend to the external demands and needs of customers.

A methodological strength of the study is that multiple sources were used
for  measures.  Information  encompassed  the  perceptions  of  three  different
parties.  Data  were  gathered  from  front-line  service  employees,  from  the
company’s quality audit teams, and from customers. Relationships among
the variables cannot, therefore, be entirely due to biases or response sets
of a single source, as in many survey studies. It is very encouraging to ﬁnd
support for the model under these circumstances, and it suggests that future
research in this area is justiﬁed.

REFERENCES

Albrecht, K., & Zemke, R. (1985). Service America: Doing business in the new eco-

nomy. Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin.

Arbuckle, J.L. (1997). Amos 3.6 users’ guide. Chicago, IL: SmallWaters.
Baruch,  Y.  (1999).  Response  rate  in  academic  studies—A  comparative  analysis.

Human Relations, 52, 421–438.

Berry,  L.L.,  &  Parasuraman,  A.  (1994).  Marketing  services:  Competing  through

quality. New York: Free Press.

Bettenhausen, K.L. (1991). Five years of group research: What we have learned and

what needs to be addressed. Journal of Management, 17, 345–381.

Chase, R.B., & Bowen, D.E. (1991). Service quality and the service delivery system.
In S.W. Brown, E. Gummesson, B. Edwardsson, & B. Gustavsson (Eds.), Service
quality (pp. 157–178). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Cross, R.L., Yan, A., & Louis, M.R. (2000). Boundary activities in “boundaryless”
organizations: A case study of a transformation to a team-based structure. Human
Relations, 53, 841–868.

Gutek, B.A., Bhappu, A.D., Liao-Troth, M.A., & Cherry, B. (1999). Distinguishing
between service relationships and encounters. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84,
218–233.

Guzzo, R.A., & Shea, G.P. (1992). Group performance and intergroup relations in
organizations. In M.D. Dunnette & L.M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial
and  organizational  psychology,  Vol.  3  (2nd  edn.,  pp.  269–313).  Palo  Alto,  CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press.

Hackman,  J.R.  (1986).  The  psychology  of  self  management  in  organizations.  In
M.S. Pallak & R.O. Perloff (Eds.), Psychology and work: Productivity, change,
and  employment  (pp.  87–136).  Washington,  DC:  American  Psychological
Association.

Hackman,  J.R.  (1990).  Groups  that  work  and  those  that  don’t.  San  Francisco,  CA:

Jossey-Bass.

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


326

SUBRAMONY ET AL.

Ilgen, D.R., & Hollenbeck, J.R. (1991). The structure of work: Job design and roles.
In  M.D.  Dunnette  &  L.M.  Hough  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  industrial  and  organ-
izational psychology, Vol. 2 (2nd edn., pp. 165–207). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.

IndiaOneStop (2000, September). [On-Line] Available: http://www.Indiaonestop.com/

service industry.htm.

James, L.R., Demaree, R.G., & Wolf, G. (1984). Estimating within-group interrater
reliability  with  and  without  response  bias.  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology,  69,
85–98.

Johnson, J.W. (1996). Linking employee perceptions of service climate to customer

satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 49, 831–851.

Katz, D., & Kahn, R.L. (1978). The social psychology of organizations. New York:

John Wiley and Sons.

Kaushik, S.K. (1997). India’s evolving economic model: A perspective on economic
and ﬁnancial reforms. American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 56, 69–84.
Latham, G.P. (2001). The reciprocal transfer of learning from journals to practice.

Applied Psychology: An International Review, 50, 201–211.

Loehlin,  J.C.  (1992).  Latent  variable  models  (2nd  edn.).  Hillsdale,  NJ:  Lawrence

Erlbaum Associates.

Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A., & Berry, L.L. (1994). Reassessment of expectations
as a comparison standard in measuring service quality: Implications for further
research. Journal of Marketing, 58, 111–124.

Polley, D., & Van Dyne, L. (1994). The limits and liabilities of self managed work
teams.  In  M.M.  Beyerlein  &  D.A.  Johnson  (Eds.),  Advances  in  interdisciplinary
studies  of  work  teams:  Theories  of  self-managing  work  teams.  Vol.  1  (pp.  1–38).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Rafaeli, A. (1989). When cashiers meet customers: An analysis of the role of super-

market cashiers. Academy of Management Journal, 32, 245–273.

Rafaeli, A., & Sutton, R.I. (1990). Busy stores and demanding customers: How do
they affect the display of positive emotion. Academy of Management Journal, 33,
623–637.

Rust, R.T., Zahorik, A.J., & Keiningham, T.L. (1994). Return on quality: Measuring

the ﬁnancial impact of your company’s quest for quality. New York: Free Press.

Ryan,  A.M.,  Schmit,  M.J.,  &  Johnson,  R.  (1996).  Attitudes  and  effectiveness:
Examining  relations  at  an  organizational  level.  Personnel  Psychology,  49,  853–
882.

Schneider, B., & Bowen, D.E. (1985). Employee and customer perceptions of service:

A replication and extension. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 423–433.

Schneider,  B.,  &  Bowen,  D.E.  (1992).  Personnel/human  resources  management  in
the service sector. In G.R. Ferris & K.M. Rowland (Eds.), Research in personnel/
human resources management, Vol. 10 (pp. 1–30). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Schneider,  B.,  &  Bowen,  D.E.  (1995).  Winning  the  service  game.  Boston,  MA:

Harvard Business School Press.

Schneider,  B.,  Gunnarson,  K.,  &  Niles-Jolly,  K.  (1994).  Creating  the  climate  and

culture of success. Organizational Dynamics, 23(1), 17–29.

Schneider,  B.,  Parkington,  J.J.,  &  Buxton,  V.M.  (1980).  Employee  and  customer

perceptions of service in banks. Administrative Science Quarterly, 25, 252–267.

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.


SERVICE EFFECTIVENESS AND QUALITY

327

Schneider, B., Wheeler, J.K., & Cox, J.F. (1992). A passion for service. Journal of

Applied Psychology, 77, 705–716.

Taylor,  S.A.,  &  Baker,  T.L.  (1994).  An  assessment  of  the  relationship  between
service quality and customer satisfaction in the formation of consumers’ purchase
intentions. Journal of Retailing, 70, 163–178.

Triandis,  H.C.  (1994).  Cross-cultural  industrial  and  organizational  psychology.  In
H.C. Triandis, M.D. Dunnette, & L.M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial
and  organizational  psychology,  Vol.  4  (2nd  edn.,  pp.  103–172).  Palo  Alto,  CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press.

Tuckman,  B.W.  (1965).  Development  sequence  in  small  groups.  Psychological

Bulletin, 63, 384–399.

Vaghul, N. (1994). Liberalization of the ﬁnancial markets in India. Columbia Journal

of World Business, 29(1), 42–48.

Zeithaml,  V.A.,  Berry,  L.L.,  &  Parasuraman,  A.  (1996).  The  behavioral  con-

sequences of service quality. Journal of Marketing, 60, 31–46.

Zeithaml,  V.A.,  Parasuraman,  A.,  &  Berry,  L.  (1990).  Delivering  quality  service:

Balancing customer perceptions and expectations. New York: Free Press.

© International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004.

