The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
http://www.emerald-library.com

Applying the service profit

chain in a retail environment
Challenging the ``satisfaction mirror''

Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK, and

Rhian Silvestro

Stuart Cross

Boots the Chemist, Nottingham, UK

Keywords Customer
Profitability

loyalty, Business performance, Retailing, Customer

satisfaction,

Abstract This paper reports the result of an exploratory study of the application of Heskett,
Sasser and Schlesinger's service profit chain to a single organisation, one of the UKs leading
grocery retailers. The results showed correlations between profit, customer loyalty, customer
satisfaction, service value, internal service quality, output quality and productivity; however there
was no support for the claim that these are driven by employee satisfaction and loyalty. In fact, to
the contrary,
there was a strong correlation between employee dissatisfaction and store
profitability. This research raises questions about the robustness of a central premise of the
service profit chain, which is that strong business performance is the result of a mirror-effect
between employee and customer satisfaction. The paper considers the implications for
management and calls for the development of a contingency based understanding of the
drivers of business success.

Introduction
Heskett et al.'s service profit chain (1997) stipulates that there are ``direct and
strong'' relationships between profit; growth; customer loyalty; customer
satisfaction; the value of goods and services delivered to customers; service
quality and productivity; and employee capability, satisfaction, and loyalty.
They have collected empirical evidence from some 20 large service
organisations, lending support to many of the linkages in the chain; however
they appear not to have subjected any single organisation to an analysis of all
the linkages in the chain.

One of the UK's major supermarket chains has adopted a service strategy
which is based on the central assumptions of the service profit chain, namely,
that employee satisfaction and loyalty in turn generate customer satisfaction
and loyalty, which are taken to be key drivers of growth and profitability. This
paper reports the outcome of a preliminary performance analysis of a small
sample of this company's stores, in order to evaluate the service profit chain as
a model for linking the drivers of business success.

The study involved reviewing the company's performance measurement
systems and collecting measures of each link in the service profit chain.
Correlation analysis was then conducted in order to substantiate the links
stipulated in the model.

IJSIM
11,3

244

Received May 1999
Revised August 1999
Accepted February 2000

International Journal of Service
Industry Management,
Vol. 11 No. 3, 2000, pp. 244-268.
# MCB University Press, 0956-4233


The service profit chain
Heskett et al.'s service profit chain (Figure 1) stipulates a series of causal
relationships which result in profit performance and growth. Its implications
for managers is clear and radical, if not new: the contribution and performance
of employees is critical to the provision of customer service and business
performance. The model is based on themes which have prevailed in the TQM
literature for almost half a century, as well as in the more recent service
management
the TQM ``gurus'' claim that process

literature. Many of

Applying the
service profit
chain

245

Figure 1.
The serice profit chain


IJSIM
11,3

246

ownership will lead to employee satisfaction which in turn results in higher
levels of both quality, productivity and business performance (e.g. Deming,
1985, Ishikawa, 1985). Links between employee and customer satisfaction have
also repeatedly been made in the service quality literature. Early contributors
include Marriott, founder of the American hotel chain, famously quoted as
saying ``you can't make happy guests with unhappy employees'' (Hostage,
1975) and Carlzon (1987) who promoted the role of empowerment in driving
customer satisfaction.

Heskett et al. (1997) capture the relationship between employee and customer
satisfaction with their analogy of the ``satisfaction mirror'', which vividly
conveys the notion that business success results from employee satisfaction
being ``reflected'' in terms of customer satisfaction. Schlesinger and Heskett
(1991b) claim that staff frustrations lead to high turnover, merely reinforcing
the organisational approach of minimal training, poor rewards and poor
customer service in a ``cycle of failure'' (Schlesinger and Heskett, 1991a). This
mirror effect is also central to Normann and Ramirez's (1993) work on value
constellation and to Liedtka et al.
```generative cycle' of mutually
reinforcing, self-sustaining employee and client development'' in professional
services.

(1997)

The strength and richness of Heskett et al.'s contribution lies in the fact that
the model interlinks and integrates many drivers of performance, drawing
together many disparate claims about these inter-dependencies. Its strength
however, is also its potential weakness. Since the profit chain is complex, it is
vulnerable to being disproved at many points. Given the lengthy and
somewhat inconclusive debate that has arisen around the possible links
between profit, market share and quality (Buzzell and Gale, 1987), Heskett et
al.'s model is likely to be even more difficult to prove.

The empirical support for Heskett et al.'s (1997) service profit chain is
fragmented. Several studies involving empirical analysis of some of the links in
the chain have been undertaken. For example, Schneider and Bowen (1985,
1993) provide documented evidence of the relationship between employee and
customer satisfaction. Reichheld and Sasser (1990) attempt to quantify the
potential for profit improvement resulting from increased customer loyalty.
Reichheld's later work (1993, 1996) also postulates links between employee
loyalty, customer loyalty, market share and revenues, although the evidence for
this is primarily anecdotal.

Bloemer and Kasper (1995) have empirically tested their typologies of
customer satisfaction and loyalty, concluding that the relationship between the
two varies with type and that true brand loyalty is more closely related to
``manifest'' than ``latent'' satisfaction. Bloemer and de Ruyter (1998) found this
also to be true of customer loyalty at store level. This suggests a degree of
conceptual complexity which is not embraced in the service profit chain, where
the links between satisfaction and loyalty take no account of the nature or type
of customer satisfaction generated.


Applying the
service profit
chain

247

Zeithaml et al. (1996) report a study of the links between service quality and
customer behaviour (including loyalty), concluding that ``The overall findings
offer strong support for the intuitive notion that improving service quality can
increase favorable behavioral intentions and decrease unfavorable intentions''
(Zeithaml et al., 1996, p. 44). Rust et al. (1995) examine the links between service
quality, customer satisfaction and loyalty, and profitability, providing a
methodology for measuring the profit
impact of quality improvements.
However, these studies consider the links between only a subset of the
variables modelled in the service profit chain. A recent attempt at applying the
entire service profit chain within one organisation is that of Rucci et al. (1998)
who describe what they call ``the employee-customer-profit chain'' in Sears, the
US retailer, and demonstrate how this model was used to implement a major
turn-around strategy in the mid 1990s. But their model is much simpler than
Heskett et al.'s, and therefore does not (and was not meant to) fully test Heskett
et al.'s conceptualisation.

The documented evidence which Heskett et al. themselves present to support
their conceptual framework is limited to a small number of companies and
many of the links in the chain have no empirical support (see Heskett et al.,
1997, p. 31). For example no evidence is presented for a link between growth
and profit and either employee productivity or employee capability; or between
customer value and either employee satisfaction,
loyalty or capability.
Moreover, the authors appear not to have subjected any single organisation to
an analysis of all the linkages in the chain. Yet this is precisely the basis of and
raison d'eÃtre for the model! The authors argue that the service profit chain
helps managers understand the drivers of business success in their
organisations, and that it can be used to formulate service strategies, as well as
improve performance measurement systems. Surprising, then, that they give
not a single example of a company in which the entire service profit chain has
demonstrably been realised!

Loveman (1998) recognises the need to test the service profit chain in a single
organisation and reports the results of a major study of a modified version of
the model in a regional US bank. Some significant limitations to the study are,
however, acknowledged, concerning the validity of
the measures used.
Customer satisfaction was not measured at branch level; business growth could
only be measured on the basis of data spanning 12 months; and revenue was
measured in the absence of branch profit figures and Loveman concedes that
this proxy measure ``fails to capture any positive profit consequences
associated with productivity or cost control from, say, loyal employees serving
loyal customers'' (Loveman, 1998, p. 30).

Loveman concludes that the results ``speak forcefully, albeit with occasional
equivocation, in support of the hypotheses that comprise the service profit
chain'' (Loveman, 1998, p. 30). However, an element of complexity emerged in
the relationship between employee loyalty and the other measures in the chain.
Employee satisfaction was linked to employees' stated loyalty but not to the
other measure of loyalty, employment tenure. Employment tenure was linked


IJSIM
11,3

248

to both customer loyalty and financial performance; but stated loyalty was
linked to neither of these measures. This provides conflicting evidence for the
prescriptions of the service profit chain model. Loveman makes surprisingly
little attempt to explain these anomalies and concludes by calling for further
testing of the service profit chain model in different industries.

So do employee satisfaction and loyalty necessarily generate customer
satisfaction loyalty and value; and are customer satisfaction and loyalty
drivers of business growth and profitability? The challenge to apply and
comprehensively test each of linkages proposed in Heskett et al.'s model in a
single service context remains. This paper reports the results of a preliminary
study of the service profit chain model in a single retail organisation. The aim
is to establish whether the relationships hold good in this organisation, by
analysing the correlation of key performance indicators representing each link
in the profit chain. The identification of correlations between these factors will
provide some support for the model (though, as in Loveman's study, no claim
can be made for the causal direction of the relationships), and will confirm the
need to test the model more widely in the retail and other industries.
Conversely, provided that the performance measures are appropriate indicators
of the service profit chain links, failure to establish any correlations will call
into question the robustness of the model.

The methodology for the study
Access was provided to a leading player in the UK grocery retail sector, a
market dominated by a small number of major players. With a chain of several
hundred large supermarkets, the company had increased selling space and had
experienced significant sales growth over the previous three years. This
company was particularly appropriate for the study because its strategy was
based on the assumptions made explicit in the service profit chain. Indeed, in a
recent annual report the chief executive explicitly stated that customer
satisfaction and loyalty were ``the real drivers'' of this company's profit and
growth, and that they were strongly influenced by how employees felt about
their work, their rewards and their manager. This was also a central theme in
the company's management training programme.

In order to study the links of the profit chain it was first necessary to
establish performance measures for each link in the chain. A review of current
information availability at store level revealed some links within the chain for
which there were no adequate measures of performance. Surveys were
therefore carried out in a small number of stores in order to generate this
information. Correlation analysis was then conducted in order to evaluate the
links postulated in the model.

Level of analysis and sample selection
In this study, performance at either regional or store level could have been
examined. However, given the large store size and the size of population served
by each store, customer perceptions were shaped primarily on the basis of their


Applying the
service profit
chain

249

experiences of one store. It was therefore considered that the links between
customer satisfaction and business performance should be tested at store level.
Permission was obtained to study a sample of 15 stores. As for all the large UK
supermarket chains, the stores have a strong corporate image, with similar
layouts and overall appearance; thus the stores are broadly comparable in
terms of service provision and service levels. All the stores were selected from
the same region, the North East, in order to limit the impact of differences in
area management styles, labour markets etc. The 15 stores were evenly spread
on the continuum of high to low business performance.

Choice of measures
A store performance report for each store was produced on a four-week period
basis; the reports of each store over a 12-month period from 1996 to 1997 were
reviewed. The report contained measures for many links in the chain. However
it soon became clear that some surveys would have to be conducted in order to
achieve a full complement of measures along the service profit chain. The scope
of the study was such that these surveys could be conducted at only six of the
15 stores; thus full analysis of the relationships specified in Heskett et al.'s
model could only be conducted for six stores. The six stores were also evenly
spread in terms of business performance.

The two types of measures which were lacking were those of customer and
employee perceptions. First, the company did not systematically collect
customer information at store level. A customer satisfaction survey was
therefore designed and implemented specifically for the purposes of this study.
At each store 30 customers were surveyed on a face-to-face basis on leaving the
store; this is considered to be the minimum sample size for statistical purposes
(Morris, 1993).

All surveys were undertaken between 10am and 3pm, in order to maximise
the consistency in the store environment encountered by customers during
their latest shopping visit. Customers were asked about their purchasing
habits, their likelihood to refer the store to friends, and about their satisfaction
with 20 different aspects of service quality, based on Johnston's (1995) list of
satisfiers and dissatisfiers, scored on a five-point Likert scale.

Second, the company's employee measures were limited to employee
absence and turnover. An employee survey was therefore undertaken to
understand the climate of employee satisfaction and loyalty within the six
stores. The sample size ranged between 20 and 32 staff. Staff completed the
questionnaires anonymously and they were assured that the results would be
analysed exclusively by the researchers rather than by store management. The
questionnaire was based on 5 point Likert-scale questions on job satisfaction;
employees' willingness to refer the store as a place to work; employee
perceptions of service quality and of the style of supervision in the store; and
their perceived ability to affect the customer experience and store performance.


IJSIM
11,3

250

Table I.
Chosen performance
measures for the
service profit chain

Table I shows a summary of the performance measures used. Whenever the
two measures to be tested are taken from company reports, the correlation
analysis is based on the sample of 15 stores; all other correlation tests are based
on six stores.

Hypotheses and correlation testing
The methodology adopted was similar to that of Loveman (1998) and six
hypotheses (see Table II) were developed to test the conceptualisation of the
service profit chain. While Loveman's hypotheses were based on a
simplification of Heskett et al.'s model, these hypotheses closely reflect the
assumptions underlying the service profit chain.

Measures of the performance of each store were collected, and each was then
tested against the rest in order to identify correlations. A null hypothesis was
developed that no correlation existed between the two variables involved in
each test. Only where Pearson's correlation coefficient was greater than the
minimum accepted at the 95 per cent significance level was the null hypothesis
rejected.

The minimum value of the calculated correlation coefficient necessary to
reject the null hypothesis was 0.51 where the sample size was 15 stores, and
0.81 where the sample size was six stores (Morris, 1993).

Elements of the chain

Selected measures

Internal service quality

Operating ratio (ratio of planned and actual working

Service capability

Employee satisfaction

Employee loyalty

Productivity and output quality

Service value
Customer satisfaction

Customer loyalty

Profit

hours)

Employees' perceived impact on customer experience
Employees' perceived impact on store performance
Overall employee satisfaction
Satisfaction with service quality, physical environment

and management style

Employee turnover
Absence
Referral of the store as a place to work
Sales per square foot
Mystery Shopper results
Customer perception of service value
Overall customer satisfaction
Customer satisfaction with 18 ``satisfiers''
Average basket size
Referral of the store as place to shop
Share of grocery budget spent at the store
Store profit margin

Note: Italics indicate measures collected specifically for the study


Hypothesis

H1a
H1b
H1c
H1d
H1e
H1f
H2
H3
H4
H5a
H5b
H5c
H5d
H5e
H5f
H6

Service value is positively correlated with employee satisfaction
Service value is positively correlated with employee loyalty
Service value is positively correlated with internal service quality
Service value is positively correlated with output quality
Service value is positively correlated with productivity
Service value is positively correlated with capability
Customer satisfaction is positively correlated with service value
Customer loyalty is positively correlated with customer satisfaction
Financial performance is positively correlated with customer loyalty
Employee satisfaction is positively correlated with financial performance
Employee loyalty is positively correlated with financial performance
Internal service quality is positively correlated with financial performance
Output quality is positively correlated with financial performance
Productivity is positively correlated with financial performance
Capability is positively correlated with financial performance
There are positive correlations between employee satisfaction, loyalty,

internal service quality, output quality, productivity and capability

Applying the
service profit
chain

251

Table II.
Research hypotheses

Limitations of the methodology
This empirical study has three methodological limitations. The first is the
small sample size. Although the small number of stores could be said to be
representative of the region, the sample is too small to be statistically
representative of the entire retail chain. Nevertheless, the findings were not
considered by the company's management to be untypical of the company, and,
as will be seen later, the results were taken seriously by the managers. Indeed
they were at pains to interpret the results and did not attempt to ``explain away''
the findings on the basis of the small sample size. Nevertheless, the authors
recognise that a larger sample size would have been desirable and a further
study is currently under way to investigate further.

The second limitation is the choice of performance measures used. This
research is based on the assumption that the performance measures used in the
analysis fairly represent the various links in the chain. However, any choice of
performance indicator could be criticised for inherent limitations, as no
performance indicator
to avoid poor
representation of the links in the chain, managers from the company were
consulted to try to ensure that the measures used were appropriate. In addition,
more than one measure was taken to represent such links; for example,
customer loyalty was measured by likelihood of customer referral, average
basket size and the share of the customers' grocery budget spent at the store.

is a perfect measure.

In order

The measures which are perhaps most vulnerable to criticism are internal
service quality (which Heskett et al. define in terms of quality of work place
from the employee's perspective) and service value. Store operating ratio was
used as an indicator of internal service quality, this being a ratio of planned to
actual working hours. This is considered by the company's management to be


IJSIM
11,3

252

a surrogate indicator for internal service quality because, as the ratio of
planned to actual hours increases, the workplace is believed to become more
stressful and internal service quality diminishes.

Service value was measured by customers' perceived service value, as
measured in the customer survey. It could be argued that a customer's rating of
perceived service value on a scale of 1 to 5 is not necessarily an accurate
measure of service value, not least because what customers claim to be a
product or service's value is not always reflected in the customer's purchasing
decision. Rust and Oliver (1994), define value as a function of quality and price;
it is ``some combination of what is received and what is sacrificed''. However
this is not easily operationalised as a performance measure. Heskett et al. (1997)
go further in operationalising the concept, defining it in terms of the following
ratio:

Results produced for customer + process quality
Price to the customer + costs of acquiring the service

Certainly the data required to obtain this measure of service value was not
available within the company and it was not possible to collect the data within
the time scale of this project. Had the measures been used, of course, it is
arguable that ``costs of acquiring the service'' would have been particularly
difficult to measure appropriately, and would almost certainly have continued
to raise methodological questions.

Finally, the research method could be critiqued on the basis of the adoption
of simple correlation analysis at the 95 per cent confidence level. While this was
the approach adopted by both Loveman (1998) and Heskett et al. (1997) in
providing their empirical evidence for the service profit chain, nevertheless, it is
arguable that more sophisticated statistical techniques would have facilitated a
better understanding of the relationships between the variables in the chain.
Unfortunately, in this study the data made available to the researchers was
limited in terms of store sample size, precluding the application of, for example,
multivariate analysis (Bryman and Cramer, 1990, p. 230). It is hoped that the
application of this preliminary empirical test of the service profit chain will
generate ideas for further, more sophisticated testing of the relationships
between the variables, by for example, identifying other variables which
should be controlled for in future studies.

While the research method used in this study has its limitations, this
appears to be the first comprehensive empirical test of the entire service profit
chain within a single retail service organisation; nevertheless the authors
recognise the need for more extensive testing of the framework in other retail
companies, as well as other service contexts.

Results of the analysis
In this section the results of the correlation analysis of each of the links in the
service profit chain are reported, moving backwards through the chain and
with reference to the hypotheses. A summary of
the main correlation


coefficients calculated between the various performance measures is given in
Figure 2. The summary indicates those correlations which were based on a
sample of only six stores and which must therefore be treated with particular
caution.

Applying the
service profit
chain

253

The links between financial performance and customer loyalty (H4)
The correlation results demonstrate strong links between mean customer
loyalty and store profit margin within the sub-set of six stores, as set out in
Figure 2, and are significant at the 95 per cent level whether loyalty is
expressed in terms of share of total grocery budget, basket size or propensity to
recommend the store to friends or relatives. In addition, the different measures
of loyalty are significantly correlated with one another, which suggests that the
measures are robust indicators of customer loyalty.

Figure 3 illustrates the correlation between the store's profit margin and the
mean share of customers' grocery budgets, indicating that stores with loyal
customers are more profitable than those with less loyal customers. This
suggests that customers who spend a high proportion of their grocery budget
within the store are likely to purchase items with high levels of profitability,
increasing overall margin. In addition, the larger basket size increases sales
volume, resulting in scale economies and cost reduction. This lends some
support to Reichheld's (1996) contention that high levels of customer loyalty
increase company profits, through lower advertising costs (resulting from a
stronger reliance on customer referrals and the need to replace fewer customer
defections), the ability to charge higher prices, and the ability to involve the
customer in the process to a greater extent, thereby reducing operating costs.

The links between customer loyalty and customer satisfaction (H3)
Heskett et al. (1997) acknowledge that, based on recent research, the link
between customer satisfaction and loyalty is the weakest of all in the service
profit chain, and that the relationship between them is not constant. Some
research has found that the factors that satisfy customers are not the same as
those which create loyalty to an organisation (Reichheld and Aspinall, 1993),
whereas other work suggests that, in general, complete customer satisfaction is
required to secure customer loyalty in a competitive business environment
(Jones and Sasser, 1995). Bloemer and Kasper's (1995) distinctions between true
and spurious brand loyalty, and between manifest and latent satisfaction, may
partly explain why this empirical research, which treats satisfaction and
loyalty as single concepts, has been so inconclusive.

In this study satisfaction and loyalty are treated as single, rather than
complex, constructs since this is how they are conceptualised in the service
profit chain. The results support the complexities set out above. The correlation
coefficients set out in Figure 2 do not suggest a significant relationship between
customer satisfaction and loyalty, except for the link between satisfaction and
customers' propensity to recommend stores to friends and relatives. However,
further analysis of the responses on customer satisfaction and share of budget


IJSIM
11,3

254

Figure 2.
Correlation analyses
between elements of the
service profit chain


Applying the
service profit
chain

255

reveals that of those people who were highly satisfied with the service (i.e. rated
the service 4 or 5), 66 per cent spent more than 75 per cent of their grocery
budget with the company, and 79 per cent spent more than 50 per cent. Thus
satisfied customers tend to spend a large share of their grocery budget in the
store.

The links between customer satisfaction and service value (H2)
In this study service value was measured, by means of the customer survey, in
terms of overall perceived value. There is a strong positive correlation between
customer satisfaction and perceived service value at the 95 per cent level, as
indicated in Figure 2. Customers appear to be strongly value-driven,
suggesting that a key aim of management should therefore be to improve
perceptions of service value for their customers.

Given that the customer surveys generated a measure of overall customer
satisfaction, overall perceived value, and satisfaction with 18 other aspects of
service, the survey results were analysed to identify correlations between
overall satisfaction and each of the 18 factors, and between perceived value and
the 18 factors. It was found that overall satisfaction correlated at the 95 per cent
level with prices, checkout speed, staff competence, offers and promotions and
staff attitudes; whilst perceived service value correlated significantly with
prices, checkout speed, staff competence, product availability and queues.
These factors appear to be the key drivers of satisfaction and perceived value,
and the two sets are remarkably similar.

The links between service value and each of employee satisfaction, loyalty,
capability, output quality, productivity, and internal service quality (H1)
Output quality has been measured through the stores' results in the Mystery
Shopper audits. The correlation between perceived service value and output
quality was significant at the 95 per cent confidence level. Furthermore, the
correlation between the Mystery Shopper results and certain drivers of
perceived value was significant at the 95 per cent confidence level. In
particular, the Mystery Shopper results correlated with customer perceptions of

Figure 3.
Linking store
profitability with
employee satisfaction
and customer loyalty


IJSIM
11,3

256

availability of goods (r = 0.93), competence of staff (r = 0.89), staff attitude and
friendliness (r = 0.89), and range of goods in the store (r = 0.90). The
relationship between output quality and perceived service value suggests that
the stores' staff primarily contribute to service value by increasing the ease of
shopping for customers, allowing for a more efficient shopping visit and a more
enjoyable customer experience in terms of friendly service encounters.

There was also a strong correlation (r = 0.92) between service value and
productivity, measured in terms of sales per square foot. All in all, analysis of
the links between service value, output quality and productivity reveals a
surprising degree of correlation between these different aspects of performance.
Taken in conjunction with the correlations demonstrated between service
value, customer satisfaction and loyalty, and profitability, this study has so far
lent considerable support to the robustness of Heskett et al.'s service profit
chain.

However, an examination of the links between service value and the
employee based measures of satisfaction, loyalty and capability, points to a
rather different picture to that portrayed by Heskett et al. There were no
significant correlations between service value and either employee satisfaction,
employee loyalty or internal capability. Here we begin to see a rift in the service
profit chain; and a significant one, since the links between these employee
measures and the other phenomena is also the foundation for the concept of the
`satisfaction mirror' which pervades the service literature.

There was a strong but negative correlation (r = ±0.97) between service
value and internal quality, measured in terms of the operating ratio. As
explained earlier, the company's management initially argued that the OR ratio
was an appropriate measure of internal service quality because the higher the
ratio, the longer the hours worked and the more stressful the workplace was
likely to be. However the research interviews revealed that a high OR ratio
resulted from store managers recognising the need to adjust their sales
forecasts and the hours worked accordingly. Those stores where adjustments
were made tended to be less stressful than those stores where the need for extra
hours was either not recognised or not translated into extra staff hours. Thus a
high OR ratio indicated high internal quality but correlated inversely with
service value.

The links between financial performance and employee satisfaction, loyalty and
capability (H5a, H5b, H5f)
No significant correlation was found between staff satisfaction and any of the
other measures of performance in the service profit chain, with the exception of
store profit margin. In particular, no relationship was identified between
employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction. Consequently, the customer-
employee ``satisfaction mirror'', suggested by Heskett et al. (1997) as a key
aspect of the service profit chain, does not appear to exist within this small
sample of stores.


Applying the
service profit
chain

257

Employee satisfaction was significantly correlated with the store's profit
margin, but as revealed in Figure 3, this is a negative correlation. In other
words, employee satisfaction is greater in the poorer performing stores. This
correlation contradicts a key assumption of the service profit chain that
customer satisfaction and behaviour is rooted in employee satisfaction
(Schlesinger and Heskett, 1991c). Furthermore, there were no correlations
between financial performance and employee capability or indeed any of the
employee loyalty measures; the data again failing to endorse what is a growing
literature on employee loyalty as a means of both reducing operating costs,
improving service levels and hence driving service profitability (see for
example, Reichheld, 1996).

The links between financial performance and internal quality, ouput quality,
and productivity (H5c, H5d, H5e)
There was a significant and positive correlation between profit margin and
productivity (r = 0.77), measured in terms sales per square foot. This certainly
makes intuitive sense.

However, no link was found between store profit margin and output quality;
this again suggests that productivity and output quality cannot be
conceptually combined as implied in the service profit chain.

There was a significant but negative relationship between profit and
internal service quality. The idea that internal service quality should be low
when profits are high accords with the negative correlation identified between
employee satisfaction and profitability.

The links between employee satisfaction, employee loyalty, capability, internal
service quality, output quality and productivity (H6)
there was no correlation between output quality and
Interestingly,
productivity; yet Heskett et al. bundle these two concepts together in the model
as though their co-existence is implicit. This research suggests that the two
concepts are distinct, and that the links between them should be subjected to
the same empirical tests as the other links in the model.

Productivity was negatively correlated with internal service quality; that is
to say, the quality of the store as a place of work deteriorated as productivity
increased. This is again very much in line with the finding that employee
satisfaction is lowest in the most productive and profitable stores. It would
appear that employees find the highest performing stores the most difficult to
work in.

Employee loyalty has been measured in terms of staff absence, staff
turnover and the likelihood of staff to recommend the store to friends and
relatives as a place to work. No significant correlation was identified between
any of these measures of loyalty; or between the loyalty measures and output
quality, productivity or internal quality. Neither was there any significant
correlation between the loyalty measures and other measures of performance


IJSIM
11,3

258

such as perceived service value, customer satisfaction, customer loyalty or
store profitability. Thus there appears to be a significant rift between employee
loyalty and the rest of the service profit chain.

No significant correlation was identified between any of the measures of
employee loyalty and overall staff satisfaction at a store level. However, at the
individual employee level a correlation does appear to exist,
in that the
employees who rated satisfaction 4 or 5 said they were more likely to refer the
store as a place of work than those assigning lower satisfaction ratings. This
suggests that employee satisfaction and loyalty are linked, even though the
correlation was not statistically significant at store level.

Figure 2 suggests that employee satisfaction in the six stores is related to the
staff's perceptions of the style of supervision and their ability to make a
difference to the experience of the store's customers (a measure of capability).
No significant correlation existed between overall staff satisfaction and the
other potential drivers tested in the short survey, namely, the store's physical
environment, employees' ability to impact on store performance and
employees' perception of service quality in the store.

In terms of the service profit chain, the results suggest that employee
satisfaction is related to service capability, as expressed by staff's perceived
ability to affect the experience of customers. A message for managers here may
be that even though this study does not demonstrate a correlation between
employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction, nevertheless nurturing in
employees the perception that they contribute to the customer's experience is
conducive to the creation of a good working environment.

Implications of the findings
Implications for Heskett et al.'s model
Table III presents the correlation results with respect to each of the six
hypotheses. Whilst these results must be treated with caution, given the small
sample size, this preliminary study appears to lend a surprising degree of
support for the service profit chain model. Hypotheses 1 through 4 are each
supported by empirical evidence; however there is disconfirmation of
hypotheses 5 and 6, there being a significant negative correlation between
financial performance and both employee satisfaction and internal service
quality.

Figure 4 sets out the application of the service profit chain to this company,
based on the correlation analysis. Just as Loveman's (1998) study lent general
support for the model, the data from this preliminary research endorses most of
the links in the chain, but with the notable exceptions of employee satisfaction,
loyalty and capability, which are not linked to the rest of the chain. Indeed,
contrary to model, the least profitable stores were characterised by higher
levels of employee satisfaction and loyalty.

What, then, do we make of this rather surprising finding that the stores with
the happiest employees are actually the lowest performers? We investigated
further, by talking to head office and store managers. Interestingly, they were


Applying the
service profit
chain

259

Hypothesis

Measured link

Finding

Statistical
significance

Service value and
employee satisfaction

Not significant

NA

H1a. Service value is

positively correlated
with employee
satisfaction

H1b. Service value is

positively correlated
with employee loyalty

H1c. Service value is

positively correlated
with internal service
quality

H1d. Service value is

positively correlated
with output quality

Service value and
employee loyalty

Service value and
internal service
quality

Service value and
output quality
(mystery shopper
results)

H1e. Service value is

positively correlated
with productivity
H1f. Service value and
internal capability

H2. Customer satisfaction
is positively correlated
with service value

H3. Customer loyalty is
positively correlated
with customer
satisfaction

Service value and
productivity

Service value and
employees' perceived
ability to impact the
customer experience
Customer satisfaction
and perceived service
value
Customer satisfaction
and willingness to
refer
Customer satisfaction
and basket size
Customer satisfaction
and share of grocery
budget

Not significant

NA

Negative correlation r = ±0.97 (6 stores,

significant at 99.9
per cent level)

Positive correlation
Also positive
correlations with
perceptions of:
availability of goods
staff competence
staff attitude
range of goods
Positive correlation r = 0.92 (6 stores,

r = 0.81 (6 stores; all
significant at 98 per
cent level):
r = 0.93
r = 0.89
r = 0.89
r = 0.90

Not significant

significant at 99 per
cent level)
NA

Positive correlation r = 0.86 (6 stores;

Positive correlation

Not significant

Not significant

H4. Financial performance
is positively correlated
with customer loyalty

Store profit margin
and share of grocery
budget
Store profit margin
and basket size

Store profit margin
and willingness to
refer

Positive correlation

Positive correlation

Positive correlation

significant at 95 per
cent level)
r = 0.82 (6 stores;
significant at 95 per
cent level)
NA

But at individual
level, satisfied
customers more
likely to spend high
proportion of budget
at the store
r = 0.91 (6 stores;
significant at 99 per
cent level)
r = 0.88 (15 stores;
significant at 99.9
per cent level)
r = 0.86 (6 stores;
significant at 95 per
cent level)

(Continued)

Table III.
Results of hypotheses
testing


IJSIM
11,3

260

Table III.

Hypothesis

Measured link

Finding

Statistical
significance

H5a. Employee satisfaction

is positively
correlated with
financial performance

Employee
satisfaction and store
profit margin

Negative correlation r = 0.87 (6 stores;

significant at 95 per
cent level)

H5b. Employee loyalty is
positively correlated
with financial
performance

H5c. Internal quality is

positively correlated
with financial
performance

H5d. Output quality
performance is
positively correlated
with financial
performance

H5e. Productivity is

positively correlated
with financial
performance

H5f. Internal capability is
positively correlated
with financial
performance

H6. There are positive

correlations between
employee satisfaction,
loyalty, internal service
quality, output quality,
productivity and
capability

Employee loyalty
and store profit
margin

Internal service
quality and store
profit margin

Not significant

NA

Negative correlation r = 0.75 (15 stores;

significant at 99 per
cent level)

Output quality and
store profit margin

Not significant

NA

Productivity and
store profit margin

Positive correlation r = 0.77 (15 stores;
significant at 99 per
cent level)

Internal capability
and store profit
margin

ONLY the following
links found:

Employee
satisfaction and
employee referral

Employee
satisfaction and
capability
Internal quality and
productivity

Not significant

NA

Not significant

Positive correlation

Negative correlation

But evidence of a link
at the individual
employee level

r = 0.93 (6 stores;
significant at 95 per
cent level)

r = 0.65 (15 stores;
significant at 95 per
cent level)

not entirely surprised by our findings. Indeed, they had heard anecdotal
evidence from managers in the other large UK grocery retail chains to this
effect too.

Their explanation was that there was another key determinant of business
success which had not been considered in analysing the service profit chain,
namely, store size. In the large grocery retail chains, store performance tends to
correlate with store size: the larger stores being more profitable than the
smaller ones. However employee satisfaction tends to be higher in the smaller
stores; it would appear that smaller stores offer working environments which


Applying the
service profit
chain

261

Figure 4.
The service profit chain
applied to the grocery
retailer

are more pleasant for staff. Indeed the company's management was able to
profile in some detail the key differences between two store archetypes;
differences which explained why nurturing employee satisfaction and loyalty
did not lead to the generation of high profits. The two store archetypes are
referred to as ``achieving'' stores and ``coasting'' stores, and may be profiled as
follows.

``Achieving stores'' are the highly profitable stores, serving high volumes of
customers. These stores have to cope with a high degree of variability in terms


IJSIM
11,3

262

of customer spend, known as basket size: they have large numbers of shoppers
loading large trolleys on the one hand and many ``top-up'' shoppers on the
other; this makes these stores difficult to manage. As a result, staff tend to have
to work harder; they are more tightly supervised; mistakes are more likely to be
picked up on; and the work place is more stressful. The larger stores employ
hundreds of staff so that it is more difficult to cultivate team spirit. Store sites
tend to be green field or in the city, so employees have to travel to work. Within
commuting distance there will typically be many other potential employers,
including direct competition from one of the other large grocery retailers. Staff
are therefore less loyal and tend to serve shorter terms of service; labour
turnover is higher.

``Coasting stores'' are not usually loss making but have lower turnover and
tend to be less profitable than the achieving stores. Customers' shopping
behaviour is less variable here, there being greater uniformity both in terms of
basket size and in terms of the amount of time customers spend in the store.
Customers therefore tend to be less impatient, easier to manage and generally
expect more interaction with staff, spending more time at the specialist
counters than would be typical in the large, fast-moving stores. The market
tends to be better defined, with less competition; and for employees there are
fewer other employment opportunities. Moreover, these stores are less likely to
operate unpopular opening hours. So in these shops staff tend to work at a
slower pace, there are more full-timers, and staff stay much longer with the
company. It is therefore easier to cultivate team spirit, and build on the sense of
community.

Table IV summarises the characteristics of these two types of store. What all
this suggests is perhaps not surprising: that performance is contingent upon
many environmental and operational variables, which cannot all be captured in
a model as simplistic as the service profit chain. Unfortunately, life just is not
that simple. Whilst this data sample is too small to represent conclusive testing
of the model, the empirical application of the service profit chain in the
superstore industry alerts us to the dangers of interpreting it as a universal
model which applies to all services and industries. These findings suggest that,
in this industry, store size is an important determinant of profitability, and so
future analysis of the service profit chain in this operational context should
control for store size. As the intervening variables in different industries or
service types become better understood, partial correlation and causal path
analysis can be applied to further test the service profit chain in different
operational contexts.

Furthermore, it may be that some of the concepts linked together in the chain
are not single constructs which can be linked together in the simplistic way
proposed by Heskett et al.'s model. This suggests the need for further empirical
studies of the sort conducted by Bloemer and Kasper (1995), who demonstrated
that the relationship between some of these concepts could vary depending on
the nature of the construct, as well as being contingent upon environmental and
operational variables.


Applying the
service profit
chain

263

Table IV.
Characteristics of high-
and low-performing
stores

Characteristic

``Achieving'' stores

``Coasting'' stores

Large
Store size
High
Volumes of customers
Basket size
Highly variable
Length of shopping visit Highly variable
Interaction between

Less interaction expected by

customers and staff

customers

Store location
Competition

Green field suburban sites
Aggressive competition from the

other big 3

Store environment

High investment in product range,

Store opening hours

Number of employees
Working conditions

Labour market

Management style

Task variety

refurbishment etc.

Long, unsociable hours
Sunday opening
High; many part-timers
Store difficult to manage
Stressful environment
Employees work harder
Employees travel to work
Competition from other employers

Tighter supervision
Mistakes more likely to be picked up
Low: employees highly

functionalised

Team work

Difficult to create team spirit

Short
Length of service
High
Employee turnover
Low
Employee loyalty
Employee satisfaction
Low
Profitability and growth High

Small
Low
Greater uniformity
Greater uniformity
More interaction expected
Patient customers
Rural communities
Often little competition
Loyal market
Low investment

Shorter hours

Low; more full-timers
Store easier to manage
Less stressful
Slower pace of work
Employees live locally
Fewer other employment

opportunities
More informal
management

Higher: employees
perform variety of tasks
Easier to cultivate team
spirit; strong sense of
community

Long
Low
High
High
Low

Implications for the ``satisfaction mirror''
Store size may account
for the inverse correlation between employee
satisfaction and profitability; but it does not explain why satisfaction and
loyalty of employees is not mirrored by satisfaction and loyalty of customers. A
possible explanation for the absence of the mirror effect may lie in the very
nature of staff/customer contact in the stores. It seems that what are most
important to customers in this business are price, convenience and product
availability: aspects of the service which are not directly connected with the
customers' interface with the staff. Thus the larger shops, in which heavy
investments are made in terms of product range, layout and refurbishment,
have the capacity to satisfy customers and generate high levels of profitability,
even though employee satisfaction is significantly lower than in the smaller,
less successful stores.


IJSIM
11,3

264

Furthermore, the marketing trend in this industry seems to be towards less
reliance on staff/customer contact to create differential advantage: supermarket
shopping is increasingly based on self-service. Even though most employees
are still employed in the front office, customer involvement has moved service
staff from a customer contact role to focusing on stock availability and
ensuring a smooth customer flow. Even when staff have direct contact with
customers, such as at the checkout, customer priorities appear to be speed and
accuracy of service, rather than friendliness and personal care.

The company described in this study recently launched a marketing
initiative based on the automatic self-scanning of products and automatic
payment facilities. This removes even further the contact between staff and
customers, and reduces even more the direct impact of the store's staff upon
customer satisfaction. The company's marketing strategy is, therefore, in line
with the findings of
this study, and recognises that current customer
preferences point towards technology driven differentiation rather than more
or improved contact between staff and customers.

Bowen and Lawler (1992) have argued that the nature of empowerment is
contingent upon service context. What this study suggests is that the
relationship between employee satisfaction, customer satisfaction and business
performance is also contingent upon service context. It appears that in low
contact services, or services where technology can be substituted for staff
contact, employee satisfaction and loyalty do not drive the service profit chain.
A key challenge for future research, therefore, is to identify the drivers of
satisfaction and value for such services. For it appears that when staff-
customer interaction is not a significant driver of service value, the service
profit chain is an inadequate tool for modelling business performance.

Returning to the ``satisfaction mirror'', it should be recognised that the fact
that the mirror does not appear to model store performance across this chain of
grocery stores, does not mean that the effect cannot be found when stores of
comparable size are compared. If profitability and employee satisfaction were
to be analysed for the ``achieving'' stores on the one hand, and the ``coasting''
stores on the other, the mirror effect may well emerge. That is to say, within a
sample of achieving stores we may indeed find that the highest performers
generate higher levels of employee satisfaction than the lowest.

There is a clear need to explore this issue further in this organisation. In the
mean time, what this study has demonstrated is that the relationship between
employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction is complex. The mirror effect
may indeed exist at other levels of analysis, or when other variables such as
store size are taken into account; but, all the same, both the ``satisfaction mirror''
and the service profit chain, as they stand, are too simplistic to model the
business performance of this organisation.

Implications for management
The concept of the ``satisfaction mirror'' is not only heavily evangelised in the
services marketing and operations literature, it is also a markedly fashionable


Applying the
service profit
chain

265

view of customer service in the retail industry. So fashionable, in fact, that this
company's management training is very much built on the premise that the
``satisfaction mirror'' is the basis of its competitive success! It is perhaps ironic
that, despite the chief executive's exhortations linking employee and customer
satisfaction, the company's strategy of differentiation through the application
of IT does not in fact rely on the mirror effect between employee satisfaction/
loyalty and customer satisfaction/loyalty. Thus the failure of this study to
establish the desired link between employee satisfaction/loyalty and other
parts of the service profit chain, does not undermine this company's marketing
strategy.

This would appear to be a classic example of the difference between explicit
and implicit or emergent strategies (Mintzberg and Waters, 1985): the explicit
strategy, as expounded in the report and accounts and as evangelised through
the company's management training scheme, being to compete on the basis of
staff/employee contact and the implicit strategy being one of technology driven
competition.

But there is a practical danger here that the company's management need to
recognise, as should any marketing and operations managers who discern the
absence of the satisfaction mirror effect in their business. The danger in
promoting the satisfaction mirror concept to management and staff (in this
case, through the management training scheme, for example) is that employees
receive messages which do not mesh with their own personal experiences.
What was interesting about the response of managers to this study was that
the inverse correlation between profitability and employee satisfaction
accorded with their experience, despite the company's evangelism which they
were expected to promote.

This kind of mismatch between a company's management philosophy and
employees' experience is clearly in danger of generating cynicism and
scepticism. If the company teaches that employee satisfaction will result in
high profits, and employees perceive that the business units where employees
are happiest are in fact the lowest performers, disenchantment with the
company philosophy is bound to arise. It is precisely the dysfunctional
behaviour which results from employees' cynical view of the company
``mantra'', that can lead to the all too familiar ``quality droop'' (Slack, 1991) or
``fizzling'' of corporate initiatives.

Conclusion
So what of the service profit chain? Has the ``satisfaction mirror'' been
shattered? Is Marriott's old adage that happy employees make for happy
customers just another management myth after all? Pushing the implications to
their extreme: should managers seriously consider making their employees'
lives unpleasant in order to improve business performance?! We think not.

In fact this exploratory study has, in line with Loveman's work (1998),
generated data which lend a surprising degree of support to Heskett et al.'s
model: for there were correlations to support most of the links in the chain.


IJSIM
11,3

266

However it is also clear that Heskett et al.'s service profit chain is too simplistic
a model to fully understand the drivers of business success, regardless of
environmental and operational context. The service profit chain does not allow
for industry-specific variables, such as, in this case, store size, which may
significantly intervene upon the relationship between various links in the
chain. Moreover, the model is based on the assumption that the performance of
staff is a critical element of the customer value equation, and cannot adequately
cope with service strategies which differentiates on the basis of factors other
than staff/customer contact. A contingency approach therefore needs to be
developed which explains: those conditions under which the model pertains;
and those conditions under which further intervening variables need to be
considered which can muddy, even negate, the mirror effect.

It is proposed that the methodology for future empirical testing and
development of the framework should be based on: a larger sample of business
units; analysis in a variety of different industries and service types in order to
identify other intervening variables; and techniques such as partial correlation
and multivariate analysis to further understand the relationships between
those intervening variables and the concepts linked in the chain. Future
research should also take into account the possibility that there may be time
lags between improvements in, say, employee satisfaction and loyalty, and the
expected improvements in customer satisfaction and business performance;
again this is a dimension which is not captured in the service profit chain.
Furthermore, the concepts embraced in the service profit chain may themselves
be inherently more complex than Heskett et al. suggest (Bloemer and Kasper,
1995). A contingency sensitive approach to the development of the model is
therefore required to reflect these complexities.

That is the academic challenge. The challenge for marketing and operations
managers is to become competent, rather than naõÈve, users of the service profit
chain model. If Heskett et al.'s service profit chain is used as a diagnostic tool to
analyse the links between the drivers of profit and growth, rather than as a
model which a priori explains those links, it should serve managers well. But
managers have to test the model and conduct the analysis themselves in order
to see whether the links do actually pertain in their businesses. The company's
competitive strategy and management philosophy can then be developed on
the basis of this analysis; and, importantly, the strategic vision communicated
to employees must be brought in line with the business realities with which
employees are all too familiar. Selling a myth does nothing to win over
employees to the company vision.

References

Bloemer, J. and de Ruyter, K. (1998), ``On the relationship between store image, store satisfaction

and store loyalty'', European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 32 Nos 5/6, pp. 499-513.

Bloemer, J.M.M. and Kasper, H.D.P.

(1995),

``The complex relationship between consumer

satisfaction and brand loyalty'', Journal of Economic Psychology, Vol. 16, pp. 311-29.


Bowen, D.E. and Lawler III, E.E.E. (1992), ``The empowerment of service workers: what, why,

how and when'', Sloan Management Review, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 31-9.

Bryman, A. and Cramer, D. (1990), Quantitative Data Analysis for Social Scientists, Routledge,

London.

Buzzell, R.D. and Gale, B.T. (1987), The PIMS Principles: Linking Strategy to Performance, Free

Press, New York, NY.

Applying the
service profit
chain

Carlzon, J. (1987), Moments of Truth, Ballinger Publishing Co., Cambridge.
Deming, W.E. (1985), Out of the Crisis, Centre for Advanced Engineering Study, Massachusetts

267

Institute of Technology, Cambridge.

Heskett, J.L., Jones, T.O., Loveman, G.W., Sasser Jr, W.E. and Schlesinger, L.A. (1994), ``Putting

the service profit chain to work'', Harvard Business Review, March-April, pp. 164-74.

Heskett, J.L., Sasser Jr, W.E. and Schlesinger, L.A. (1997), The Service Profit Chain: How Leading
Companies Link Profit and Growth to Loyalty, Satisfaction and Value, Free Press, New
York, NY.

Hostage, G.M. (1975), ``Quality control in a service business'', Harvard Business Review, Vol. 53

No. 4, pp. 98-106.

Ishikawa, K. (1985), What is Total Quality Control? The Japanese Way, Prentice-Hall, Englewood

Cliffs, NJ.

Johnston, R.

(1995),

``The determinants of service quality: satisfiers and dissatisfiers'',

International Journal of Service Industry Management, Vol. 6 No. 5, pp. 53-71

Jones, T.O. and Sasser Jr, W.E. (1995),

``Why satisfied customers defect'', Harvard Business

Review, November-December, pp. 88-99.

Liedtka, J.M., Haskins, M.E., Rosenblum, J.W. and Weber, J. (1997), ``The generative cycle: linking

knowledge and relationships'', Sloan Management Review, Fall, pp. 47-58.

Loveman, G.W. (1998) ``Employee satisfaction, customer loyalty, and financial performance: an
empirical examination of the service profit chain in retail banking'', Journal of Service
Research, Vol. 1 No. 1, August, pp. 18-31

Mintzberg, H. and Waters, D.

(1985),

``Of strategies, deliberate and emergent'', Strategic

Management Journal, Vol. 6, pp. 257-72.

Morris, C. (1993), Quantitative Approaches in Business Studies, Pitman, London.
Normann, R. and Ramirez, R.

``From value chain to value constellation: designing

(1993)

interactive strategy'', Harvard Business School, July-August, pp. 65-77.

Reichheld, F.F. (1993), ``Loyalty-based management'', Harvard Business Review, March-April,

pp. 64-73.

Reichheld, F.F. (1996), The Loyalty Effect: The Hidden Force Behind Growth, Profits and Lasting

Value, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

Reichheld, F.F. and Aspinall, K. (1993), ``Building high-loyalty business systems'', Journal of

Retail Banking, Winter, pp. 21-9.

Reichheld, F.F. and Sasser Jr, W.E. (1990), ``Zero defections: quality comes to services'', Harvard

Business Review, September-October, pp. 105-11.

Rucci, A.J., Kirn, S.P. and Quinn, R.T. (1998), ``The employee-customer-profit chain at Sears'',

Harvard Business Review, January-February, pp. 83-97.

Rust, R. and Oliver, R.L. (1994) ``Insights and managerial implications from the frontier'', in Rust,
R. and Oliver, R.L. (Eds), Service Quality: New Directions in Theory and Practice, Sage
Publications, London.

Rust, R., Zahorik, A.J. and Keiningham, T.L. (1995), ``Return on quality (ROQ): making service

quality financially accountable'', Journal of Marketing, Vol. 59, April, pp. 58-70.


IJSIM
11,3

268

Schlesinger, L.A. and Heskett, J.L. (1991a), ``Breaking the cycle of failure in services'', Sloan

Management Review, Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 17-28.

Schlesinger, L.A. and Heskett, J.L. (1991b),

``The service-driven service company'', Harvard

Business Review, September-October, pp. 71-80.

Schlesinger, L.A. and Heskett, J.L.

(1991c),

``Customer satisfaction is rooted in employee

satisfaction'', Harvard Business Review, November-December, pp. 148-9.

Schneider, B. and Bowen, D. (1985), ``New services design, development and implementation and
the employee'', in George, W.R. and Marshall, C. (Eds), New Services, The American
Marketing Association, Chicago, IL, pp. 82-101.

Schneider, B. and Bowen, D. (1993), ``Human resource management is critical'', Organisational

Dynamics, pp. 39-52

Slack, N. (1991), Manufacturing Advantage, Mercury Books, London.
Zeithaml, V.A., Berry, L.L. and Parasuraman, A. (1996), ``The behavioral consequences of service

quality'', Journal of Marketing, Vol. 60, April, pp. 31-46.

