Revisiting the Performance Consequences of CEO Succession: The Impacts of Successor Type,
Postsuccession Senior Executive Turnover, and Departing CEO Tenure
Author(s): Wei Shen and Albert A. Cannella Jr.
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Aug., 2002), pp. 717-733
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3069306
Accessed: 10/07/2010 10:16

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Journal.

http://www.jstor.org


O  Academy  of Management  Journal 
2002,  Vol.  45,  No.  4,  717-733. 

REVISITING THE PERFORMANCE CONSEQUENCES OF CEO 

SUCCESSION: THE IMPACTS OF SUCCESSOR TYPE, 
POSTSUCCESSION SENIOR EXECUTIVE TURNOVER, 

AND DEPARTING CEO TENURE 

WEI SHEN 

University  of  Florida 

ALBERT A.  CANNELLA, Jr. 

Texas  A&M University 

Highlighting the  importance of  succession  context, this  study  examines  the  perfor- 
mance impacts of successor type, postsuccession  senior executive turnover, and de- 
parting CEO tenure. Following a power circulation theory of control, we distinguished 
three types of CEO successors: followers, contenders, and outsiders. Our theory and 
evidence from a sample of 228 CEO successions suggest that successor type interacts 
with postsuccession senior executive turnover to influence firm return on assets (ROA) 
and that there is an inverted U-shaped relationship between departing CEO tenure and 
postsuccession firm ROA. 

In the past several decades, research on the per- 
formance  consequences  of  CEO succession  has 
been  extensive  but  characterized by  inconsistent 
findings and debates about causes and effects (e.g., 
Brown,  1982;  Carroll, 1984;  Friedman & Singh, 
1989; Gamson & Scotch, 1964; Grusky, 1963; Have- 
man,  1993;  Lubatkin, Chung,  Rogers, & Owers, 
1989;  Wiersema,  1995;  Zajac,  1990).  The  general 
observation  has been  made  that it is not the event  of 
CEO succession per se, but the succession context, 
that  affects  postsuccession 
firm  performance 
(Finkelstein & Hambrick, 1996: 193-201).  Succes- 
sor origin, a key successor characteristic that refers 
to whether a new CEO comes from inside or outside 
the firm whose  chief executive he or she becomes, 
has been  proposed as important. Successor origin 
both reflects succession context and has significant 
implications  for  subsequent  firm  performance 
(Brady & Helmich, 1984). However, empirical stud- 
ies also report inconsistent evidence regarding the 
performance impacts of insider and outsider suc- 
cession,  even when the influence of presuccession 
firm performance has been controlled (for a review, 
see Kesner and Sebora [1994]). 

In this  study,  we  strove to  capture succession 
context  more  completely  than  previous  research 
has  and to  enhance  understanding of  the  perfor- 
mance consequences  of CEO succession  by simul- 

We thank Bob Hoskisson, Jing Zhou, Catherine Daily, 
and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful  com- 
ments and suggestions. 

717 

taneously examining three important components 
of  succession  contexts.  First, we  focused  on  key 
characteristics of CEO successors, but we diverged 
from previous research in that we did not dichoto- 
mize  CEO successors into  insiders  and outsiders. 
Adopting  a  power  circulation  theory  of  control, 
which  takes  intrafirm  contention  into  account 
(Ocasio, 1994; Ocasio & Kim, 1999), we  propose 
herein that there are two  distinct types  of insider 
successors: those appointed following their prede- 
cessors' dismissals  and those appointed following 
their  predecessors'  ordinary retirements. We  la- 
beled these two types of inside successors contend- 
ers  and  followers,  respectively.  Thus,  including 
outsiders, we examined three types of CEO succes- 
sors. These three types of successors-contenders, 
followers,  and outsiders-differ 
importantly with 
respect their ability to manage change, their firm- 
specific  knowledge, and the risk of adverse selec- 
tion  (selection  of  an  unsuitable  successor)  they 
pose. We expected them to have different impacts 
on firm performance. 

Second, we focused on postsuccession executive 
turnover at the  top  management team  level.  Ac- 
cording to upper echelons theory, it is not a firm's 
CEO alone, but  its  entire management team, that 
shapes strategic decisions  (Dooley & Fryxell, 1999; 
Hambrick, Cho, & Chen, 1996; Hambrick & Mason, 
1984).  Senior  executive  turnover influences  top 
management team composition (Wagner, Pfeffer, & 
O'Reilly, 1984) and may have a significant impact 
on strategic decision making and firm performance 
(Virany, Tushman, & Romanelli, 1992). However, 


718 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

August 

its performance impact has not received much in- 
vestigation in  previous research. We propose that 
senior  executive  turnover following  CEO succes- 
sion  reflects top management team dynamics and 
that its impact on firm performance will be moder- 
ated by successor type. 

Lastly, we focused on CEO succession frequency 
at the organizational level by examining the influ- 
ence  of  a  departing CEO's tenure. Frequent CEO 
successions  may disrupt organizational continuity 
and hurt firm performance (Grusky, 1963; Kesner & 
Sebora, 1994). At the same time, long CEO tenure 
has been found to be directly linked to top manage- 
ment's commitment to  the  status quo  (Hambrick, 
Geletkanycz, & Fredrickson, 1993) and decreases in 
the  fit between  firm strategy, structure, and envi- 
ronmental demands (Miller, 1991). Drawing on the 
organizational change literature, we  propose that 
departing CEO tenure  importantly affects  subse- 
quent firm performance through its impact on or- 
ganizational inertia and the disruption surrounding 
a succession  event. 

Previous research has  suggested that many fac- 
tors  influence  firm  performance. The  impact  of 
some factors, such as firm size,  governance struc- 
ture, and  industry environment, may be  particu- 
larly significant in the CEO succession context ow- 
ing  to  their  potential  influence  over  managerial 
discretion (Finkelstein & Hambrick, 1996). To re- 

duce the influence  of confounding factors, we  in- 
cluded  several  control variables in  our  analysis: 
successor industry experience; firm size, diversifi- 
cation,  presuccession  performance,  and  gover- 
nance structure; and industry performance and in- 
stability. Figure 1 illustrates our proposed model of 
the performance consequences of CEO succession. 
Firm performance is  a  multidimensional  phe- 
nomenon  that has  been  measured with  both  ac- 
counting- and market-based indicators in previous 
research (e.g., Daily, Certo, & Dalton, 2000; Finkel- 
stein  & Hambrick,  1990;  Ocasio,  1994;  Zajac, 1990). 
Accounting  measures  reflect  the  current  opera- 
tional  performance of  a  firm, while  market mea- 
sures indicate investors' perceptions of the firm's 
future performance potential  (Daily et  al.,  2000). 
Our study  focused  on  firms'  operational perfor- 
mance rather than market valuation for the follow- 
ing reasons: First, market valuation is often subject 
to forces beyond management control; in contrast, 
operational performance is  more  under  manage- 
ment control (Grossman & Hoskisson, 1998; Ham- 
brick & Finkelstein, 1995). Second, boards of direc- 
tors often find  that accounting measures provide 
convenient  targets for management to  reach (Jos- 
kow, Rose, & Shepard, 1993) and are more likely 
to  link  them  (rather than  market valuation)  to 
CEO compensation (Hambrick & Finkelstein, 1995; 
Jensen & Murphy, 1990).  Thus,  management has 

A Model of the Performance Consequences of CEO Succession 

FIGURE 1 


2002 

Shen  and  Cannella 

719 

incentives to focus on operational performance. Fi- 
nally,  in  the  succession  literature, financial event 
studies  have  generally used  market indicators to 
examine  immediate  investor  reactions to  succes- 
sion  announcements  rather than  the  actual  cash 
flows  generated by the firms over the first two  or 
three years  of  new  CEOs' tenures  (Finkelstein  & 
Hambrick, 1996: 201). Our study is  an attempt to 
understand  the  impact  of  CEO succession  on  a 
firm's actual operational performance, not investor 
reactions or market valuation. 

THEORY AND  HYPOTHESES 

Three  Types  of  CEO Successors 

Organization and strategy scholars studying CEO 
succession  often dichotomize CEO successors into 
insiders and outsiders: insiders are executives pro- 
moted from within the firm, and outsiders come to 
new  CEO  positions  from  other  organizations 
(Allen,  Panian,  & Lotz,  1979;  Dalton  & Kesner, 
1985; Helmich  & Brown, 1972; Kesner & Dalton, 
1994; Wiersema, 1995; Zajac, 1990). The assump- 
tion in most research is that inside  successors are 
appointed under conditions of good company per- 
formance and  reflect  intent  to  maintain  strategic 
continuity,  and  outside  successors  are appointed 
under  conditions  of  poor  company  performance 
and reflect intent to initiate strategic change (Brady 
& Helmich, 1984). We agree that firms do not typ- 
ically  appoint outside  successors unless  they face 
the pressure of initiating strategic change, coupled 
with  an  unavailability  of  competent  inside  suc- 
cessor  candidates  (Cannella  &  Lubatkin,  1993; 
Fredrickson, Hambrick, & Baumrin, 1988; Ocasio, 
1999). However, we propose that the appointment 
of an inside  successor does not necessarily reflect 
intent to maintain strategic continuity. This prop- 
osition is grounded in a power circulation theory of 
control, and it separates our study from mainstream 
succession  research. 

The power circulation theory of control (Jackall, 
1988; Ocasio, 1994; Ocasio & Kim, 1999) suggests 
that incumbent CEOs face a risk of power contests 
initiated by  other senior executives  as well  as by 
outsider directors. CEOs are surrounded by senior 
executives who are typically ambitious individuals 
with  strong  needs  for  power  and  control.  The 
power of a CEO is thus, from time to time, subject to 
challenge and contestation from these senior exec- 
utives  (Pfeffer, 1981, 1992). The likelihood  of CEO 
turnover is significantly increased when questions 
arise about an incumbent's capabilities and viable 
inside candidates exist (Ocasio, 1994). Research on 
successor selection has also shown that inside suc- 

cessors are often appointed in periods of poor firm 
performance (Dalton & Kesner, 1985; Friedman & 
Singh, 1989), even in situations of forced CEO de- 
parture (Parrino, 1997). Although this phenomenon 
has been proposed to reflect managerial entrench- 
ment (Boeker & Goodstein, 1993), we believe that it 
more likely reflects the outcome of power struggles 
within top management. According to power circu- 
lation theory (Ocasio, 1994; Ocasio & Kim, 1999); 
an inside  succession  following  a CEO's dismissal 
reflects a successful internal power contest against 
the CEO, and the successor is a contending execu- 
tive who has won the support and approval of the 
board of directors. In this situation, the inside suc- 
cessor, whom  we  refer to  as a contender, is  more 
likely  to  be  charged with  a  mandate to  initiate 
strategic change, as is  the  case in  an outside  suc- 
cession, rather than a mandate to maintain strategic 
continuity. 

In contrast, if  an inside  successor  is  appointed 
following  the  predecessor's  ordinary  retirement 
rather than dismissal,  the  successor's mandate is 
more likely to be to maintain strategic continuity, 
as  proposed  in  previous  research (Brady & Hel- 
mich, 1984; Datta & Rajagopalan, 1998; Friedman & 
Singh,  1989).  Because  successors  who  follow  a 
CEO's ordinary retirement are  often  expected  to 
continue  and follow  their predecessors' strategies 
(Hambrick et al., 1993), we refer them as followers. 
Thus, as noted above, including outsider succes- 
sors, there are three types  of CEO successors: fol- 
lowers,  contenders,  and  outsiders.  These  three 
types of CEO successors will have different impacts 
on  postsuccession  firm  operational performance. 
We view  three sets of factors as the source of per- 
formance effects: firm-specific knowledge, change 
initiatives, and the risk of adverse selection. In our 
conceptualization,  change  initiatives  have  two 
parts-a  board mandate  for  alterations of  firm's 
strategic profile, and the  new  leader's propensity 
for and ability to make such alterations. The risk of 
adverse selection arises because information asym- 
metry between the board and successor candidates 
makes it difficult for the board to accurately assess 
if  the  abilities  of  a potential  successor match the 
needs  of the firm. The board may select  someone 
who is poorly suited to the job (Zajac, 1990). 

Follower successors. Follower successors are in- 
side executives who are promoted to CEO positions 
following  the  ordinary retirements of their prede- 
cessors.  As  insiders,  they  possess  firm-specific 
knowledge  (Brady & Helmich,  1984). Further, be- 
cause  of  their  frequent exposure  to  their  firms' 
boards  of  directors and  other  senior  executives, 
coupled  with  their history of performance inside 
the firms, the risk of adverse selection is relatively 


720 

Academy of Management Journal 

August 

low  (Zajac,  1990).  However,  follower  successors 
have  significant  limitations  in  their  ability  to  initi- 
ate strategic  change  because  they  are often  selected 
and  groomed  by  the  outgoing  CEOs  (Cannella  & 
Shen,  2001).  Incumbent  CEOs  often  believe  that 
their  successors  should  be  similar  to  them  (Ham- 
brick  et al.,  1993),  and  many  incumbents  do  select 
such  successors  when  they  retire  (Levinson,  1974; 
Zajac  & Westphal,  1996).  Because  of  their  close 
connections  and  similarities  to  their  predecessors, 
follower  successors  are heavily  influenced  and  so- 
cialized  by their outgoing  CEOs and may  share with 
them  the  same  or  similar  strategic  perspectives 
(Fondas  & Wiersema,  1997).  They  are  also  signifi- 
cantly  constrained  by  their  within-firm  social  net- 
works  (Shleifer  & Summers,  1988).  Further,  CEO 
successors  promoted  after  their  predecessors'  re- 
tirements  typically  have  mandates  to maintain  stra- 
tegic  continuity  rather  than  to  initiate  change 
(Friedman  & Olk,  1995). 

Therefore,  although  follower  successors' 

firm- 
specific  knowledge  and  the  relatively  low  risk  of 
adverse  selection  they  pose  can  help  reduce  the 
their  close  connec- 
disruption  of  CEO succession, 
tion  to  their  predecessors  and  social  networks 
within  the  firm,  coupled  with  a likely  mandate  for 
continuity  rather  than  change,  will  impede  their 
initiating  significant  strategic  change  and  make  it 
firm 
difficult  for  them  to  significantly 
operational  performance.  Given  this,  no hypothesis 
is  proposed  regarding  the  performance  impact  of 
follower  successors. 

influence 

Contender  successors.  Contender  successors  are 
inside  executives  who  are  promoted  to  CEO posi- 
tions  after the  dismissals  of their predecessors.  Like 
follower  successors,  contender  successors'  work 
experiences  give  them  firm-specific  knowledge 
(Brady  &  Helmich,  1984)  and  their  exposure  to 
directors  and  other  senior  executives  reduces  the 
risk of adverse  selection  (Zajac, 1990).  What distin- 
guishes  contender  successors  from follower  succes- 
sors  is  their  having  mandates  for change  from their 
that 
boards  of  directors  and  the  high  likelihood 
they  will  be  able  to  initiate  and  implement  impor- 
tant  changes. 

Unlike  follower  successors,  who  are usually  se- 
lected  and  groomed  by  the  outgoing  CEOs,  con- 
tender  successors  are  promoted  after  successfully 
challenging  their predecessors.  Because  power  con- 
testation  and  CEO dismissal  often  occur  in  periods 
of  poor  firm  performance  (Ocasio,  1994;  Puffer  & 
successors  will  be 
Weintrop,  1991),  contender 
charged  to  initiate  strategic  change  and  improve 
firm  performance.  CEO dismissal  is  a very  disrup- 
tive  event,  and boards  of directors  are very  cautious 
in  making  dismissal  decisions 
(Alderfer,  1986; 

their  predecessors 

Lorsch  & MacIver,  1989).  In  order  to  gain  support 
from directors,  contenders  for succession  must  con- 
vince  them  that the incumbent  CEOs' competencies 
are not  up  to  the  demands  of the  job and  that  they 
(the  contenders)  have  different  strategic  perspec- 
tives  and  can  perform  better  (Ocasio,  1994).  Fur- 
ther,  contenders  may  not  only  have  board  support, 
but  also  support  among  senior  executives  for their 
power  contests  against  the  incumbent  CEOs (Van- 
cil,  1987).  An  established  power  base  and  support 
within  top  management  will  greatly  facilitate  the 
process  of  taking  charge  (Gabarro,  1987).  Lastly, 
contender  successors  do  not  have  to  be  concerned 
in  initiating 
about  offending 
changes  because  their  predecessors  have  been  dis- 
missed  and  have  terminated  all  association  with 
the  firms  (Vancil,  1987).  Contender  successors  may 
also  be  constrained  to  a  certain  degree  by  their 
within-firm  social  networks,  but  demands  from the 
boards  for change  initiatives  will  push  contenders 
to  overcome  such  constraints  in  their  actions.  The 
firm-specific  knowledge,  different  strategic  per- 
spectives,  and  supportive  directors  and  executives 
possessed  by  contender  successors  can  not  only 
help  them  reduce  harmful  disruption  associated 
with  CEO dismissal,  but also  enable  them  to formu- 
late  and  implement  appropriate  strategic  changes 
in  a timely  manner.  Thus,  we  expected  contender 
successors  to have  a positive  impact  on subsequent 
operational  performance. 

Hypothesis  1.  Contender  successors  will  be 
positively  associated  with  postsuccession  op- 
erational  performance. 
Outsider  successors.  Outsider  successors  are 
most  often  selected  in  periods  of  poor  firm  perfor- 
mance  and  when  directors  cannot  locate  a compe- 
tent  successor  within  their  firms  (Finkelstein  & 
Hambrick,  1996:  182-183).  Outsider  successors  are 
prized  for their  fresh  perspectives  and  their  ability 
to  initiate  strategic  change  (Helmich  &  Brown, 
1972;  Kesner  &  Dalton,  1994;  Wiersema,  1995). 
Also,  the popular  business  press  has advocated  out- 
sider  succession  when  corporate  transformation  is 
required  (e.g.,  BusinessWeek,  1997).  However,  past 
research  has  reported  mixed  investor  reactions  to 
outsider  succession,  and  little  is  known  about  its 
(Kesner  &  Sebora,  1994: 
long-term 
355).  Although  the  objective  of outsider  succession 
is  improved  firm  performance,  three  factors  work 
against this  outcome.  First, outsider  successors  lack 
firm-specific  knowledge.  Facing  mandates  to  turn 
performance  around,  outsider  successors  are often 
pressured  to  take  quick  action  (Friedman  & Saul, 
1991).  However,  without  a  deep  understanding  of 
their  new  firms'  internal  operations  and  external 

implications 


2002 

Shen  and  Cannella 

721 

environments, it is difficult for outsider successors 
to  quickly  formulate and  implement  appropriate 
strategic changes (Gabarro, 1987; Kotter, 1982). 

Second, it is more difficult for directors to fully 
and accurately evaluate the capabilities of outside 
candidates (compared with  inside  candidates) be- 
cause  directors usually  do not have a deep famil- 
iarity with them. This evaluation difficulty leads to 
a higher risk of adverse selection  in  that a newly 
appointed outsider successor may not  fit a firm's 
strategic demands (Zajac, 1990). Finally,  outsider 
successors often face the challenge of finding com- 
petent  and  supportive  senior  executives  within 
their new  firms (Friedman & Saul,  1991).  Senior 
executives  have  often been  selected  by  outsiders' 
predecessors  and  have  close  connections  with 
them.  These  executives  are  often  hostile  toward 
outside  successors  (Boeker  &  Goodstein,  1993; 
Gouldner, 1954). Constrained by their experiences 
and by hostility, these executives may have strong 
commitments to their firms' past strategies and will 
resist  any  significant  changes  initiated  by  the 
outsider  successors  (Helmich  &  Brown,  1972; 
Wiersema, 1995). Although the outsider successors 
have the support of their boards, the lack of com- 
petent and supportive executive teams when  they 
take office puts them at a significant disadvantage. 
Thus, despite their being appointed to turn around 
performance,  we  expected  outsider  successors 
to  often  have  negative  impacts  on  operational 
performance. 

Hypothesis 2. Outsider successors will be neg- 
atively associated  with postsuccession  opera- 
tional performance. 

Postsuccession  Senior Executive Turnover 

According  to  upper  echelons  theory,  a  firm's 
strategies and performance are shaped by its entire 
top  management  team  rather than  by  the  CEO 
alone  (Hambrick & Mason,  1984).  We  expected 
that personnel  changes in a top management team 
following  CEO succession  would  have  a signifi- 
cant  impact  on  firm  operational  performance. 
Postsuccession  senior executive turnover has been 
studied primarily as a consequence of CEO succes- 
sion. Following a "strategic replacement" argument 
(Gouldner, 1954), most previous studies  state that 
postsuccession  senior executive turnover reflects a 
new CEO's efforts to clear executive deadwood and 
to  facilitate  strategic  reorientation  (Friedman & 
Saul,  1991;  Helmich  & Brown,  1972;  Kesner  & Dal- 
ton,  1994; Wiersema,  1995).  The underlying  logic  is 
that because  executives  are constrained by  their 
experiences (Hambrick & Mason, 1984), it is neces- 

sary for new  CEOs to  replace  executives  whose 
knowledge and skills have become obsolete in  or- 
der to facilitate desired strategic changes (Keck & 
Tushman, 1993; Wiersema & Bantel, 1993). Accord- 
ing to this strategic replacement argument, postsuc- 
cession  senior  executive  turnover will  positively 
contribute to firm performance. However, there is 
evidence  that  executive  turnover following  CEO 
succession,  considered in  isolation,  has no  direct 
impact on postsuccession  operational performance 
(Virany et al., 1992). 

Like successor selection,  senior executive  turn- 
over in different succession contexts likely has dif- 
ferent causes,  and thus  different impacts on  firm 
operational performance. For example, much of the 
senior executive  turnover after a follower succes- 
sion  may  simply  consist  of  ordinary retirements 
rather than dismissals initiated by the new CEO. In 
other  situations,  some  executives  may  leave  be- 
cause of their dissatisfaction with their firms' suc- 
cession  decisions  or their desire to  pursue better 
career opportunities. Further, the  succession  con- 
text may even significantly moderate the impact of 
senior executive turnover attributable to dismissal 
on firm operational performance. Because succes- 
sor  type  reflects  important characteristics of  the 
succession  context, as pointed out earlier, we  dis- 
cuss below how  successor type may influence the 
nature of executive turnover and moderate the as- 
sociation between postsuccession  senior executive 
turnover and firm operational performance. 

Senior executive  turnover after a follower  suc- 
cession.  In a follower succession,  the retired CEO 
exercises  a  strong influence  over  the  succession 
process  (Lorsch & MacIver, 1989).  As  discussed 
earlier, follower successors are usually  committed 
to the retired CEOs' strategies and are unlikely  to 
initiate significant organizational changes. In this 
context, most senior executive departures are likely 
to be ordinary retirements among top management 
team members and to  reflect a well-planned  suc- 
cession  process in  which  a new  top management 
team smoothly succeeds the old one (Vancil, 1987). 
This kind of senior executive turnover emphasizes 
continuity of leadership and strategies, and it gen- 
erally will  not  have  a  significant impact on  firm 
performance (Friedman & Singh,  1989).  Even  if 
there are cases in  which  senior executives  depart 
for reasons other than ordinary retirement, the de- 
partures are unlikely  to  affect firm performance. 
For example, when  these  executives  quit because 
they are passed over in the CEO succession tourna- 
ment, their departures are probably expected  and 
prepared for (Vancil, 1987). Further, dismissals  of 
executives by follower successors often reflect the 
successors' efforts to  consolidate  their leadership 


722 

Academy of Management Journal 

August 

initiate 

rather  than  efforts  to 
strategic  change 
(Friedman  & Saul,  1991).  No matter which  scenario 
unfolds,  senior  executive 
turnover  in  a  follower 
succession  context  is  unlikely  to  significantly 
in- 
fluence  firm  operational  performance. 

Senior  executive 

turnover  following 

a  con- 
tender  succession.  In  a  contender  succession,  se- 
nior  executive  turnover  is  likely  to be greatly  influ- 
enced  by  the  new  CEO's effort  to  initiate  strategic 
change.  As  pointed  out  earlier,  contender  succes- 
sors  have  garnered  support  from  directors  in  their 
power  contests  with  their  predecessors,  and  they 
are expected  to perform better than  their  dismissed 
predecessors.  Under  the pressure  of improving  firm 
performance,  contender  successors  will  be  very 
prudent  in  assessing  the  capabilities  of their  senior 
executive  teams  and restructuring  them  to suit their 
new  strategies.  Those  executives  whose  capabili- 
ties  and  loyalties  are  suited  to  the  predecessors' 
strategies  will  be  removed  in  favor  of  those  more 
suited  to  the  new  leaders'  strategies.  As  insiders, 
contender  successors  are  familiar  with  both  the 
existing  cadre  of  senior  executives  and  the  firms' 
(Brady  &  Helmich, 
competitive 
1984).  Their  valuable  firm-specific  knowledge  can 
help  them  reduce  the  risk  of making  poor  replace- 
ment  decisions  and  help  them  identify  and  pro- 
mote  executives  who  are competent  to  assist  them 
to  accomplish  the  needed  strategic  change.  Thus, 
turnover  following  a  contender 
senior  executive 
succession  will  have  a  positive 
impact  on  opera- 
tional  performance. 

environments 

turnover  following 

Hypothesis  3.  Senior  executive 
turnover  fol- 
lowing  a  contender  succession  will  be  posi- 
tively  associated  with  postsuccession 
opera- 
tional  performance. 
Senior  executive 

an  out- 
sider  succession.  Like contenders,  outsider  succes- 
sors  are  also  expected  to  initiate  strategic  change 
and  turn  around  firm  performance.  However,  the 
organizational  context  of  an  outsider  succession 
is 
significantly  different  from that of a contender  suc- 
cession.  An  important  reason  for  outsider  succes- 
sion  is the judgment  by directors  that no  competent 
successor  candidate  is  available  within  their  firm 
(Finkelstein  & Hambrick,  1996).  Indeed,  an  out- 
sider  succession  often  signals  a loss  of control  for a 
firm's  entire  top  management  team,  rather than  for 
the  CEO alone  (Boeker  & Goodstein,  1993).  In this 
situation,  tension  within  the  top  management  team 
is  likely  to be high,  because  senior  executives  from 
the  previous  regime  may  feel  inferior,  fearful,  or 
even  hostile  toward  the  outsider  successor,  who 
may  in  turn  question  the  competencies  of  these 
senior  executives 
(Gouldner,  1954).  Senior  execu- 

tive  turnover  following  an  outsider  succession, 
therefore,  is  likely  to be  initiated  either  by the  suc- 
cessor,  to  restructure  the  top  management  team 
(Helmich  & Brown,  1972;  Wiersema,  1995),  or by 
the  senior  executives 
themselves,  out  of  disap- 
pointment  with  the  succession  decision  and/or  the 
fear  of  dismissal  by  the  new  leader  (Friedman  & 
Saul,  1991).  In  addition,  because  the  context  in- 
volves  poor  firm performance  and  tension  with  the 
outsider  successor,  some  executives  who  are well 
suited  to  helping  the  outsider  successor 
initiate 
change  may  elect  to  jump  ship  for  better  career 
opportunities  elsewhere  (Cannella,  Fraser,  & Lee, 
1995). 

Unlike 

in  executive 

senior  executive 

in  a  contender  succession, 

in  an  out- 
sider  succession 
turnover  will 
be  detrimental  to  firm  performance  for  two  rea- 
sons.  First,  it  further  increases  the  disruption  of 
the  outsider  succession.  Although  disruption 
in 
an  outsider  succession 
is  inevitable  and  neces- 
sary  to  eliminate  the  influence  of  past  strategies, 
a  certain  degree  of  stability 
leader- 
ship  is  beneficial  to  firm  operations  because  out- 
sider  successors  need  time  to  accumulate 
firm- 
(Gabarro,  1987;  Kotter,  1982; 
specific  knowledge 
Virany  et  al.,  1992).  A  high  rate  of  senior  execu- 
tive  turnover  after  an  outsider  succession, 
espe- 
cially  turnover  owing  to  the  executives 
seeking 
better  career  opportunities,  will  deprive  the  out- 
sider  successor  of  some  managerial  talent  and  a 
much-needed 
transition  period.  Second,  unlike 
contender  successors,  outsider  successors  are not 
familiar  with  their  new  firms'  internal  and  exter- 
nal  environments,  nor  do  they  know  their  senior 
executives  well.  In  this  situation,  executive  re- 
placement  decisions  they  make  very  early  in  their 
tenures  may  not  always  meet  the  demands  of 
their  competitive  environments,  and  some  valu- 
able  executive  talent  may  be  lost  (Gabarro, 1987). 
Indeed,  such  personnel  changes  may  arise  more 
from  pressure  to  initiate  change  and  power  con- 
solidation  than  from  a careful  assessment  of  stra- 
tegic  contingencies  and  executive  competencies 
(Gouldner,  1954).  Such  motivation  further  under- 
mines  the  quality  of  the  outsider  successor's  ex- 
ecutive  replacement  decisions.  Given  these  rea- 
an 
sons, 
outsider  succession 
to  have  a  nega- 
tive  impact  on  firm  operational  performance. 

senior  executive 

is  expected 

following 

turnover 

Hypothesis  4.  Senior  executive 
turnover  fol- 
lowing  an  outsider  succession  will  be  nega- 
tively  associated  with  postsuccession 
opera- 
tional  performance. 


2002 

Shen  and  Cannella 

723 

Departing CEO Tenure 

The length of a departing CEO's tenure is another 
important  component  of  the  succession  context 
and reflects the frequency of CEO succession  at a 
firm. Departing CEO tenure influences postsucces- 
sion  operational  performance through  organiza- 
tional inertia and the disruption surrounding CEO 
succession.  Hambrick and  Fukutomi  (1991)  pro- 
posed that CEOs increase commitment to their stra- 
tegic paradigms over their tenure in office. There is 
empirical evidence that top executive tenure is di- 
rectly  linked  to  top  management commitment to 
the status quo (Hambrick et al., 1993) and strategic 
persistence (Finkelstein & Hambrick, 1990; Grimm 
& Smith,  1991). Because strategies determine the 
direction  of  capital  investment,  the  means  of  re- 
source allocation within  a firm, and its  exchange 
relations with  other firms (Porter, 1980), strategic 
persistence implies  a strong continuity in the pat- 
terns of these activities, all of which  are sources of 
organizational inertia (Hannan & Freeman, 1984). 
Strong inertia arising from a long-tenured CEO can 
create serious problems for the  successor because 
the strategies and structures developed  during the 
departing CEO's tenure are probably no longer ap- 
propriate. For example,  Miller  (1991)  reported a 
decreased  fit  between  firm  strategies, structures, 
and  environmental  demands  among  firms  with 
long-tenured  CEOs. For  successors  who  adhere 
to  their  predecessors'  strategies, negative  conse- 
quences of the decreased fit are likely to arise. For 
successors who  want to initiate strategic changes, 
the strong organizational inertia developed  during 
their predecessors' time in office will  increase the 
difficulty  of, or may even  prevent, accomplishing 
their goals. Thus, the exit of a long-tenured CEO is 
likely to have a negative impact on postsuccession 
operational performance. 

However, a very short departing CEO tenure may 
also be  detrimental to  postsuccession  firm opera- 
tions.  When firms replace their CEOs frequently, 
the new  leaders are often unable to establish reli- 
able  and  accountable organizational routines  be- 
cause  of the  disruption associated with  each suc- 
cession event (Vancil, 1987). This lack of reliability 
and accountability will  have a negative impact on 
both inside  and outside stakeholders (Friedman & 
Saul,  1991; Hannan & Freeman, 1984). Empirical 
studies  have  consistently  reported that  frequent 
CEO  succession  negatively  affects  firm  perfor- 
mance (Kesner & Sebora, 1994). Further, short CEO 
tenure often implies  that departing CEOs failed to 
consolidate  their  leadership,  either because  they 
lacked  the  needed  competencies  or because  the 
situations  they  were  facing were  extremely diffi- 

cult. The failure of these  CEOs drains away valu- 
able resources and worsens the situation faced by 
their successors (Grusky, 1963). Thus, like the exit 
of a long-tenured CEO, the exit of a short-tenured 
CEO will  also have a negative impact on postsuc- 
cession  firm performance. Given this  pattern, we 
propose  an  inverted  U-shaped  relationship  be- 
tween  departing CEO tenure  and  postsuccession 
firm operational performance. 

Hypothesis  5.  There  will  be  an  inverted 
U-shaped  relationship  between  departing 
CEO tenure  and  postsuccession  operational 
performance. 

METHODS 

Sample and Data Collection 

The population for this study was large, publicly 
traded U.S.  corporations. We  initially  selected  a 
random sample of 300 public corporations report- 
ing at least $200 million in sales for 1988. We then 
gathered data on CEO succession  and senior exec- 
utive  turnover for  each  year  from  1988  through 
1994.  A  primary data source for CEO succession 
and senior executive  turnover was  the  officer list 
provided in  each firm's 10K reports to sharehold- 
ers. Additional descriptive data on CEOs and their 
successors were collected from Dun & Bradstreet's 
Reference Book of Corporate Management and Dow 
Jones Interactive's database, the Wall Street Journal 
and News  Wires. Data on firm operational perfor- 
mance,  size,  diversification  level,  and  industry 
characteristics were collected  from COMPUSTAT. 
Data on governance structure were collected  from 
proxy  statements. Our final  sample  consisted  of 
228 successions with complete data, including 159 
follower  successions,  41  contender  successions, 
and 28 outsider successions. 

Measures 

Dependent  variable:  Postsuccession  opera- 
tional  performance.  As  pointed  out  earlier, our 
study focused on the impact of CEO succession  on 
firm  operational  performance. Return  on  assets 
(ROA) was  selected  as the dependent variable be- 
cause it is  a well-understood and widely  used  ac- 
counting  measure  of  operational performance in 
CEO succession  research (Zajac, 1990). We calcu- 
lated each firm's ROA as income before extraordi- 
nary items and discontinued operations divided by 
net  assets as reported during each fiscal  year. To 
fully  capture the  succession  effect and to  smooth 
fluctuations in  ROA specific  to  a given  year, we 
calculated postsuccession firm ROA as average firm 


724 

Academy of Management Journal 

August 

ROA during the first three years following the year 
of CEO succession (e.g., Daily et al., 2000; Kesner & 
Dalton,  1994). 

Successor  type.  As  also  described above, there 
are three types of successors-followers,  contend- 
ers, and outsiders. A major challenge for this study 
was to separate contenders and followers, as both 
are insider successors. What differentiates them is 
the cause of their predecessors' departure: follow- 
ers are executives  promoted after an ordinary re- 
tirement, whereas contenders are promoted after a 
dismissal. It is difficult to identify CEO dismissals 
because  firms seldom  fully  disclose  the  true rea- 
sons  behind  CEO resignations  (Denis  & Denis, 
1995; Fredrickson et  al.,  1988; Warner, Watts, & 
Wruck,  1988;  Weisbach,  1988;  Wiersema,  1995). 
Some previous research has relied upon CEO age to 
separate dismissals  from retirements (e.g., Ocasio, 
1994; Puffer & Weintrop, 1991). Researchers often 
use  age 64  as a cutoff in  making these  decisions: 
CEOs who left office before the age of 64 are treated 
as dismissed,  and others, as retired. An  examina- 
tion of our sample suggested that solely relying on 
CEO age to make the decision  might be too crude 
for  our  study.  Many  CEOs in  our  sample  relin- 
quished the CEO title at the age of 62 or 63 but kept 
the title of chairman of the board until the age of 64 
or 65.  These  CEOs can  hardly be  treated as  dis- 
missed  because  it  is  unreasonable to  keep  a  dis- 
missed CEO as the chairman of the board, or even 
as a director (Lorsch & MacIver, 1989). Indeed, the 
observation described above may actually reflect an 
ordinary relay  CEO succession  process  (Vancil, 
1987). 

Given that firms are unlikely to keep dismissed 
CEOs on their boards, we  used both CEO age and 
continued board membership to separate contend- 
ers  from followers.  Further, we  checked  annual 
reports, proxy statements, and the Wall Street Jour- 
nal and News  Wires to exclude  from our analysis 
CEO turnovers due  to  sudden  death  (12  cases), 
health issues (2 cases), and taking a similar position 
at another firm (9 cases). Contender successor was 
coded  1 when  an executive who was currently an 
officer of a firm was promoted to the CEO position 
and the  departing CEO terminated his/her  service 
as both the CEO and a director of the firm before the 
age of 64, and it was coded  0 otherwise. Outsider 
successor was coded 1 when an executive who was 
not an employee of the focal firm was promoted to 
the  CEO position,  and  coded  0  otherwise.  Fol- 
lower  successors,  the  omitted  category  in  our 
analysis,  included  all  noncontender  inside  suc- 
cessors. 

We  also  examined  news  reports to  bolster our 
identification  of CEO dismissals  described above. 

Contender  and  outsider  successors 
identified 
through news analysis composed a subset of those 
identified in our above approach. We analyzed this 
subset  of  contenders and  outsiders  and  obtained 
essentially  the  same  result  as  those  reported  in 
the next section,  which  are based on coding con- 
tenders  and  outsiders  as  described  above.  The 
alternative  results  are  available  from  the  first 
author on request. 

Senior executive turnover was  measured as the 
proportion of officer turnover during the first two 
years after CEO succession. We selected a two-year 
period  to  fully  capture the  succession  effect  on 
executive  turnover (Wagner et  al.,  1984)  and the 
period normally required for a new  CEO to  fully 
take charge in  a new  job (Gabarro, 1987; Vancil, 
1987). We measured turnover among all executives 
who were listed as officers in a firm's annual report 
to  shareholders one year prior to the year of suc- 
cession. Departing CEO tenure was measured as the 
number of years an individual  had served as the 
CEO of the firm from which  he or she was depart- 
ing. To test for the inverted U-shaped relationship 
hypothesized, we also included departing CEO ten- 
ure squared in the analysis. 

Control variables.  A number of factors, such as 
firm size, governance structure, and industry envi- 
ronment, may  influence  firm performance in  the 
CEO succession  context through their impacts on 
managerial  discretion  (Finkelstein  &  Hambrick, 
1996).  To  control for the  influence  of  these  and 
other important factors, we  included  nine  control 
variables in our analysis. Like firm-specific knowl- 
edge, industry experiences of CEO successors may 
play an important role in firm performance (Datta & 
Rajagopalan, 1998).  To  ensure  that  it  is  firm- 
specific knowledge rather than industry experience 
that  makes  performance differences  among  CEO 
successors, we included a dummy variable, indus- 
try outsider, as a control in  our analysis. Industry 
outsider was  coded  1 when  a successor  had less 
than two  years' industry experience  (at the  two- 
digit SIC level) and 0 otherwise. 

Presuccession firm ROA was included to control 
the  potential  threat of  "regression to  the  mean" 
(Brown, 1982) and was  measured as average firm 
ROA over the last three years prior to the year of 
CEO succession. Industry characteristics have been 
proposed to have significant impacts on managerial 
discretion (Finkelstein & Hambrick, 1996) and firm 
performance (Dess, Ireland, & Hitt, 1990). To con- 
trol  for  a  potential  industry  effect  (Tushman & 
Rosenkopf, 1996), we  included  industry ROA and 
instability in  the analysis. Industry ROA was  cal- 
culated as the average industry ROA over the first 
three years following the year of CEO succession at 


2002 

Shen  and  Cannella 

725 

a firm's primary two-digit SIC level. Industry insta- 
bility was measured as the variance in  the indus- 
try's four-firm sales  concentration ratio  over  the 
first three years  following  CEO succession.  This 
variable is similar to the one used by Wiersema and 
Bantel (1993). 

Diversification and  restructuring have  been  re- 
ported to have a significant impact on firm perfor- 
mance  (Hoskisson  &  Hitt,  1990;  Johnson,  1996). 
Because  the  firms in  our  sample  varied  in  their 
levels  of diversification, we  included  the  entropy 
measure of diversification as a control variable. The 
entropy measure has two  components: related di- 
versification  (DR)  and  unrelated  diversification 
(DU)  (Palepu,  1985).  The  two  components  were 
calculated  for all  firms in  our sample. Following 
Hoskisson and colleagues (Baysinger & Hoskisson, 
1989;  Hoskisson,  Hitt,  Johnson,  & Moesel,  1993), 
we  calculated  total  diversification by  summing a 
firm's three-year average related and unrelated di- 
versification  after  succession.  Restructuring was 
calculated  as  decrease in  the  firm's level  of total 
diversification in  the  three years prior to  succes- 
sion. We included  this measure to control the po- 
tential  influence  of  presuccession  corporate re- 
structuring on  postsuccession  firm  performance 
(Johnson,  1996). 

Governance structure is an important factor in- 
fluencing  succession  decisions  (Johnson, Hoskis- 
son,  & Hitt, 1993; Weisbach,  1988) and firm sur- 
vival  (Daily  & Dalton,  1994).  We  included  two 
variables to control for the impact of governance 
structure. Proportion of independent  outside  di- 
rectors was  measured as the proportion of direc- 
tors who  were  elected  to  a board before the  suc- 
cessor  took  office  and  who  were  not  current or 

past officers of the firm (Dalton, Daily, Ellstrand, 
& Johnson,  1998).  Institutional  ownership  was 
measured as the proportion of a firm's outstand- 
ing  shares held  by  institutional  investors  in  the 
year  of  succession  (Johnson  & Greening,  1999; 
Smith, 1996). Lastly, firm size was controlled and 
was  measured  as  the  natural  logarithm  of  the 
firm's total sales. 

Statistical Analysis 

We  tested  our  hypotheses  using  hierarchical 
multiple  regression. In a hierarchical multiple  re- 
gression analysis, explanatory variables are entered 
into the regression equation in a prespecified order 
as  a  means  of  determining their  individual  and 
joint contributions to explaining the outcome vari- 
able (Tabachnick & Fidell,  1989). In our analysis, 
we  first entered into  the  regression equation the 
nine control variables. Following the time order of 
their occurrence, we  entered the explanatory vari- 
ables in the following order: departing CEO tenure 
first, contender and  outsider successors  next,  se- 
nior  executive  turnover and its  interactions with 
contender and outsider successors  last. Although 
our study emphasizes operational performance, we 
also ran an analysis with market performance as a 
dependent variable, measured as a firm's average 
market-to-book value ratio in  the first three years 
following  the succession.  The results suggest that 
succession  does not importantly influence a firm's 
long-term market performance. Because of our em- 
phasis on operational performance, we  report this 
analysis in the Appendix. 

Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations 

TABLE 1 

Variable 

Mean 

s.d. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

1. Firm  ROA 
2.  Contender  successor 
3.  Outsider  successor 
4.  Senior  executive  turnover 
5.  Departing  CEO tenure 
6.  Industry  outsider 
7. Presuccession  firm ROA 
8.  Proportion  of  independent 

outside  directors 

9.  Institutional  ownership 
10.  Industry  ROA 
11.  Industry  instability 
12.  Restructuring 
13.  Total  diversification 
14.  Logarithm  of  sales 

3.56 
0.18 
0.12 
0.17 
10.59 
0.06 
4.34 
0.74 

0.49 
3.24 
0.02 
0.01 
0.51 
7.40 

5.25 
0.38  -.01 
0.33  -.18* 
0.11  -.18* 
7.29 
.11 
.01 
0.24 
4.76 
.56* 
.10 
0.15 

.17* 
0.18 
.07 
1.35 
0.01  -.08 
0.21 
.05 
0.50  -.00 
1.49  -.08 

-.18* 
.21* 
-.41* 
-.12 
.01 
.02 

-.07 

.13* 

-.06 
.11 
-.08 
-.01 

.21* 
-.14* 
.41* 
.02 
.12 

.15* 

-.04 
.06 
.01 
-.01 
-.09 

* p  <  .05 

-.18* 

-.08 

.15*  -.09 
.07 
.03 

.14* 

.07 
.15* 

-.04 

-.05 
.07 
.01 
.06 
.00 
.13 

.04 
-.15* 
.05 
.04 
.03 
-.09 

.00 
.07 
-.06 
-.03 
.11 
-.09 

.10  -.04 
.10 
.14* 

-.07 
-.07 

.04  -.10 
.02  -.01 
.04 

-.16* 

-.21* 
-.07 
-.02 

.29* 
.35 

-.07 
-.05 
-.14* 
-.09 

-.06 
.03 
-.05 

.22* 
.14* 

.28* 


726 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

August 

RESULTS 

Table 1 reports the means, standard deviations, 
and correlation coefficients of variables used in the 
analysis. The hypothesis tests used OLS hierarchi- 
cal  regression analysis  with  postsuccession  firm 
ROA as  the  dependent  variable. The  results  are 
reported in  Table  2.  Model  1  reports the  results 
with  only the control variables included. Model 2 
reports the results with  the  addition of  departing 
CEO tenure, and model  3 reports the results with 
the  addition  of  departing  CEO tenure  squared. 
Model  4  reports the  results with  the  addition  of 
contender and outsider successor. Models 5, 6, and 
7  report the  results  with  the  addition  of  senior 
executive  turnover and its  interactions with  con- 
tender  and  outsider  successor,  respectively.  The 
F-statistics for models  1 through 7 indicate strong 
model significance (p <  .001). In addition, as indi- 
cated by multiple  squared correlation coefficients 
(R2s), all seven models explain a significant amount 
of variance in postsuccession  firm ROA. 

As shown in model 1 of Table 2, the nine control 
variables account for a significant amount of vari- 
firm  ROA  (R2 =  0.37,  p  < 
ance  in  postsuccession 
.001).  Presuccession  firm ROA (b =  0.77,  p  <  .001), 
industry  ROA (b =  0.50,  p  <  .05), the  proportion  of 

independent  outside  directors  (b  =  4.76,  p  <  .05), 
(b  =  4.65,  p  <  .01) 
and  institutional  ownership 
display significant, positive associations with post- 
succession  firm ROA. 

The "main effect" of contender and outsider suc- 
cessor on  postsuccession  firm operational perfor- 
mance was tested in model 4. The addition of con- 
tender and outsider successor into  the regression 
equation significantly increases model 4's explan- 
atory  power  over  model  3  (AR2 =  .02,  p  <  .001). 
Hypothesis  1  predicts  a  positive  association  be- 
tween  contender  successor  and  postsuccession 
firm  performance. The  coefficient  for  contender 
successor  is  positive,  but  not  significant  (b =  0.04, 
n.s.). Thus, Hypothesis 1 is not supported. Hypoth- 
esis 2 predicts a negative association between out- 
sider  successor  and  postsuccession  operational 
performance. The coefficient for outsider successor 
is  negative  and  significant  (b  =  -2.65,  p  <  .01). 
Thus,  Hypothesis  2  is  supported.  However,  as 
shown in model 7, the impact of outsider successor 
on firm ROA is  influenced by its interaction with 
postsuccession  senior  executive  turnover. When 
the interaction is included (model 7), outsider suc- 
cessor displays a positive main effect (b =  3.85, p < 
.05). These results, as discussed  later, help  clarify 

OLS Regression  Models  of the  Performance  Consequences  of  CEO Succession  for  Return  on  Assetsa 

Variable 

Model  1  Model  2  Model  3 

Model  4 

Model  5 

Model  6 

Model  7 

TABLE 2 

Intercept 
Presuccession  firm ROA 
Industry  ROA 
Industry  instability 
Industry  outsider 
Proportion  of  independent  outside  directors 
Institutional  ownership 
Restructuring 
Total  diversification 
Logarithm  of  sales 
Departing  CEO tenure 
Departing  CEO tenure  squares 
Contender  successor 
Outsider  successor 
Senior  executive  turnover 
Contender  x  senior  executive  turnover 
Outsider  x  senior  executive 

-6.35** 

-7.06** 

0.77*** 
0.50* 

0.76*** 
0.54* 

-20.36 
-1.36 

-20.99 
-1.18 

-7.40** 

0.75*** 
0.55* 

-24.21 
-1.00 

4.76* 
4.65** 
0.98 
-0.09 
-0.15 

4.58* 
4.56* 
0.93 
-0.13 
-0.12 
0.05 

4.13* 
4.23* 
0.80 
-0.21 
-0.14 

0.28* 
-0.01* 

-6.63** 

0.75*** 
0.47* 

-19.64 
0.45 
4.54* 
3.45* 
0.89 
-0.27 
-0.15 

0.28* 
-0.01* 
0.04 

-2.65** 

-6.54** 

0.74*** 
0.49t 

-18.67 
0.69 
4.93** 
3.36+ 
1.09 
-0.26 
-0.06 

0.26t 
-0.01* 
0.46 
-2.20* 
-6.20* 

-6.14* 

0.73*** 
0.47* 

-6.57** 

0.80*** 
0.45* 

-18.27 
0.81 
4.78* 
3.30t 
1.10 
-0.30 
-0.06 

0.27* 
-0.01* 
-0.77 
-2.09* 
-7.77* 
6.45t 

-16.82 
0.87 
4.01* 
2.65 
1.02 
-0.20 
-0.06 

0.25t 
-0.01* 
0.09 
3.85* 

-1.06 

-29.48*** 

F 
R2 
AR2 

13.93*** 

12.74*** 

11.98*** 

11.03*** 

10.76*** 

10.13*** 

12.81*** 

.37 

.37 
.00 

.38 
.01*b 

.40 
.02*** 

.41 
.01* 

.42 
.Ol 

.46 
.05*** 

a Values  are unstandardized  regression  coefficients. 
b As  compared  with  model  1. 

p <  .10 
* p  <  .05 
** p  <  .01 
** p  <  .001 


2002 

Shen and Cannella 

727 

some  of the  confusion  regarding the  performance 
impact of outsider succession in previous research. 
The effect of senior executive  turnover on  firm 
ROA, both the main effect and the interaction with 
successor type, were tested in models 5 through 7. 
Although no  hypothesis  was  proposed, results in 
model 5 suggest that senior executive turnover has 
a negative main effect on postsuccession firm ROA 
(AR2 =  .01, p  <  .05; b =-6.20,  p  <  .05). Hypothesis 
3 predicts that senior executive turnover will  inter- 
act  with  contender  successor  to  positively  affect 
firm performance. With the inclusion  of the inter- 
action in model 6 the variance explained increases 
(AR2 =  .01, p  <  .10). The coefficient for the inter- 
action is positive (b = 6.45, p <  .10). Thus, Hypoth- 
esis 3 receives some support. Hypothesis 4 predicts 
that  senior  executive  turnover will  interact with 
outsider successor to negatively affect firm perfor- 
mance.  With  the  inclusion  of  the  interaction in 
model  7,  the  variance  explained  again increases 
(AR2 =  .05, p <  .001). The coefficient for the inter- 
action  is  negative  (b  =  -29.48,  p  <  .001). Thus, 
Hypothesis 4 is strongly supported. 

To facilitate interpretation, we plotted the inter- 
action effect of successor type and senior executive 
turnover on  postsuccession  firm ROA. Following 
Aiken  and West (1991), we  calculated the  partial 
derivative of firm ROA in the regression equation 
with  respect to  contender successor  as  aY/aX1 = 
-0.77  +  6.45Z and the  partial derivative of  firm 
ROA with  respect  to  outsider  successor  as  aY/ 
aX2  =  3.85  -  29.48Z,  where  X1 is  contender  suc- 
cessor, X2 is outsider successor, and Z is the level of 
postsuccession  senior executive turnover. Figure 2 
shows  the relationships between  senior executive 
turnover and  firm ROA following  contender and 

outsider successions  respectively, where the range 
of senior executive  turnover is  from one  standard 
deviation  below  the  sample  mean  (low:  0.17  - 
0.11  =  0.06) to  one  standard deviation above the 
sample mean (high: 0.17 +  0.11 =  0.28). The graph 
clearly demonstrates that senior executive turnover 
is  positively  associated with  firm ROA following 
contender  succession  but  negatively  associated 
with firm ROA following outsider succession.  The 
slopes  of the  two  regression lines  further suggest 
that senior executive  turnover has a more signifi- 
cant impact on  firm ROA in  outsider succession 
than in contender succession. 

An important observation that can be made from 
our analyses is that the main effect of postsucces- 
sion  senior  executive  turnover on  firm ROA re- 
mains negative and significant in model 6, when its 
interaction with  contender successor  is  included 
(b =  -7.77,  p <  .05), but it becomes insignificant in 
model 7, when turnover's interaction with outsider 
successor is controlled (b =  -1.06,  n.s.). Thus, the 
negative main  effect of  senior  executive  turnover 
on firm ROA may come primarily from senior ex- 
ecutive turnover following outsider succession. 

Hypothesis 5 predicts an inverted U-shaped re- 
lationship between departing CEO tenure and post- 
succession firm performance. Models 2 and 3 show 
results of tests of this hypothesis.  In model  2, the 
addition of departing CEO tenure does not signifi- 
cantly increase the explanatory power (AR2 =  .00, 
n.s.),  nor is  the  coefficient  significant  (b  =  0.05, 
n.s.). However, with the addition of departing CEO 
tenure squared, model  3  has  significantly  higher 
explanatory power than model  1 (AR2 =  .01, p  < 
.01). Further, the coefficient for departing CEO ten- 
ure squared is negative and significant (b =  -0.01, 

FIGURE 2 

Interactive Effect of Successor Type and Postsuccession 

Senior Executive Turnover on Firm ROA 

3.0  - 

2.0 

1.0  - 

0.0- 

Firm ROA  -1.0 - 
-2.0  - 

-3.0  - 

-4.0  - 

-5.0 

-- 

Contender  Successor 

- - *-  -  Outsider  Successor 

Low 

Mean 

High 

Postsuccession Senior Executive Turnover 


728 

Academy  of Management  Journal 

August 

.05),  and  the  coefficient 

p  < 
for  departing  CEO 
tenure  is  positive  and  significant  (b  =  0.28,  p  < 
.05).  The  first-order  partial  derivative  of  firm  ROA 
with  respect  to  departing  CEO  tenure  (aY/X  = 
-0.02X  +  0.28)  suggests  that  in  our  sample  firm, 
ROA  (Y) reaches  its  inflection  point  when  depart- 
ing  CEO tenure  (X)  is  about  14  years  (X  =  0.28/ 
0.02  =  14; Cohen  & Cohen,  1983:  233).  Models  4-7 
show  similar  results  and  suggest  that  the  inverted 
U-shaped  relationship  between  departing  CEO ten- 
firm  ROA holds  even  after 
ure  and  postsuccession 
successor  type, postsuccession  senior executive  turn- 
over, and their interactions  have  been  controlled. 

DISCUSSION  AND  CONCLUSION 

In  this  study,  we  revisited  an  important  and 

widely  studied  topic  in  management  research-the 
performance  consequences  of  CEO  succession- 
with  an  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  succession 
context.  Building  on theories  of strategic  leadership 
and  organizational  change,  we  simultaneously  ex- 
amined  the performance  impacts  of three important 
components  of  succession  context:  successor  type 
categorized  at the  individual 
level,  postsuccession 
senior  executive  turnover  at  the  top  management 
team  level,  and  succession  frequency  (as indicated 
by  departing  CEO  tenure)  at  the  organizational 
firm  ROA  used  as  the 
level.  With  postsuccession 
dependent  variable,  our  empirical  results  suggest 
that  all  three  components  have  important  implica- 
for  firms'  operational  performance.  This 
tions 
study  leads  us  to  four  general  conclusions  and 
raises  several  interesting  and  important  questions 
for future  research. 

theory 

First, the  evidence  supports  our proposition  that 
to  rely  solely  on  firm  origin  to  divide  CEO succes- 
sors into  insiders  and  outsiders  is to neglect  impor- 
tant  differences  among  insider  successors.  Follow- 
ing  a  power  circulation 
(Ocasio,  1994; 
Ocasio  & Kim,  1999),  we  distinguished  two  types  of 
insider  successors,  contenders  and  followers,  on 
left  the  posi- 
the  basis  of  how  their  predecessors 
tions  to  which  they  succeeded.  We  proposed  that 
contenders  and  followers  differ  in  their  strategic 
mandates  and  their  ability  to  initiate  strategic 
change.  Although  the  results  did  not  support  our 
hypothesis  regarding  a  positive  main  effect  of  a 
successor  contender  (an insider  who  struggled  with 
the  departing  CEO), they  do  support  our  argument 
that  senior  executive 
turnover  following  a  con- 
impact  on  firm 
tender  succession  has  a  positive 
performance.  Further,  the  correlations  reported  in 
Table  1  show  that  both  contender  and  outsider 
successors  are  positively  correlated  with  postsuc- 
cession  senior  executive  turnover,  which  has  been 

used  as  an  indicator  of  strategic  change  in  earlier 
studies  (Friedman  & Saul,  1991;  Helmich  & Brown, 
1972).  These  findings  support  our proposition  that 
contender  successors 
importantly  differ  from  fol- 
lower  successors,  though  both  are insiders.  One  of 
our explanations  for our not finding  a main  effect  of 
contender  successors  on  firm ROA is  that contend- 
ers, though  they  differ from followers,  are still  con- 
strained  by their  social  networks  within  their  firms 
(Shleifer  & Summers,  1988).  Unless  they  can  re- 
structure  their  top  management  teams,  they  will 
not  be  able  to  improve  firm performance.  An  alter- 
native  explanation  follows  the  power  perspective: 
some  contender  successions  after  CEO  dismissal 
may  reflect  the  outcome  of power  struggles  within 
top management  rather than  an intention  to initiate 
strategic  change  (Jackall,  1988;  Vancil,  1987).  Be- 
cause  of  the  prestige  and  material  benefits  asso- 
ciated  with  the  CEO title,  some  ambitious  senior 
executives  may  challenge  an  incumbent  CEO 
their  own  careers  (Lazear, 
simply 
con- 
1989).  Because 
tender  and  follower  successors 
is  new  and  impor- 
tant,  more  research  is  needed  regarding  the  ante- 
cedents  and  consequences  of  these  two  types  of 
insider  successors. 

the  distinction 

to  advance 

between 

Second,  our  study  clearly  demonstrates  that  fo- 
cusing  on  a CEO successor  alone  without  consider- 
ing  other  personnel  changes  within  top  manage- 
ment  cannot 
fully  and  accurately  capture  the 
of  CEO  succession. 
performance  consequences 
Postsuccession  senior  executive  turnover  has  been 
primarily  studied  as an outcome  of CEO succession 
(Friedman  & Saul,  1991;  Helmich  & Brown,  1972). 
Results  of  this  study  suggest  that  postsuccession 
senior  executive  turnover  has  important  implica- 
tions  for  firm  performance  and,  more  important, 
that  the  direction  of its  impact  depends  on  succes- 
sor  type.  We  found  that  senior  executive  turnover 
has  a  positive 
impact  on  firm  ROA  in  contender 
succession,  but  a negative  impact  in  outsider  suc- 
cession.  These  findings  not  only  highlight 
the 
importance  of  taking  a  top-management-team- 
based  approach  when  studying  the  performance 
impact  of  CEO succession,  but  also  suggest  that 
there  are  different  patterns  of  top  management 
in  contender,  outsider,  and  fol- 
team  dynamics 
lower  successions. 

Although  we  conceptually  discussed  different 
types  of  executive  turnover  (ordinary  retirement, 
in 
dismissal,  and  seeking  outside  opportunities) 
it  is  beyond  the  scope  of 
our  theory  development, 
this  study  to examine  them  empirically.  A potential 
direction  for future  research  is  to  study  the  pattern 
turnover  in  con- 
of  different  types  of  executive 
tender,  outsider,  and follower  CEO successions  and 


2002 

Shen  and  Cannella 

729 

their  organizational  implications.  Further,  al- 
though we  controlled for industry ROA and insta- 
bility  in  our  analysis,  it  would  be  interesting to 
consider whether these and other industry charac- 
teristics, such as growth rate (Datta & Rajagopalan, 
1998),  would  moderate  the  performance conse- 
quences  of  postsuccession  senior  executive  turn- 
over.  By  focusing  on  the  dynamics  of  entire top 
management teams rather than on CEO successors 
alone, researchers will  be able to gain a better un- 
derstanding of  the  performance consequences  of 
CEO succession. 

An extension of the above proposition would be 
to  examine  the  patterns and  performance conse- 
quences  of changes  in  the boards of  directors in 
contender,  follower,  and  outsider  successions. 
CEO succession  certainly  influences  the  dynam- 
ics  within  top  management  teams,  and  perhaps 
also  the  composition  and  structure  of  boards 
(Ward, Bishop,  & Sonnenfeld,  1999). Board com- 
position  and  structure have  been  found  to  have 
an  important  impact  on  corporate restructuring 
and financial  performance (Daily & Dalton, 1994; 
Goodstein  & Boeker, 1991; Johnson et al.,  1993). 
In this  study, the proportion of independent  out- 
side directors displayed  a consistent,  positive  im- 
pact on postsuccession  firm ROA. Thus, it will  be 
interesting  and  important  to  study  whether  the 
three types  of CEO successions  proposed  in  this 
study  have  different impacts  on board composi- 
tion and structure and their subsequent organiza- 
tional  implications.  In addition,  we  need  to  in- 
vestigate  how  board  composition  and  structure 
influence  the  occurrence  of  the  three  types  of 
successions,  since  boards play  an important role 
in  succession  decisions  (Johnson  et  al.,  1993; 
Weisbach,  1988). 

Third,  our  study  helps  to  clarify  some  of  the 
confusion  surrounding the performance impact of 
outsider  succession.  Successor  origin has  been  a 
primary focus  in  previous  studies  of  the  perfor- 
mance consequences of CEO succession,  and there 
is  pressure from the  business  press  for  firms to 
adopt  outsider  succession  (e.g.,  BusinessWeek, 
1997). Earlier empirical evidence  has been  incon- 
clusive regarding how outside successors influence 
firm performance (Kesner & Sebora, 1994). Our re- 
sults  show  that the  impact of outsider successors 
on firm ROA is significantly influenced by postsuc- 
cession  senior executive  turnover in that its main 
effect changes from negative to  positive  when  its 
negative interaction with senior executive turnover 
is  controlled. This change suggests that the nega- 
tive  impact of outsider succession  on  firm opera- 
tional performance stems largely from a high level 
of  postsuccession  senior  executive  turnover.  In 

other words, outsider successors may be beneficial 
to firm operations, but a subsequent loss  of senior 
executives may outweigh any gains that come from 
the outsider successors themselves. 

Finally,  our  study  reveals  that,  in  addition  to 
successor type and postsuccession senior executive 
turnover, the tenure of departing CEOs importantly 
influences  firm operational performance. We pro- 
posed  that lengthy CEO tenures would  be  associ- 
ated with  strong organizational inertia, leading to 
difficulty when the successors wish to initiate stra- 
tegic change. However, if a departing CEO's tenure 
is  too  short,  the  firm  may  not  have  recovered 
sufficiently  from the  disruption  of  the  previous 
succession.  This  proposition  was  supported  by 
the  inverted  U-shaped  relationship  between  de- 
parting  CEO  tenure  and  postsuccession 
firm 
ROA. Although the impact of CEO tenure on firm 
strategy and performance has been  examined  in 
previous  research (Hambrick et al.,  1993; Miller, 
1991;  Thomas,  Litschert,  & Ramaswamy,  1991), 
our study demonstrates that this impact does not 
disappear with  the  end  of the  CEO's tenure.  In- 
stead, it extends  at least to the early years of the 
successor's  tenure.  CEO tenure  has  also  been 
found  to  significantly  influence  the  power  dy- 
namics  within  top  management  (Boeker,  1992; 
Ocasio,  1994).  As  an  extension,  it  would  be  in- 
teresting to examine whether  departing CEO ten- 
ure influences  successor type and postsuccession 
senior  executive  turnover. 

Limitations 

The findings and implications of this study must be 
considered in light of its limitations. A primary lim- 
itation is that our study focused only on firms' oper- 
ational  performance and  used  three-year average 
ROA as an indicator. This measure, widely used in 
succession research, only  captures the  operational 
performance consequences of CEO succession in the 
first three years after its occurrence and tells us noth- 
ing about later performance. It is  possible that the 
performance consequences of CEO succession, espe- 
cially  outsider succession,  may  differ in  the  later 
years of these CEOs' tenures. In addition, our findings 
should not be generalized to firms' performance in 
financial markets, because ROA and market valuation 
reflect different aspects of firm performance (Daily et 
al., 2000; Dalton et al., 1998). 

A second limitation is that we used publicly ob- 
servable managerial characteristics as  proxies  for 
unobservable or hard-to-observe variables. Because 
it is difficult to know the true causes of CEO turn- 
over  (Denis  & Denis,  1995;  Weisbach,  1988),  in  our 
measure of contender succession, we used CEO age 


730 

Academy of Management Journal 

August 

and continuing  as a board member  to infer whether 
a CEO had  or had not been  dismissed.  Although  we 
obtained  information  on  CEO departures  owing  to 
death,  illness,  or outside  appointment  (these  causes 
were  excluded),  our  measure  is  not  perfect.  For 
example,  a CEO over  63 years  old  could  be fired.  In 
this  situation,  our measure  would  wrongly  classify 
an  inside  successor  as  a  follower  rather  than  a 
contender.  On  the  other  hand,  a CEO less  than  64 
years  old  could  voluntarily  retire from a firm with- 
out  remaining  on  the  board.  In  this  situation,  our 
measure  might  wrongly  classify  an  insider  succes- 
sor  as  a contender  rather than  a  follower.  Our  ob- 
servations  suggest  both  cases  are  rare,  but  such 
misclassifications  would  reduce  our  ability  to  ac- 
curately  detect  the  hypothesized  positive  perfor- 
mance  impact  of contender  successors.  In addition, 
our theory  linked  departing  CEO tenure  to  a firm's 
commitment  to  maintaining  the  status  quo  and  or- 
ganizational  inertia.  Although  strong  logical  argu- 
ments,  empirical  evidence,  and  practical  concerns 
limitations  of 
justify  our  treatment,  given 
the  demographic  approach  (e.g.,  Lawrence,  1997; 
Priem,  Lyon,  & Dess,  1997),  the  rigor  of  our  study 
would  have  been  further bolstered  if we  could  have 
directly  measured  these  constructs. 

the 

Managerial  Implications 

Findings  from this  study  have two  important man- 
agerial implications.  The  first concerns  top  manage- 
ment  team  restructuring  following  contender  and 
outsider  successions.  Facing tremendous  pressure to 
initiate  strategic  change,  contenders  and  outsiders 
may make restructuring top management  teams their 
top  priority  (Helmich  &  Brown,  1972;  Wiersema, 
1995).  Our  evidence  demonstrates  that  the  opera- 
tional performance impact  of this  practice differs sig- 
nificantly  for  contender  and  outsider  successions. 
Whereas  postsuccession  senior  executive  turnover 
was  found  to  improve  firm ROA among  companies 
impact 
experiencing 
among  those  gaining  outsider  successors  was  nega- 
tive, at least as measured for the first three years of the 
outsider  successors'  tenure  with  firm  ROA  as  the 
outcome  measure.  As  we  pointed  out  earlier,  this 
result is mainly  a consequence  of the outsider succes- 
sors' lack of firm-specific  knowledge  and the tremen- 
dous  disruption  already  present  in  outsider  succes- 
sion.  Thus,  we  advise  newly  appointed  outsider 
CEOs to be prudent  when  making executive  replace- 
ment  decisions  and to strive for some  executive  lead- 
ership  stability  in  their  firms.  At  the  same  time, 
boards may also need  to consider  giving  outside  suc- 
cessors  more time  to smooth  the transition. 

successions, 

contender 

its 

Second,  in  accordance  with  many  other  studies 

the  14-year 

inflection  point 

(e.g.,  Vancil,  1987),  our  study  suggests  that  boards 
of  directors  need  to  carefully  manage  CEO tenure. 
for  the 
Although 
change  in  the  effect  of  departing  CEO tenure  on 
firm  ROA  may  be  sample-specific  and  therefore 
should  be  interpreted  cautiously,  the  inverted  U- 
shaped  relationship  suggests  that  both  overly  long 
and  overly  short  CEO tenures  are harmful  to  post- 
firm  operational  performance.  Given 
succession 
this,  directors  need  to consider  how  long  their  can- 
didates  should  serve  when  selecting  CEO succes- 
sors.  Because  most  firms  have  age  65  as  a custom- 
ary CEO retirement  age,  it  may  not  be  desirable  to 
select  a successor  whose  age  is  near  or even  above 
60.  Further,  if  a CEO is  appointed  very  young,  the 
board  may  also  need  to  consider  replacing  this 
individual  before mandatory  retirement  age, even  if 
she  or he  is  very  successful.  At  the  very  least,  the 
board  should  be  aware  of the  organizational  inertia 
that  may  develop  during  a CEO's tenure. 

REFER ENCES 

Aiken, L. S.,  & West, S.  G. 1991. Multiple regression: 
Testing  and  interpreting  interactions.  Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Alderfer, C. P. 1986. The invisible director on corporate 

boards. Harvard Business Review, 64(6): 38-52. 

Allen, M. P., Panian, S. K., & Lotz, R. E. 1979. Managerial 
succession and organizational performance: A recal- 
citrant problem revisited. Administrative  Science 
Quarterly, 24: 167-180. 

Baysinger, B. D., & Hoskisson, R. E. 1989. Diversification 
strategy and R&D intensity  in  multiproduct firms. 
Academy  of Management Journal, 32: 310-332. 

Boeker, W. 1992. Power and managerial turnover: Scape- 
goating at the  top.  Administrative  Science  Quar- 
terly, 37: 400-421. 

Boeker, W., & Goodstein, J. 1993. Performance and suc- 
cessor choice: The moderating effects of governance 
and ownership. Academy of Management Journal, 
36: 172-186. 

Brady, G., & Helmich, D.  1984.  Executive  succession. 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Brown, M. C. 1982. Administrative succession  and or- 
ganizational performance: The succession effect. Ad- 
ministrative  Science  Quarterly, 27: 1-16. 

BusinessWeek, 1997. Wanted: A few good CEOs. August 

11: 64-70. 

Cannella, A. A., Jr., Fraser, D. R., & Lee, D. S. 1995. Firm 
failure and managerial labor markets: Evidence from 
Texas banking. Journal of Financial Economics, 38: 
185-210. 

Cannella, A. A., Jr., & Lubatkin, M. 1993. Succession as a 


2002 

Shen and Cannella 

731 

sociopolitical  process.  Academy  of  Management 
Journal,  36:  763-793. 

Cannella,  A. A., Jr., & Shen,  W. 2001.  So  close  and yet  so 
far: Promotion  versus  exit  for  CEO heirs  apparent. 
Academy  of Management Journal, 44: 252-270. 
Carroll, G. R. 1984.  Dynamics  of publisher  succession 

in 
newspaper  organizations.  Administrative  Science 
Quarterly,  29:  93-113. 

Cohen, J., & Cohen, P.  1983. Applied  multiple  regres- 
sion/correlation  analysis  for  the  behavioral  sci- 
ences.  Hillsdale,  NJ: Erlbaum. 

Daily,  C. M.,  Certo,  S.  T.,  & Dalton,  D.  R.  2000.  Interna- 
tional  experience  in  the  executive  suite:  The  path  to 
prosperity?  Strategic  Management  Journal,  21: 
515-523. 

Daily,  C. M.,  & Dalton,  D.  R.  1994.  Bankruptcy  and  cor- 
porate governance:  The impact  of board composition 
and  structure. Academy  of  Management  Journal, 
37:  1603-1617. 

Dalton, D. R., Daily,  C. M., Ellstrand, A. E., & Johnson, J. L. 
1998.  Meta-analytic  reviews  of  board  composition, 
leadership  structure, and financial  performance.  Stra- 
tegic  Management  Journal,  19: 269-290. 

Dalton,  D. R., & Kesner,  I. F. 1985.  Organizational  perfor- 
mance  as  an  antecedent  of  inside/outside 
chief  ex- 
ecutive  succession:  An  empirical  assessment.  Acad- 
emy of Management Journal, 28: 749-762. 

Datta,  D.  K.,  & Rajagopalan,  N.  1998.  Industry  structure 
and  CEO characteristics:  An  empirical  study  of  suc- 
cession events. Strategic Management Journal, 19: 
833-852. 

Denis,  D.  J., & Denis,  D.  K.  1995.  Performance  changes 
top  management  dismissals.  Journal  of 

following 
Finance,  50:  1029-1057. 

Dess,  G. G.,  Ireland,  R. D.,  & Hitt,  M.  A.  1990.  Industry 
effects  and  strategic  management  research.  Journal 
of Management,  16: 7-27. 

Dooley,  R.  S.,  & Fryxell,  G. E.  1999.  Attaining  decision 
quality  and  commitment  from dissent:  The  moderat- 
ing  effects  of  loyalty  and  competence 
in  strategic 
decision  making  teams.  Academy  of  Management 
Journal,  42:  389-402. 

Finkelstein,  S., & Hambrick,  D. C. 1990.  Top management 
team  tenure  and  organizational  outcomes:  The  mod- 
erating  role  of  managerial  discretion.  Administra- 
tive Science  Quarterly, 35: 484-503. 

Finkelstein,  S.,  & Hambrick,  D.  C.  1996.  Strategic  lead- 
ership: Top executives  and their effects on organi- 
zations.  New  York: West. 

Fondas,  N.,  & Wiersema,  M.  1997.  Changing  of the  guard: 
The influence  of CEO socialization  on strategic change. 
Journal of Management Studies, 34: 561-584. 

Fredrickson,  J. W., Hambrick,  D. C., & Baumrin,  S.  1988. 
A  model  of  CEO  turnover.  Academy  of  Manage- 
ment  Review,  13:  255-270. 

Friedman,  S.  D.,  & Olk,  P.  1995.  Four  ways  to  choose  a 
CEO: Crown  heir,  horse  race,  coup  d'etat,  and  com- 
prehensive  search.  Human  Resource  Management, 
34:  141-164. 

Friedman,  S.  D.,  & Saul,  K.  1991.  A  leader's  wake:  Or- 
ganizational  member  reactions  to  CEO  succession. 
Journal of Management,  17: 619-642. 

Friedman,  S.  D.,  & Singh,  H.  1989.  CEO succession  and 
stockholder  reaction:  The  influence  of  organiza- 
tional  context  and  event  content.  Academy  of  Man- 
agement  Journal,  32:  718-744. 

Gabarro, J. J.  1987.  The  dynamics  of  taking  charge. 

Boston:  Harvard Business  School  Press. 

Gamson,  W., & Scotch,  N.  1964.  Scapegoating  in baseball. 

American Journal of Sociology,  70: 69-72. 

Goodstein,  J., & Boeker,  W.  1991.  Turbulence  at the  top: 
A new  perspective  on  governance  structure  changes 
and  strategic  change.  Academy  of  Management 
Journal,  34:  306-330. 

Gouldner,  A.  W.  1954.  Patterns  of  industrial  bureau- 

cracy.  Glencoe,  IL: Free Press. 

Grimm,  C.  M.,  & Smith,  K.  G.  1991.  Management  and 
organizational  change:  A note  on  the  railroad  indus- 
try. Strategic Management Journal, 12: 557-562. 

Grossman,  W.,  & Hoskisson,  R. E.  1998.  CEO pay  at the 
crossroad  of Wall  Street  and  Main: Toward  the  stra- 
tegic  design  of executive  compensation.  Academy  of 
Management Executive,  12(1): 43-57. 

Grusky,  0.  1963.  Managerial  succession  and  organiza- 
tional  effectiveness.  American  Journal  of  Sociol- 
ogy,  69:  21-31. 

Hambrick,  D.  C.,  Cho,  T.  S.,  & Chen,  M.  J.  1996.  The 
influence  of top  management  team  heterogeneity  on 
firms'  competitive  moves.  Administrative  Science 
Quarterly,  41:  659-684. 

Hambrick,  D. C., & Finkelstein,  G. S.  1995.  The  effects  of 
ownership  structure  on  conditions  at  the  top:  The 
case  of CEO pay raises.  Strategic  Management  Jour- 
nal,  16:  175-193. 

Hambrick,  D. C., & Fukutomi,  G. S.  1991.  The  seasons  of 
a CEO's tenure. Academy  of Management Review, 
16:  719-742. 

Hambrick, D. C., Geletkanycz,  M. A.,  & Fredrickson,  J. W. 
1993.  Top  executive  commitment  to  the  status  quo: 
Some  tests  of  its  determinants.  Strategic  Manage- 
ment  Journal,  14: 401-418. 

Hambrick,  D. C., & Mason,  P.  1984.  Upper  echelons:  The 
organization  as  a  reflection  of  its  top  managers. 
Academy  of Management Review,  9: 193-206. 

Hannan,  M.,  & Freeman,  J. 1984.  Structural  inertia  and 
organizational  change.  American  Sociological  Re- 
view,  49:  149-164. 

Haveman,  H.  1993.  Ghosts  of managers  past:  Managerial 
succession  and  organization  mortality.  Academy  of 
Management Journal, 36: 864-881. 


732 

Academy of Management Journal 

August 

Helmich,  D. L., & Brown,  W. B. 1972.  Successor  type  and 
organizational  change  in  corporate  enterprise.  Ad- 
ministrative  Science  Quarterly,  17:  371-381. 

Hoskisson,  R.  E.,  & Hitt,  M.  A.  1990.  Antecedents  and 
performance  outcomes  of  diversification:  Review 
and  critique  of  theoretical  perspectives.  Journal  of 
Management,  16: 461-509. 

Hoskisson,  R. E.,  Hitt,  M.  A.,  Johnson,  R. A.,  & Moesel, 
D. D.  1993.  Construct  validity  of an objective  (entro- 
py)  categorical  measure  of  diversification  strategy. 
Strategic  Management  Journal,  14: 215-235. 

Jackall,  R.  1988.  Moral  mazes:  The  world  of  corporate 

managers.  New  York: Oxford  University  Press. 

Jensen,  M. C., & Murphy,  K. J. 1990.  Performance  pay and 
incentives.  Journal  of  Political 

top  management 
Economy,  98:  225-264. 

Johnson,  R. A.  1996.  Antecedents  and  outcomes  of  cor- 
porate  restructuring.  Journal  of  Management,  22: 
439-483. 

Johnson,  R.  A.,  & Greening,  D.  W.  1999.  The  effects  of 
corporate  governance  and  institutional  ownership 
types  on  corporate  social  performance.  Academy  of 
Management  Journal,  42:  564-576. 

Johnson, R. A., Hoskisson,  R. E., & Hitt, M. A.  1993.  Board 
of director involvement  in restructuring: The effects of 
board  versus  managerial  controls  and  characteristics. 
Strategic  Management  Journal,  14:33-50. 

Joskow,  P.,  Rose,  N.,  &  Shepard,  A.  1993.  Regulatory 
constraints  on  CEO  compensation.  Brookings  pa- 
158: 
pers  on  economic  activity:  Microeconomics, 
70-72. 

Keck,  S.  L., & Tushman,  M. L. 1993.  Environmental  and 
organizational  context  and  executive  team  restruc- 
ture.  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  36:  1314- 
1344. 

Kesner,  I.  F.,  & Dalton,  D.  R.  1994.  Top  management 
turnover  and  CEO  succession:  An  investigation  of 
the  effects  of  turnover  on  performance.  Journal  of 
Management  Studies,  31:  701-713. 

Kesner,  I. F., & Sebora,  T. C. 1994.  Executive  succession: 
Past,  present  & future.  Journal  of  Management,  20: 
327-372. 

Kotter,  J.  P.  1982.  The  general  managers.  New  York: 

Free Press. 

Lawrence,  B.  S.  1997.  The  black  box  of  organizational 

demography.  Organization  Science,  8: 1-22. 

Lazear,  E. P.  1989.  Pay  equality  and  industrial  politics. 

Journal  of  Political  Economy,  97:  561-580. 

Levinson,  H.  1974.  Don't  choose  your  own  successor. 

Harvard  Business  Review,  52(2):  53-62. 

Lorsch,  J. W.,  & MacIver,  E. 1989.  Pawns  or potentates: 
The reality  of America's  corporate  boards.  Boston: 
Harvard Business  School  Press. 

Lubatkin,  M.,  Chung,  K.,  Rogers,  R.,  & Owers,  J.  1989. 

Stockholder  reactions  to  CEO  change  in  large  or- 
ganizations.  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  32: 
47-68. 

Miller,  D.  1991.  Stale  in  the  saddle:  CEO tenure  and  the 
match between  organization  and environment.  Man- 
agement  Science,  37:  34-52. 

Ocasio,  W.  1994.  Political  dynamics  and  the  circulation 
in  U.S.  industrial  corpo- 
of  power:  CEO succession 
rations,  1960-1990.  Administrative  Science  Quar- 
terly,  39:  285-312. 

Ocasio,  W.  1999.  Institutionalized  action  and  corporate 
governance:  The  reliance  on rules  of CEO succession. 
Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  44: 384-416. 

Ocasio,  W., & Kim, H.  1999.  The  circulation  of corporate 
control:  Selection  of  functional  backgrounds  of new 
CEOs in  large U.S.  manufacturing  firms,  1981-1992. 
Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  44:  532-562. 

Palepu,  K.  1985.  Diversification  strategy,  profit  perfor- 
mance,  and the entropy  measure.  Strategic  Manage- 
ment  Journal,  6: 239-255. 

Parrino, R. 1997.  CEO turnover  and outside  succession:  A 
cross-sectional  analysis.  Journal  of  Financial  Eco- 
nomics,  46:  165-197. 

Pfeffer, J. 1981.  Power  in  organizations.  Marshfield,  MA: 

Pitman. 

Pfeffer,  J. 1992.  Managing  with  power.  Boston:  Harvard 

Business  School  Press. 

Porter, M. E. 1980.  Competitive  strategy.  New  York: Free 

Press. 

Priem,  R.  L.,  Lyon,  D.  W.,  & Dess,  G. D.  1999.  Inherent 
limitations  of  demographic  proxies  in  top  manage- 
ment  team  heterogeneity  research.  Journal  of  Man- 
agement,  25:  935-953. 

Puffer,  S.,  & Weintrop,  J.  1991.  Corporate  performance 
and CEO turnover:  The role  of performance  expecta- 
tions.  Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  36:  1-19. 
Shleifer,  A.,  & Summers,  L. H.  1988.  Breach  of  trust  in 
hostile  takeovers.  In  A.  Auerbach  (Ed.),  Corporate 
takeovers:  33-56.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago 
Press. 

Smith,  M. P.  1996.  Shareholder  activism  by  institutional 
investors:  Evidence  from  CalPERS.  Journal  of  Fi- 
nance,  51:  227-252. 

Tabachnick,  B.  G., & Fidell,  L. S.  1989.  Using  multivar- 
iate  statistics  (2nd  ed.).  New  York: Harper Collins. 
Thomas,  A.  S.,  Litschert,  R. J., & Ramaswamy,  K.  1991. 
The  performance 
strategy-manager 
coalignment:  An  empirical  examination.  Strategic 
Management  Journal,  12: 509-522. 

impact 

of 

Tushman,  M.  L.,  & Rosenkopf,  L.  1996.  Executive  suc- 
strategic  reorientation  and  performance 
study  in  the  U.S.  cement 

cession, 
growth:  A  longitudinal 
industry.  Management  Science,  42:  939-953. 


2002 

Shen and Cannella 

733 

Vancil,  R.  1987.  Passing 

University  Press. 

the  baton.  Boston:  Harvard 

Virany,  B.,  Tushman,  M.,  & Romanelli,  E.  1992.  Execu- 
tive  succession  and  organization  outcomes  in  turbu- 
lent  environments:  An  organizational 
learning  ap- 
proach.  Organization  Science,  3: 72-90. 

Wagner,  W. G., Pfeffer,  J., & O'Reilly,  C. A.  1984.  Organ- 
izational  demography  and  turnover  in  top  manage- 
ment groups. Administrative Science  Quarterly, 29: 
74-92. 

Ward,  A.,  Bishop,  K.,  & Sonnenfeld,  J. A.  1999.  Pyrrhic 
victories:  The  cost  to  the  board  of  ousting  the  CEO. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior,  20: 767-781. 
Warner,  J. B.,  Watts,  R.  L.,  & Wruck,  K. H.  1988.  Stock 
prices  and  top  management  changes.  Journal  of  Fi- 
nancial  Economics, 20: 461-492. 

Weisbach,  M. 1988.  Outside  directors  and  CEO turnover. 

Journal of Financial  Economics, 19: 431-460. 

Wiersema,  M.  F.  1992.  Strategic  consequences  of  execu- 
tive  succession  within  diversified  firms.  Journal  of 
Management  Studies,  29: 73-94. 

Wiersema,  M.  F.  1995.  Executive  succession  as  an  ante- 
cedent  to  corporate  restructuring.  Human  Resource 
Management,  34:  185-202. 

Wiersema,  M. F., & Bantel,  K. A.  1993.  Top  management 
turnover  as  an  adaptation  mechanism:  The  role  of 

the  environment. Strategic  Management  Journal, 
14: 485-504. 

Zajac,  E. J. 1990.  CEO selection,  succession,  compensa- 
tion  and  firm performance:  A theoretical  integration 
and  empirical  analysis.  Strategic  Management 
Journal,  11:  217-230. 

Zajac,  E. J., & Westphal,  J. D.  1996.  Who  shall  succeed? 
How  CEO/board  preferences  and  power  affect  the 
choice  of  new  CEOs.  Academy  of  Management 
Journal,  39:  64-90. 

Wei  Shen  (shenw@notes.cba.ufl.edu) 
is  an  assistant  pro- 
fessor  of  strategic  management  at the  University  of Flor- 
ida.  He received  his  Ph.D.  in  strategic  management  from 
Texas  A&M University.  His research  focuses  on corporate 
executive  leadership  development,  succession,  and  their 
organizational  implications. 
Albert  A.  Cannella,  Jr.,  is  an  associate  professor  and  a 
Mays  Faculty  Fellow  at  Texas  A&M University.  He  re- 
ceived  his  Ph.D.  in  strategic  management  from Columbia 
University.  His research  focuses  on executives,  executive 
careers,  leadership,  succession,  and  the  links  between 
executive  actions  and  organizational  outcomes. 

OLS Regression  Models  of  the  Performance  Consequences  of  CEO Succession  for  Market-to-Book  Ratioa 
Model 1  Model 2  Model 3  Model 4  Model 5  Model 6  Model 7 

Variable 

APPENDIX 

Intercept 
Presuccession  firm  market-to-book  ratio 
Industry market-to-book ratio 
Industry  instability 
Industry  outsider 
Proportion  of  independent  outside  directors 
Institutional  ownership 
Restructuring 
Total  diversification 
Logarithm  of  sales 
Departing  CEO tenure 
Departing  CEO tenure  squared 
Contender  successor 
Outsider  successor 
Senior  executive  turnover 
Contender  x  senior  executive 
Outsider  x  senior  executive  turnover 

-32.82 

-27.45 

-31.16 

-32.15 

-32.16 

-19.00 

-33.07 

0.75*** 
0.65** 

0.75*** 
0.64** 

0.75*** 
0.64** 

0.76*** 
0.61** 

0.76*** 
0.60** 

0.75*** 
0.58** 

0.75*** 
0.60** 

-732.88 
29.33 
60.13 
17.30 
8.43 
-7.43 
7.25 

-716.74 
27.41 
58.83 
16.64 
7.66 
-6.92 
6.93 
-0.51 

-768.59 
29.88 
64.86 
20.75 
9.87 
-8.07 
6.79 
2.66 
-0.12 

-810.83 
14.72 
68.08t 
14.91 
10.39 
-7.17 
6.80 
2.66 
-0.11 
-0.21 
26.72 

-820.19 
9.86 
76.85* 
12.60 
13.74 
-7.00 
5.59 
2.83 
-0.12 
-7.57 
20.12 
110.01' 

-808.88 
13.77 
79.79t 
9.93 
13.09 
-8.07 
5.60 
3.17 
-0.13 
-51.89 
24.59 
43.77 
230.55t 

-829.16 
6.41 
71.05' 
10.36 
13.94 
-8.39 
6.14 
2.76 
-0.11 
-6.08 
-37.69 
79.78 

283.82 

F 
R2 
AR2 

20.40*** 

18.33*** 

16.77*** 

14.27*** 

13.56*** 

12.92*** 

12.88** 

.47 

.47 
.00 

.48 
..00b 

.48 

.49 
.Ot 

.49 
.Olt 

.49 
.01 

a  Values  are unstandardized  regression  coefficients. 
b  As  compared  with  model  1. 

p< 

.10 
** p  <  .01 
***p  <  .001 

