What Bandwagons 
Bring: Effects of Popular 
Management 
Techniques on 
Corporate Performance, 
Reputation, and CEO 
Pay 

Barry M. Staw 
Lisa D. Epstein 
University of  California, 
Berkeley 

of  popular  management 

This  paper  examines  some  of the  important  organization- 
al consequences 
techniques. 
Using  informational  reports  on  quality,  empowerment, 
and  teams,  as  well  as  a  measure  of  the  implementation 
of  total  quality  management  programs,  we  found  that 
companies  associated  with  popular  management 
tech- 
niques  did  not  have  higher  economic  performance.  Nev- 
ertheless,  these  same  companies  were  more  admired, 
perceived  to  be  more  innovative,  and  rated  higher  in 
management  quality.  Higher  pay  was  also  given  to  chief 
executives  when  their  companies  were  associated  with 
these  management 
trends.  These  results  provide  strong 
support  for  institutional  theory,  demonstrating  how  both 
internal  and  external  legitimacy  can  be  gained  by  using 
popular  management 
tutional  theory  from  its  usual  emphasis  on  organization- 
environment  relations  to  new  within-firm  dynamics.  - 

techniques.  They  also  extend  insti- 

It is  hard to  get  a sense  of  scientific  progress  by reading a 
chronology  of  popular management  techniques:  Management 
by Objectives,  Zero-based  Budgeting,  T Groups, Theory Y, 
Theory Z, Diversification, Matrix Organization, Participative 
Management,  Management  by Walking Around, Job  Enlarge- 
ment,  Quality Circles, Downsizing,  Re-engineering,  Total 
Quality Management,  Teams,  and  Empowerment.  There  is 
not a steady  progression  of  ideas  based  on  systematic 
knowledge  of  people  and organizations,  nor are there  clear- 
cut discoveries  of  principles for motivating and coordinating 
the  work of others.  Instead, the  chronology  of  management 
techniques  reads  more  like a list of  claims  not quite  substan- 
tiated and promises  not quite fulfilled. Though  many tech- 
niques  once  enjoyed  the  enthusiastic  support of  consultants, 
journalists, and management  scholars,  all but the  most 
recent  have fallen from favor, replaced  by newer  philosophies 
and procedures. 
Abrahamson  (1996)  described  the  ebb  and flow  of  manage- 
ment  techniques  as  similar to  that of a fashion  cycle.  At any 
particular time,  practitioners and researchers  are likely to 
agree  that older management  techniques  were  deficient,  that 
their popularity was  not justified by gains  in efficiency  or eco- 
nomic  performance.  But, as  with  any fashion  trend, discus- 
sions  of  contemporary  techniques  tend  to  be  much  more 
positive.  Today's business  writers  and consultants,  for exam- 
ple,  extol  the  virtues  of techniques  such  as  total quality man- 
agement  (TQM), teams,  and empowerment,  pointing to  their 
widespread  use  by high-prestige  organizations and their role 
in corporate  success  stories.  Many academics  have  also 
jumped  on the  bandwagon.  Lawler (1992)  has  called employ- 
ee  involvement  the  "ultimate competitive  advantage."  Pfef- 
fer (1994)  has  described  a broader set  of  human relations 
procedures  as  a source  of  "competitive  advantage  through 
people."  And Pfeffer  and Sutton  (2000)  have  gone  so  far as 
to  argue that the  main problem of  modern  management  is 
not  knowing what  the  right set  of techniques  is (this is pre- 
sumably  clear) but reducing what  they  call the  "knowing- 
doing gap." 
If the  merits  of  current management  techniques  are as  obvi- 
ous  as  Pfeffer and Sutton  claim them  to  be,  then  it makes 

523/Administrative Science Quarterly, 45 (2000): 523-556 

?2000  by Cornell University. 
0001 -8392/00/4503-0523/$3.00. 
0 

We  thank Jan  Beyer,  Robert Cole,  Glenn 
Carroll, John  Freeman,  David Levine, and 
John  Meyer for their many  helpful com- 
ments  and suggestions  during this  pro- 
ject.  The resulting  paper also  benefited 
greatly from the  comments  of  Daniel 
Brass and three  anonymous  reviews  for 
ASO. The  research  was  funded,  in part, 
by a faculty  research  grant from the  Insti- 
tute  of  Industrial Relations  at the  Universi- 
ty of  California, Berkeley.  Please  send  cor- 
respondence  regarding this article to 
Barry M. Staw,  Haas School  of  Business, 
Berkeley,  CA 94720-19000,  or to 
staw~haas.berkeley.edu. 


sense  to  shift our attention  from the  identification of  effec- 
tive  procedures  to  their implementation.  We  should,  as  they 
suggest,  start to  specify  norms,  incentives,  and strategies  to 
help organizations  implement  the  most  popular or best  prac- 
tices.  If effectiveness  cannot  easily  be  attributed to these 
contemporary  techniques,  however,  then  there  may not be 
as  much  of a knowing-doing  gap as  a simple  deficiency  in our 
understanding  of  organizational behavior, requiring continued 
search  for effective  procedures  rather than shortcuts  for their 
implementation.  In this  article, therefore,  we  take a critical 
look at some  of the  most  popular management  techniques 
and their consequences.  We  assess  whether  these  proce- 
dures  really are associated  with the  performance  of firms. 
We  also  ask  if there  are social  and material outcomes  that 
may drive organizations  and their management  toward  popu- 
lar programs, even  when  economic  or technical  benefits  are 
hard to  find. To begin  such  an inquiry, we  turn to the  litera- 
ture of  institutional theory. 

AN  INSTITUTIONAL VIEW OF POPULAR MANAGEMENT 
TECHN IQUES 
Institutional theorists  have  long dealt with the  issue  of why 
many organizational forms  and procedures  can exist  without 
obvious  technical  or economic  value  (Meyer and Rowan, 
1977;  Scott,  1995).  Early qualitative and descriptive  studies 
illustrated how  organizations  structure themselves  not so 
much to  execute  their tasks  more  efficiently  but to  gain legiti- 
macy  or cultural support  (e.g.,  Selznick,  1949;  Zald and Den- 
ton,  1963;  Meyer  and Rowan,  1983;  DiMaggio,  1991).  Some 
quantitative research  also  showed  that, while  technical  or 
functional criteria may be  important determinants  of the  early 
adoption  of an innovation, these  factors  become  weaker  pre- 
dictors over time  (e.g.,  Tolbert and Zucker, 1983).  Although 
most  institutional theorists  have  argued that  late adopters 
use  legitimacy  rather than technical  rationality as  the  basis  of 
their actions,  Scott  (1995)  noted  that  most  of the  evidence 
has  been  indirect, providing more  support for the  absence  of 
technical  or economic  determinants  of adoption than for insti- 
tutional processes. 
Somewhat  more  direct tests  of  institutional theory  have 
involved social  networks  of organizations  and their execu- 
tives.  Organizational practices  and forms  have  been  found to 
migrate between  organizations that are linked in social  net- 
works,  such  that executives  have  the  opportunity to  share 
information and perspectives  (e.g.,  Davis,  1991;  Haunschild, 
1993;  Palmer, Jennings,  and Zhou, 1993;  Haunschild and 
Miner, 1997).  While these  studies  have  illustrated the  impor- 
tance  of  modeling  and social  learning by organizations  (Levitt 
and  March, 1988),  they  have  not yet  provided definitive evi- 
dence  on  key processes  underlying institutional theory. We 
still do  not  know  whether  firms copy  other organizations to 
gain legitimacy  rather than technological  or economic  advan- 
tage.  And, conceptually,  it has  been  difficult to  separate 
actions  based  on  shared,  taken-for-granted values  and 
assumptions  (DiMaggio and  Powell,  1983)  from those  based 
on  more  familiar cognitive  shortcuts  (e.g.,  Nisbett  and  Ross, 
1980).  As  March and Olsen  (1976)  noted,  when  technologies 
are poorly understood  and organizations  face  problems  with 

524/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

ambiguous  causes  and unclear solutions,  copying  other orga- 
nizations  (and their executives)  may simply be  a low-cost 
heuristic for finding useful  solutions. 
Since  a core  assumption  of  institutional theory  is that organi- 
zations  act to  enhance  or protect  their legitimacy  (Scott, 
1995),  we  believe  it is important for empirical tests  of the 
theory  to  measure  directly any gains  in legitimacy  received  by 
the  organization. Two recent  studies  have  begun  to  provide 
such  data.  In a cross-sectional  study  of  Minnesota  banks, 
Deephouse  (1996)  showed  that conformity to  prevailing 
industry standards  (in terms  of  asset  allocations) was  signifi- 
cantly associated  with  banks' legitimacy, as  measured  by the 
approval of  regulatory agencies  as  well  as  public endorse- 
ment  reported in the  press.  In a larger, longitudinal study  of 
U.S.  hospitals,  Westphal,  Gulati, and Shortell (1997)  showed 
that isomorphism  (i.e.,  using TQM procedures  in the  same 
way  as  other  hospitals)  led to  increases  in legitimacy, as  evi- 
denced  by the  ratings of a national accreditation organization. 
While  Deephouse's  (1996) and Westphal,  Gulati, and Short- 
ell's  (1997)  studies  both provided direct measures  of  legitima- 
cy, they  also  shared  a particular limitation. Each study  was 
conducted  within a highly regulated  industry, in which  the 
organization had little choice  but to  follow  accepted  practices. 
Banks and hospitals  must  follow  regulatory and accreditation 
standards  or be  severely  sanctioned.  In other  business  situa- 
tions,  where  fears  of  misconduct  and demands  for account- 
ability are not so  great,  pressures  for legitimacy  may not be 
strong  enough  to  prevail over technical  and economic  consid- 
erations.  Moreover,  in many industries,  legitimacy  may sim- 
ply be  bestowed  on the  highest-performing  firms,  regardless 
of whether  they  adhere  to  popular business  practices  in their 
pursuit of  economic  performance. 
To validate institutional theory  as  a more general  explanation 
of organizational behavior, attention  should  be  directed  to  a 
broad cross-section  of firms. Attention  should  also  be  direct- 
ed  to  positive  as  well  as  negative  aspects  of  social  control. At 
present,  negative  sanctioning  is  recognized  as  a central com- 
ponent  of  coercive  institutional processes.  This is logical, 
given  that coercive  pressures  include  rules,  regulations,  and 
laws  that are used  to  constrain organizational actions  (e.g., 
DiMaggio and  Powell,  1983;  Scott,  1995).  But negative  sanc- 
tioning is also  implicit in most  empirical tests  involving nor- 
mative  systems  of  control.  For example,  when  accreditation 
is at stake  in hospital or educational  settings  (e.g.,  Ruef and 
Scott,  1998),  a failure to  meet  the  conditions  set  by external 
examiners  can  constitute  a threat to the  well-being  or survival 
of the  organization, not unlike that of  government  sanctioning 
in regulated  industries.  Because  of this  reliance on  negative 
(rather than positive)  sanctioning,  previous  tests  of  institution- 
al theory  have  probably understated  the  differences  between 
coercive  and normative systems  of  control. 
Theoretically, normative pressures  can  refer to the  positive 
pursuit of valued  ends,  not just  negative  deviations  from 
goals  and standards  (Scott,  1995).  The  positive  pursuit of  cul- 
tural or industry ideals  is something  that may be  richly 
rewarded  by external agents  and observers  of the  organiza- 

525/ASQ, September 2000 


tion, providing the  firm with  clear opportunities  to gain in 
stature.  Thus, when  normative  pressures  are considered  in a 
more  positive  (or bidirectional) light, institutional forces  can 
be  seen  as  influencing a broader range of  actions,  beyond 
the  usual dichotomy  of  meeting  or not  meeting  expectations 
or behaving  in ways  that are acceptable  or not. 
A more  positive  approach to  normative control also  implies 
that organizational attention  does  not necessarily  revert to 
technical  and economic  considerations  when  a threat to  legit- 
imacy is resolved.  Once  minimal standards  are met,  corpora- 
tions  are likely to  continue  working for the  esteem  of  exter- 
nal judges,  be  they  various trade associations,  public interest 
groups,  or the  business  press.  They  may exert  efforts  to  be 
the  best  or most  admired in arenas  from customer  service  to 
employment  conditions  to  product design.  Hence,  when  insti- 
tutional forces  are described  in terms  of  positive  as  well  as 
negative  pressures,  there  is reason  to  consider  the  pursuit of 
reputation (e.g.,  Fombrun and Shanley,  1990;  Fombrun, 1996) 
as  a major vehicle  for gaining organizational legitimacy.  Since 
organizational legitimacy  constitutes  "the degree  of  cultural 
support for an organization" (Meyer and Scott,  1983:  201), 
significant changes  in reputation may often  be  what  drives 
the  institutional basis  of  behavior. 

Legitimacy  and  Performance 
If one  describes  the  adoption of  popular management  tech- 
niques  as  a means  for the  corporation to  improve its reputa- 
tion, does  this also  imply that there  is a reduction  in the  tech- 
nical or economic  performance  of the  firm? Implicit in most 
versions  of  institutional theory  is the  notion that organizations 
are less  efficient  or rational when  they  seek  legitimacy  rather 
than economic  ends  (e.g.,  Meyer  and Rowan,  1977).  The  pur- 
suit of  legitimacy  is presumed  either to  lead to  nonefficient 
practices  or to  draw the  firm's attention  away  from more 
essential  activities.  But, as  Scott  (1995)  pointed  out,  even  if 
an organization pursues  a policy or procedure  for legitimacy 
reasons,  this  does  not necessarily  mean  that there  will be 
negative  economic  consequences.  A gain in legitimacy  could 
materially benefit  an organization, since  it may aid in securing 
valued  resources  or external support. And, if "best  practices" 
are even  partially as  useful  as  they  are claimed  to  be,  then 
their adoption will be  beneficial  even  when  it is  motivated  by 
legitimacy  rather than economic  considerations.  Thus,  argu- 
ments  can be  mustered  on  both sides  of the  performance 
question.  While some  scholars  stress  that many manage- 
ment  techniques  are nothing  more  than passing  fads  (e.g., 
Abrahamson,  1996),  others  wonder  why  seemingly  smart 
organizations fail to  adopt  beneficial  innovations  (e.g.,  Pfeffer 
and Sutton,  2000).  Hence,  there  is reason  to  expect  either an 
increase  or decrease  in organizational performance  following 
the  adoption of  popular business  practices: 

Hypothesis la  (Hia): The adoption of popular management tech- 
niques will lead to an increase in organizational performance. 

Hypothesis lb  (Hib): The adoption of popular management tech- 
niques will lead to a decrease in organizational performance. 

526/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

The  Pursuit  of  Legitimacy 
Though we  have  posed  conflicting hypotheses  about 
whether  popular techniques  facilitate or detract from organi- 
zational performance,  the  effects  of  performance  on corpo- 
rate reputation are not so  ambiguous.  Using  Fortune maga- 
zine's  well-known  annual survey  on  corporate  reputation, 
Fombrun and Shanley  (1990) and McGuire, Schneeweis,  and 
Branch (1 990)  found  highly significant  relationships  between 
performance  and admiration. One  specific  example  highlights 
this  relationship over time.  From 1983  to  1986,  IBM was 
rated highest  in Fortune's survey  of  corporate  reputation, 
since  this  was  also  a period when  its economic  performance 
was  strongest.  As  IBM's performance  declined,  however,  so 
did its corporate  reputation. After two  years  (1992-93)  of 
negative  returns on assets,  sales,  and equity,  IBM's reputa- 
tion fell all the  way  to  number 354  on the  1994  Fortune list. 
Nonetheless,  as  the  firm's economic  performance  improved 
in the  late  1990s,  so  too  did its corporate  reputation, moving 
back to  number 37  on the  1999  Fortune survey. Thus, 

Hypothesis 2 (H2): Organizational performance will significantly 
influence a firm's external reputation. 
Given the  relationship between  organizational performance 
and reputation, one  might hypothesize  that legitimacy  is pri- 
marily achieved  through strong  financial performance.  What- 
ever  techniques  a firm uses  could  become  the  accepted 
(even  approved) means  of  production, as  long as  they  appear 
to  be  associated  with  positive  economic  performance.  Like- 
wise,  if adopting  popular management  techniques  really does 
add to  organizational performance,  one  might also  expect  an 
improvement  in the  firm's reputation.  In either  case,  legitima- 
cy would  be  mediated  by organizational performance,  such 
that popular management  techniques  would  not be  associat- 
ed  with  legitimacy when  performance  is statistically con- 
trolled. Thus, 

Hypothesis 3 (H3): Organizations will gain in external reputation 
when they have adopted popular management techniques that are 
either positively associated with firm performance or actually lead to 
improved performance. 
Though  it is possible  to  build corporate  reputation by adopt- 
ing innovations that improve organizational performance, 
institutional theorists  argue  that the  process  can  be  much 
simpler. As  Meyer  and Rowan  (1977)  noted,  when  an organi- 
zation adopts  programs that adhere  to  the  prescriptions  (and 
myths)  in the  institutional environment,  it demonstrates  that 
it is acting on  collectively  valued  purposes  in a proper and 
adequate  manner. Because  popular management  techniques 
are generally as  much  a reflection  of the  values  of a culture 
as  a technical  solution  (Barley and  Kunda, 1992;  Wagner and 
Gooding,  1987),  their adoption  reflects  an alignment  of  corpo- 
rate and societal  values.  By adopting fashionable  manage- 
ment  techniques  (e.g.,  TQM, empowerment,  or teams),  orga- 
nizations  may thus  be  able to  improve their corporate 
reputations directly, regardless of economic performance. 

527/ASQ, September 2000 


Hypothesis 4 (H4): Organizations will gain in external reputation 
when they have adopted popular management techniques, regard- 
less of whether there is an improvement in firm performance. 
Since  corporate  reputations  are an aggregation  of judgments, 
appearances  can also  count  as  much  or more than reality. As 
Oliver (1991:  1 55)  noted,  "from an institutional perspective 
...  the  appearance  rather than the  fact  of  conformity is often 
presumed  to  be  sufficient  for the  attainment  of  legitimacy." 
Thus,  not only may economic  benefits  be  unnecessary  for 
reputational effects,  it may not even  be  essential  to  imple- 
ment  the  techniques  themselves.  Such  decoupling  between 
the  rhetoric and implementation  of  management  techniques 
could  be  due  to  managerial efforts  to  manipulate or control 
the  institutional environment  surrounding an organization 
(Pfeffer,1981;  Westphal  and Zajac, 1998).  It may also  reflect 
the  simple  fact that  it is easier  to  talk about  popular manage- 
ment  techniques  (such  as  TQM) than to  implement  them 
(Zbaracki, 1998;  Cole,  1999;  Pfeffer and Sutton,  1999). 
Regardless,  one  can argue that  reputational effects  are most 
immediately  influenced  by the  information available to  exter- 
nal judges  of the  organization and that  information linking the 
firm with  popular management  techniques  must  only be 
salient  and/or credible,  not necessarily  true. Thus, 

Hypothesis 5 (H5): Organizations will gain in external reputation 
when they are informationally linked with popular management 
techniques, irrespective of the firm's economic performance. 
Institutional theorists  argue that firms adopting  popular man- 
agement  techniques  are following  social  convention  or fash- 
ion, essentially  conforming  to  industry or societal  norms.  Yet 
because  popular management  techniques  are generally  char- 
acterized  as  modern,  state-of-the-art  tools,  information linking 
the  firm with these  techniques  may influence  the  perception 
of  innovation. Jumping  on the  bandwagon,  even  at the  later 
stages  of a management  fad,  may be  perceived  as  a form of 
innovation when  it is contrasted  with the  more  passive  act  of 
ignoring industry trends  or the  more  active  stance  of  reject- 
ing them  altogether.  Although  moving with  business  fashions 
may be  interpreted by academic  observers  as  a form of  con- 
formity (e.g.,  Meyer  and  Rowan,  1983;  Abrahamson,  1996), 
business  practitioners are likely to  see  these  changes  as  a 
means  of  keeping  up to  date  and competitive.  Thus, 

Hypothesis 6 (H6): Organizations that are informationally linked 
with popular management techniques will be perceived as more 
innovative, irrespective of the firm's economic performance. 
The  use  of  popular management  techniques  may also  be 
interpreted as  a general  indicator of  management  quality. 
Because  there  is so  much  ambiguity in attributing the  causes 
of  organizational performance  (March and Olsen,  1976;  Staw, 
1980),  outside  observers  may rely on  positively  valued  behav- 
iors in making their judgments  of a corporation's manage- 
ment.  Observers  may perceive  that managers  are well  quali- 
fied  and of  high ability when  they  are using the  latest 
techniques,  such  as  TQM, empowerment,  or teams. 
Because  these  techniques  are popular, leaders  using  them 
are assumed  to  be  competent,  regardless  of their actual 
degree  of  effectiveness.  Thus, 

528/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

Hypothesis 7 (H7): Organizations that are informationally linked 
with popular management techniques will be perceived as having 
higher-quality management, irrespective of the firm's economic per- 
formance. 

Beyond 

External  Reputation 

legitimacy 

By  pursuing 
procedures 
build 
Oliver,  1991;  Scott, 
that  being  associated 
may  help  to  improve 
may  also  be  some 
inside  and  outside 
help 
credibility 
several  ways 
fested. 

legitimate 

such 

valued  goals  and  employing 
for  reaching 

these 
in  the  domains 

generally 
goals,  organizations 
in  which 

they  operate 

approved 
are  able  to 

(e.g., 

1995).  Though 

it  comes 

with  popular  management 
a  corporation's 

as  no  surprise 
techniques 

external 
in  the  way 

legitimacy, 

legitimacy 

The  kinds  of  actions 

there 
is  built 
that 

isomorphism 
the  organization. 

a  firm  in  its  environment 

may  also  help  gain 

for  managers 

inside 

the  organization. 

There  are 

intraorganizational 

effects 

could  be  mani- 

tech- 
organiza- 

these 

expect 

and 

leaders 

actually 

certainly 

advocate 

adoption 

regardless 

implementation 

for  the  simple 

its  compensation 

cue  or  cognitive 

the  organization, 

then  one  would 

of  their  economic 

by  evaluators  within 

in  high  regard  within 

popular  management 
improves 

to  be  held 
theorists  would  argue 

If corporate 
niques  and  their 
tional  performance, 
executives 
institutional 
be  rewarded 
dures, 
tives  who  adopt  popular  procedures  may  be  held 
esteem 
board  of  directors 
evaluators  may  use  popular  management 
heuristic 
compensation 
Ross, 
formance 
been 
ents 
officer 
and  Crystal,  1988).  Similarly,  one  might  expect 
boards 
techniques 
tor  of  the  professionalism 
tives.  They  may  consider  CEOs  associated 
cedures 
worth  more 
cedures. 

shortcut 
of  the  organization's 
of  difficulties 
leaders, 

or  forward-looking 
identified  with 

(CEO)  (Main,  O'Reilly,  and  Wade, 

found 
in  determining 

to  use  popular  management 

to  be  more  advanced 

to  use  psychological 

than  CEOs  not  so 

of  organizational 

1980).  Because 

or  effectiveness 

compensation 

Thus, 

the 

their  firms.  But 
that  top  managers  might 

of  well-accepted 
consequences. 

proce- 

Execu- 
in  greater 
such  as  the 
These 
as  a 

committee. 

techniques 

the  value  and 

in  deciding 
leaders 
in  evaluating 
boards  of  directors 

(Nisbett 

and 

the  true  per- 

have 
refer- 

as  well  as  economic 

for  the  chief  executive 

1995;  O'Reilly,  Main, 

corporate 
as  an  indica- 

of  chief  execu- 
with  popular  pro- 

leaders, 
latest  pro- 

Hypothesis 8 (H8): Corporate leaders will be compensated more 
when their firms have adopted popular management techniques 
that are either positively associated with firm performance or actual- 
ly lead to improved performance. 

Hypothesis 9 (H9): Corporate leaders will be compensated more 
when their firms have adopted popular management techniques, 
regardless of whether there is an improvement in firm performance. 

linkage  of  corporations 

reputation  may  be  dependent 

Just  as  external 
tual 
may  CEO  compensation. 
that  public  announcements 
impor- 
tant 
irre- 
spective of the actual changes implemented by firms. Thus, 

of  popular  pay  plans  were 
constituents, 

on  the  percep- 
so,  too, 
found 

internal  and  external 

and  Zajac  (1998) 

with  popular 

in  managing 

techniques, 

Westphal 

both 

529/ASQ, September 2000 


it is possible  that  public information linking companies  with 
particular management  techniques  can  influence  the  way 
boards of  directors treat CEOs.  Because  of widespread  belief 
in the  merits  of  popular management  techniques,  CEOs 
associated  with  these  techniques  may gain internal approval 
or repute.  Leaders of  companies  associated  with  popular 
management  techniques  may then  receive  increased  com- 
pensation,  even  if this  association  is based  on  public informa- 
tion about the  firm and is not tied to  increased  firm perfor- 
mance: 

Hypothesis 10 (H10): Corporate leaders will be compensated more 
when their firms are informationally linked with popular manage- 
ment techniques, irrespective of the performance of the firms they 
lead. 
In addition to  acting as  a direct psychological  cue  to the  value 
or effectiveness  of  leaders  (cf. Staw,  1975),  there  may be 
some  indirect ways  in which  popular management  tech- 
niques  contribute to  executive  pay. Because  the  true perfor- 
mance  of an organization's leader  is so  ambiguous,  inside 
evaluators  could turn to  outside  evaluators  for guidance  in 
forming their own  opinions.  Such  a transference  of opinions 
from outside  to  inside the  organization would  be  analogous 
to the  social  information processing  effects  originally 
described  by Salancik and  Pfeffer  (1978).  Being  identified 
with  popular management  techniques  may  increase  a 
leader's  compensation  because  association  with these  tech- 
niques  has  heightened  external admiration of  a corporation's 
management. 

Hypothesis 11 (H11): Corporate leaders will be compensated more 
when they are informationally linked with popular management 
techniques, but this effect will be mediated by outsiders' opinions 
of the management of the firm. 
A third reason  why  leaders  may be  compensated  more  when 
they  are identified with  popular management  techniques 
could  stem  from the  reputational effects  these  techniques 
provide to the  organization. Because  the  adoption of  popular 
techniques  may  increase  support and goodwill  for the  organi- 
zation, any benefits  received  by corporate  leaders  could sim- 
ply be  viewed  as  payback for gains  in external  reputation. 
Even if there  are no economic  benefits  resulting from popular 
management  techniques,  boards could  reward increases  in 
reputation when  deciding  compensation  for the  chief  execu- 
tive.  Thus, 

Hypothesis 12 (H12): Corporate leaders will be compensated more 
when their firms are informationally linked with popular manage- 
ment techniques, but this effect will be mediated by the external 
reputation of the firm. 
These  compensation  hypotheses  extend  institutional theory 
from external to  internal processes  of the  firm. They delve 
into whether  rewards  are determined  by the  economic  and 
social  outcomes  brought to the  firm or if CEO pay is simply a 
product of the  leader's association  with widely  accepted 
management  techniques.  If the  latter is true, then  there  may 
be  a decoupling  of  performance  and consequences 

for top 

530/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

management  inside the  firm, in much  the  same  way  as  legiti- 
macy  is achieved  by organizations  in their environments. 

Effects  of  Information  vs.  Implementation 
Information linking firms with  popular management  tech- 
niques  may only be  an imperfect  indicator of the  actual adop- 
tion or implementation  of these  procedures.  This means  that 
one  might expect  stronger  relationships  between  implemen- 
tation measures  and firm performance  than between  perfor- 
mance  and informational measures  linking the  firm with  pop- 
ular management  techniques.  Because  actions  should 
generally  be  more  important than rhetoric in improving orga- 
nizational performance  (Pfeffer and Sutton,  1999),  measures 
of  actual implementation  should  take  precedence  over  infor- 
mational data in testing  for performance  effects  such  as 
those  outlined  in hypotheses 
The situation should  be  reversed  when  testing  for reputation- 
al effects.  According to  institutional theory, gains  in legitima- 
cy are bestowed  on  organizations  believed  to  be  using  social- 
ly approved  practices  and procedures.  Primary to  such  beliefs 
would  be  information linking the  corporation with  certain pro- 
cedures,  not the  actual practices  themselves.  In fact,  a firm 
may be  able to  convince  external constituents  that it is on 
the  leading edge  of  popular management  techniques,  even 
though  reality may not match the  rhetoric (e.g.,  Westphal  and 
Zajac, 1998;  Zbaracki, 1998).  Information linking firms with 
popular management  techniques  should  therefore  predict 
corporate  reputation better  than measures  of the  implemen- 
tation of these  same  procedures.  There may also  be  signifi- 
cant effects  of  informational linkage over and above  those  for 
implementation: 

la  and  l b. 

Hypothesis 13 (H13): Organizations will gain in external reputation 
when they are informationally linked with popular management 
techniques, irrespective of the firm's actual implementation of these 
procedures. 
In predicting CEO compensation,  we  are less  certain whether 
the  effects  will be  stronger  for the  implementation  of  popular 
management  techniques  or information linking them  with the 
firm. On the  one  hand, CEO compensation  is determined  by 
committees  that should  be  more  knowledgeable  about a cor- 
poration's affairs than outsiders,  including the  firm's imple- 
mentation  of  popular management  techniques.  On the  other 
hand, many studies  have found  that boards of directors are 
less  than fully informed about  corporate affairs (e.g.,  Mace, 
1971;  Lorsch and MacIver, 1989),  making them  (like out- 
siders)  susceptible  to  public information tying the  firm to  pop- 
ular management  techniques.  Thus,  it is possible  that there 
are compensation  effects  for informational linkage over and 
above  those  for the  implementation  of  popular management 
techniques: 

Hypothesis 14 (H14): Corporate leaders will be compensated more 
when their firms are informationally linked with popular manage- 
ment techniques, irrespective of the firm's actual implementation of 
these procedures. 

531/ASQ, September 2000 


In the  research  reported below,  we  first tested  for improve- 
ments  in organizational performance  that may result from 
popular management  techniques.  Then,  in accord with  insti- 
tutional theory, we  examined  whether  keeping  up with  man- 
agement  trends  yields  improved reputation for the  firm. Final- 
ly, we  investigated  whether  institutional effects  translate  into 
personal  gains  for the  organization's leader, testing  if identifi- 
cation with  popular management  techniques  or their imple- 
mentation  leads  to  greater financial compensation. 

METHOD 
Sample 
The sample  for this  research  consisted  of the  largest  (in 
terms  of  sales)  U.S.  industrial corporations.  Using the  1995 
Fortune 500  data base,  which  included both financial and 
industrial corporations,  we  chose  the  100  largest  industrial 
corporations for which  we  could also  obtain data on  either 
corporate  reputation or executive  compensation.  The final 
sample  consisted  of corporations from 25  industries. The 
Appendix lists the  firms. 

Popular  Management  Techniques 
We  used  three  different  measures  of  popular management 
techniques.  Because  reputations  are a function  of what 
external  parties see  the  organization doing,  we  created  two 
informational measures  linking sampled  corporations with 
popular management  techniques.  A third measure  assessed 
the  extent  to which  corporations  in our sample  implemented 
a currently popular management  technique,  total quality man- 
agement.  We  tested  each  of the  hypotheses  using  these 
three  indicators of  popular management  techniques. 
Informational  measures.  To obtain informational measures 
of  popular management  techniques,  we  consulted  the  Nexis 
News  Library, a computerized  full-text data base  of  legal, 
business,  and current affairs information. The  Nexis  News 
Library includes  major U.S.  newspapers  such  as  the  New 
York Times and the  Washington  Post,  as  well  as  news  maga- 
zines  such  as  Time, Fortune, and  Business  Week.  Using a 
search  of all magazines  and major newspapers  in the  News 
Library, we  examined  the  recent  citation rates  of a number of 
popular management  techniques.  For the  focus  of this  study 
we  selected  three  of the  most  frequently  cited  techniques: 
quality, teams,  and empowerment. 
Pilot searches  were  conducted  to  eliminate  false  hits for the 
three  management  techniques.  These  searches  showed  that 
it was  necessary  to  preclude the  everyday  use  of terms  such 
as  quality, since  this  could yield numerous  articles  about 
product quality rather than total quality management,  or 
teams,  since  this  could yield articles on  sports  rather than 
team-based  management.  Accurate  searches  were  produced 
by coupling quality, teams,  and empowerment  with other 
adjectives  so  as  to yield only work-related articles.  Our final 
search  protocol consisted  of the  following  descriptors  for the 
three  popular management  techniques:  (1) quality: total quali- 
ty, quality assurance,  or quality circles,  (2) teams:  self  man- 
aged  teams,  self  managing teams,  or work teams,  and (3) 
empowerment:  employee  participation, worker participation, 

532/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

employee  involvement,  worker involvement,  employee 
empowerment,  or worker empowerment. 
Relative  citation  rates.  We  first conducted  computerized 
searches  for the  year  1994  and then  gathered  data for the 
years  1990-1992  so  as  to  study  lagged  effects.  For each  of 
the  100  companies  in our sample,  we  recorded  the  number 
of articles  retrieved on  both the  company  name  and the 
descriptors  of  quality, teams,  and empowerment.  These  cita- 
tion data measure  the  informational linkage of a particular 
firm with  popular management  techniques.  Because  citation 
data are third-party observations,  they  may be  subject  to 
reporting errors. For example,  the  larger a company,  the 
more  press  coverage  it can  be  expected  to  attract. Likewise, 
the  better  the  performance  of a firm, the  more  likely 
observers  are to  see  positively valued  activities  such  as  popu- 
lar management  techniques.  Therefore,  we  controlled for 
both size  and performance  in our empirical tests. 
We  also  paid attention  to  the  conceptual  meaning  of these 
citation data. At their most  obvious  level,  citation data are 
indicators of  public attention,  in the  form of  media  exposure, 
for a company's  activities.  Therefore,  by counting  all citations 
associating  each  company  with  quality, teams,  and empower- 
ment,  we  constructed  a measure  of  exposure  for popular 
management  techniques  (PMT exposure).  Because  the  num- 
ber of  citations  for a firm on  quality, teams,  and empower- 
ment  depended  highly on the  size  of the  firm (e.g.,  average 
r =  .72), we  divided the  number of  citations  by firm size, 
measured  as  the  average  of  normalized sales  and assets.  The 
resulting measure  reduces  the  problem of  multicollinearity 
when  size  and  PMT exposure  are both  included  in regression 
equations.  Thus, the  measure  of  PMT exposure  can  be  inter- 
preted  as  the  amount  of attention  paid to  a firm's popular 
management  techniques  relative to  other firms of  its size. 
Though  public exposure  for popular management  techniques 
is a useful  variable for predicting legitimacy  effects,  it may  be 
an imperfect  guide  to  the  actual use  of  popular management 
techniques.  Because  companies  attempt  to  manage  public 
impressions  (Elsbach,  1994;  Johns,  1999),  they  may attempt 
to  associate  themselves  with  popular management  tech- 
niques  even  when  they  have  not seriously  implemented 
them.  To control for simple  efforts  to  gain positive  publicity, 
we  constructed  an alternative informational measure.  For 
each  corporation, we  divided the  number of articles  linking 
the  firm with  the  three  popular management  techniques  by 
the  total number of  citations  received  by that firm during a 
given  year. The  resulting measure  can  be  considered  an indi- 
cator of the  firm's focus  on  popular management  techniques 
(PMT focus),  since  it taps  the  proportion of  each  firm's cita- 
tions  devoted  to  these  procedures.  Logically, for a company 
to  receive  a greater  proportion of  citations  on quality, teams, 
and empowerment, 
it would  have to  receive  a lower  propor- 
tion of citations  on other  corporate  issues,  such  as  product 
introductions, earnings,  new  hiring, and community  affairs. 
Because  there  are many  issues  on which  corporations 
attempt  to  gain media  exposure,  it would  be  costly  to trade 
off  such  publicity in exchange  for greater attention  on  popular 
management techniques. Thus, we  believe the PMT focus 

533/ASQ, September 2000 


data are less  subject  to  corporate  impression  management 
than data on  PMT exposure,  though  they  may not be  totally 
devoid  of  such  influences. 
TQM implementation.  As a third measure  of  popular man- 
agement  techniques,  we  used  Easton and Jarrell's (1998) 
sample  data as  an indicator of the  implementation  of total 
quality management  (TQM) programs. To build a sample,  Eas- 
ton  and Jarrell initially gathered  information on firms reputed 
to  have TQM programs. They conducted  computerized 
searches  of annual reports, selecting  companies  that men- 
tioned  the  implementation  of at least  one  specific  quality- 
management  approach (e.g.,  statistical  process  control, just- 
in-time manufacturing, quality training, improvement  teams). 
They also  searched  annual reports and Standard and Poor's 
Register  of  Directors and Executives  for use  of the  word 
"quality" within five words  of  "vice president"  or "director." 
Finally, they  searched  the  Businesswire  data base  for refer- 
ences  to  quality awards,  along with  lists  of  site-visited  firms 
for the  Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award (from the 
U.S.  Government  Accounting  Office) and the  institutional 
affiliations of  Baldridge Award examiners  for the  years  1989 
to  1 993. 
After reviewing  information on over  500  firms from the  above 
sources,  Easton and Jarrell approached  207  firms they  initial- 
ly believed  to  have  implemented  TQM programs.  In the 
process  of  setting  up interviews,  17 firms were  determined 
not to  have a TQM system,  and  14 firms declined  to  partici- 
pate  in the  study,  leaving  176  firms.  George  Easton,  a former 
senior  examiner  for the  Baldridge Awards, then  conducted 
semistructured  interviews  with  a top  manager  in these  firms 
familiar with the  company's  quality-management  system, 
generally a vice  president  or director of quality. The objective 
was  to  develop  a time-line  of the  company's  TQM efforts, 
determine  what  key approaches  were  used,  and assess  the 
actual extent  of  deployment  through in-depth probing. As  a 
result of the  on-site  interviews,  Easton and Jarrell eliminated 
53  firms from their sample  because  they  considered  the 
company's  efforts  to  implement  TQM to  be  inadequate.  An 
additional 15 were  eliminated  because  performance  data 
were  not available. Easton and Jarrell's final sample  consisted 
of  108  firms deemed  to  "have made  serious  efforts  to  imple- 
ment  TQM approaches  in a majority of their business"  (p. 
244).  Most  of the  firms using TQM were  determined  to  have 
first implemented  it in the  late  1 980s,  with the  latest  starting 
date  being  1991.1 
Of the  100  companies  in our Fortune sample,  36  were  also 
determined  by Easton and Jarrell to  have  implemented  TQM 
programs. We  therefore  dummy  coded  our sampled  compa- 
nies  as  being  included in Easton-Jarrell's TQM sample  or not. 
We  recognize,  of  course,  that such  a dummy  coding  can only 
be  considered  an approximate  measure  of TQM implementa- 
tion. Although  Easton and Jarrell tried to  be  exhaustive  in 
their construction  of a TQM sample,  there  is no guarantee 
that every  company  excluded  from their sample  did not  have 
a TQM program. Therefore,  Easton and Jarrell's coding 
should  be  interpreted as  a fairly conservative  measure  of 

534/ASQ,  September  2000 

I 
To create  a fully accurate  indicator of 
TOM implementation,  one  might also 
want  to  interview  lower-level  employees 
and observe  the  actual workings  of vari- 
ous  quality programs.  Nevertheless,  given 
the  previous  experience  of the  interview- 
er as  a former quality examiner, and the 
fact that nearly a third of the  companies 
initially thought  to  have  quality programs 
were  eliminated  from the  sample,  we 
interpret these  data as  a reasonably accu- 
rate indicator of  implementation. 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

techniques.  Of this 

implementation,  one  that possibly  underestimates  the  differ- 
ences  between  the  TQM and non-TQM subsamples. 
Measuring  popular  management 
study's  three  indicators of  popular management  techniques, 
the  two  informational measures,  PMT exposure  and PMT 
focus,  both  rest  on  citation rates  (and share  a common 
numerator), yet  they  are only modestly  correlated  (e.g.,  r = 
.46 for  1994).  The TQM measure  is obviously  derived from 
an entirely different  methodology  from the  PMT measures.  In 
addition, its subject  matter overlaps  only partially with the 
informational measures  of  popular management  techniques. 
Though TQM programs generally  involve efforts  to  improve 
quality, use  work teams,  and empower  workers,  they  often 
include additional technical  and managerial components 
(Hackman and Wageman,  1995).  Therefore,  it is not surpris- 
ing that the  measure  of TQM implementation  is only moder- 
ately associated  with  informational measures  of  popular man- 
agement  techniques  (e.g.,  r =  .41  between  TQM and PMT 
exposure;  r =  .43  between  TQM and  PMT focus). 
Not only may each  of the  three  measures  of  popular manage- 
ment  techniques  tap a slightly different aspect  of the  general 
construct,  each  may also  differ on the  dimension  of  rhetoric 
vs.  reality. Based  on journalistic reports, the  two  information- 
al measures  are both subject  to  corporate  efforts  in impres- 
sion  management.  Though  it is unclear how  much  of the 
informational linkage a company  can  really manage,  it is likely 
that the  focus  measures  are less  susceptible  to  impression 
management  efforts  than the  exposure  measures.  The TQM 
implementation  measure,  based  on  Easton and Jarrell's 
rather thorough  assessment 
techniques,  should  be  least 
affected  by impression  management  biases. 
Corporate  reputation.  Data on  corporate  reputations  were 
based  on  Fortune magazine's  "Most Admired" survey.  Our 
primary dependent  measures  consisted  of the  1995  survey 
results  published  in the  March 6,  1996  issue  of  Fortune, but 
we  obtained  the  data we  used  from  Fortune's web  site 
(http:llpathfinder.com/@@kZZmUAcAZ1 v@*gy7/fortune/ 
1 996/specials/mostadmired/index.html), 
more  detailed  information than the  magazine  article summa- 
rizing the  results.  Previous years'  data were  obtained  from 
the  magazine's  archives. 
Fortune sends  surveys  to  executives  and outside  directors 
asking them  to  rank companies  in their own  industries  on 
eight  criteria. They also  send  surveys  to financial analysts 
asking them  to  rank companies  within the  industries they 
cover. The  Fortune surveys  are sent  out  between  September 
and December  and are received  up until the  end  of the  year. 
Approximately  11,000  people  receive  the  survey,  and the 
response  rate is between  45  and 50  percent.  The companies 
chosen  for the  reputation survey  are limited to  members  of 
the  Fortune 500  in industries  in which  there  are at least  five 
companies  represented  in the  Fortune 500.  Industry groups 
are assigned  to  companies  on the  basis  of their largest 
source  of  revenue  (Fisher, 1996).2 
Ninety-four companies  in our sample  were  also  included in 
the  Fortune "Most  Admired" data base.  For each  of these 

since  it contained 

535/ASQ, September 2000 

2 
Some  of our information on the  procedures 
used  in the  Fortune survey  on  corporate 
admiration comes  from a telephone  inter- 
view  with  Greg Martire, representing  the 
research firm of  Clark, Martire and Bar- 
tolomeo,  which  conducted  the  survey  for 
Fortune magazine. 


companies,  Fortune reported  ratings on  eight  dimensions  of 
corporate  reputation and an overall measure  of  "admiration." 
We  recorded the  ratings from both sampled  executives  and 
financial analysts  on  overall admiration (ax =  .97  for 1995  data) 
as  well  as  the  individual ratings for the  following  aspects  of 
corporate  reputation: (1) innovativeness,  (2) quality of  man- 
agement,  (3) quality of  products/services  offered,  (4) long- 
term  investment  value,  (5) financial soundness,  (6) ability to 
attract/keep  talented  people,  (7) community/environmental 
responsibility, and (8) use  of corporate assets. 
Economic  performance.  We  used  the  COMPUSTAT data 
base  of  corporate financial information to  determine  each 
company's  economic  performance,  recording financial data 
on  return on assets  (ROA), return on  equity  (ROE), and return 
on  sales  (ROS). The  intercorrelation of these  three  financial 
indicators averaged  .80  (with a range from  .73  to  .86). To cre- 
ate  a measure  of overall financial performance,  we  first nor- 
malized each  of these  financial indicators and then  aggregat- 
ed  the  scores  into an overall performance  measure. 
CEO compensation.  Data on  CEO salary and bonuses  came 
from the  "Executive  Pay Scoreboard"  published  by Business 
Week for the  years  1990  through  1995.  Data on  long-term 
compensation  were  drawn from COMPUSTAT's Execucomp 
data base  for the  years  1992  (the first year available) through 
1995.  Long-term compensation  included the  value  of  restrict- 
ed  stock  grants,  long-term incentive  payouts,  the  value  of 
stock  options  granted  (using the  Black-Scholes  formula), and 
all other  long-term compensation  for the  year. The value  of 
stock  options  exercised  during the  year was  not included 
because  these  options  were  granted  in previous years  and 
the  timing of their exercise  was,  to  a large extent,  at the 
CEO's discretion. 

Control  Variables 
Although size  was  used  in creating the  exposure  measures 
of  popular management  techniques,  it may still have  indepen- 
dent  effects  on the  dependent  variables.  Large firms  may be 
held  in greater  repute,  and corporate officers  of  larger firms 
may be  paid more  than others.  Therefore,  we  used  company 
size  as  a control variable in regressions  predicting corporate 
reputation and CEO pay. Since  company  sales  and assets 
were  highly correlated  (r =  .9), we  averaged  the  normalized 
scores  on  both of these  variables to  compose  an index for 
size.  We  also  used  data on  industry performance  as  a control 
variable in analyses  of  corporate  performance.  Information on 
industry performance  came  from  Fortune magazine's  "For- 
tune 500"  issue  for each  year of the  study.  We  recorded 
industry averages  for ROA, ROE, and  ROS, and then  calculat- 
ed  overall, normalized means  of these  measures.  In the 
analyses  of  CEO compensation,  we  controlled for a number 
of  previously  researched  determinants  of  executive  pay (e.g., 
Barkema and Gomez-Mejia,  1998).  Data on  CEO tenure  were 
obtained  from COMPUSTAT's Execucomp  data base.  Data on 
the  size  of the  board of  directors,  proportion of  inside  direc- 
tors,  and whether  the  CEO was  also  chair of the  board were 
obtained  from the  1995  Standard and Poor's Register  of  Cor- 
porations,  Directors,  and Executives. 

536/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

RESULTS 
Table 1 shows  the  intercorrelations among  the  study's  prima- 
ry variables  using  1994-1995  data. As  one  might expect, 
there  were  strong  correlations among  the  informational mea- 
sures  of  popular management  techniques.  When  companies 
were  cited  for using  one  of these  techniques,  they  also  tend- 
ed  to  be  cited  for using other techniques.  This was  especially 
true for the  various exposure  measures,  since  they  are based 
on  aggregated  citation counts  rather than on the  relative pro- 
portion of  citations  on a particular technique.  There were  also 
strong  correlations among  the  components  of  corporate  repu- 
tation,  reflecting  likely spillover or halo on these  question- 
naire-based  measures.  There were,  however,  only modest 
relationships  among  the  major independent  variables used  in 
this  study. Thus,  multicollinearity is not a problem as  long as 
each  of the  popular management  techniques  and reputational 
measures  is entered  into separate  regression  equations. 

Organizational  Performance 
Table 2 examines  the  effects  of  popular management  tech- 
niques  on organizational performance.  Each of the  equations 
in the  table  predicts  1995  performance  using  a normalized 
average  of  1 995  return on sales,  return on assets,  and return 
on  equity. The first three  equations  are predictive models 
using  1994  measures  of  quality, team,  and empowerment 
focus  as  the  independent  variables, along with  controls  for 
size  and industry performance.  Equation 4  includes  the 
aggregate  measure  of  popular management  techniques  (PMT 
focus)  to  predict subsequent  performance.  As  shown  in the 
table,  only the  specific  measure  of  quality and the  PMT-focus 
measure  were  significant  predictors of  performance,  and 
these  relationships  were  negative. 
It is possible  to  argue that a one-year  lag is insufficient time 
for popular management  techniques  to  positively  influence 
organizational performance.  We  therefore  conducted  longitu- 
dinal analyses  in which  earlier measures  of  popular manage- 
ment  techniques  (from 1990,  1991,  and  1992)  were  entered 
into the  predictive equations.  We  also  included prior firm per- 
formance  (from 1990,  1991,  or 1992)  in the  same  regression 
equations.  Including prior performance  in the  set  of  predictor 
variables not only allows  a test  for changes  in performance 
over time,  it also  helps  to  control for any unspecified  corre- 
lates  of  performance  (Pedhazur, 1982).  Thus,  equations  5, 6, 
and 7  predict changes  in performance  that may have 
occurred  over a three-,  four-, and five-year time  period. The 
results  of these  longitudinal analyses  showed  no significant 
effects  of  popular management  techniques  on  changes  in 
firm performance  over time,  thereby  failing to  support  either 
of the  performance  hypotheses,  HIa or HIb. 
We  also  analyzed the  effects  of TQM implementation.  Equa- 
tion 8  predicts  corporate  performance  with  Easton-Jarrell's 
measure  of TQM implementation,  as  well  as  controls  for size 
and industry performance.  Equation 9  predicts  changes  in 
corporate  performance  using TQM implementation,  control- 
ling for previous  corporate  performance,  size,  and industry 
performance. We selected  1991 as the year for previous cor- 
porate performance because it was the last year of TOM 

537/ASQ, September 2000 


Table 1 
Correlations among  Major Variables 

Variable 

Mean 

S.D. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1  Overall reputation 95 
2. Innovativeness 95 
3. Quality of management 95 
4. CEO pay 95 (salary & bonus) 
5. CEO pay 95 (long-term comp.) 
6. Firm performance 95* 
7. Quality focus 94 
8  Quality exposure 94 
9. Team focus 94 
10. Team exposure 94 
1 1. Empowerment focus 94 
12. Empowerment exposure 94 
13. PMT focus 94 
14. PMT exposure 94 
15. TQM implementation 
16. Size 94* 
17. Industry performance 94* 
18. Proportion inside directors 
19. Board size 
20. CEO tenure 
21. CEO as board chair 

Variable 

7. Quality focus 94 
8. Quality exposure 94 
9. Team focus 94 
10. Team exposure 94 
11. Empowerment focus 94 
12. Empowerment exposure 94 
13. PMT focus 94 
14. PMT exposure 94 
15. TQM implementation 
16. Size 94* 
17. Industry performance 94* 
18. Proportion inside directors 
19. Board size 
20. CEO tenure 
21. CEO as board chair 

.97 

6.67 
6.44 
6.90 

.88 
.96 
1 .04 
2244.36 
984.61 
2621.40 
2939 
-7.E-1 7 
.94 
1A4E-02  9. E-03 
4.1 E-16 
3.1E-03 
3. E-03 
-2.E-16 
.97 
3.9E-03 
4. E-03 
9.7E-17 
.97 
2.OE-02  1.E-02 
.97 
3.1E-17 
.48 
.36 
.98 
3.7E-17 
4.6E-17 
.96 
.86 
.41 
2.72 
12.94 
6.74 
7.68 
.29 
.91 
6 
7 

-.27e 
-.03 
-.09 
.04 
-.12 
.01 
-.23 
-.01 
-.08 
-.02 
.43* 
.06 
-.11 
-.10 
-.06 

.45* 
.58* 
.33* 
.61* 
.42* 
94 
45 
.35* 
-.10 
.02 
-.11 
.13 
-.07 
-.07 

.88* 
.96* 
.06 
.09 
*45 
.03 
.13 
.24 
.26 
.07 
.19 
.09 
.17 
.12 
.15 
.300 
-.01 
.14 
-.15 
.03 
8 

.29* 
.85* 
.25 
.81* 
43 
99 
39* 

-.08 
.12 
-.05 
-.09 
-.18 
-.15 

.80* 
.07 
.02 
.36* 
.07 
.28* 
.29* 
*43 
.09 
.31 
.13 
.33* 
.20 
.05 
.26 
-.03 
.15 
-.12 
-.09 
9 

.51 
.67* 
.40" 
.78* 
.36* 
39* 
.03 
.09 
-.07 
.02 
-.03 
-.05 

.11 
.11 
.40" 
.07 
.10 
.24 
.20 
.11 
.16 
.13 
.14 
.15 
.17 
.22 
-.05 
.09 
-.15 
.08 
10 

.30* 
.78e 
.41* 
.91* 
44* 
.01 
.15 
-.06 
-.13 
-.19 
-.24 

.44* 
.09 
.13 
.13 
.17 
.18 
.14 
.14 
.16 
.15 
.22 
.47* 
.18 
-.04 
.04 
-.20 
-.01 
11 

-.01 
-.04 
.09 
.00 
.12 
-.05 
.12 
-.04 
.11 
.05 
.38* 
.13 
-.04 
.12 
-.24 
-.10 
12 

57- 
.80* 
.33- 
35* 
.00 
-.06 
.01 
.02 
-.1 1 
-.05 

.51* 
.88- 
47* 

-.01 
.07 
.04 
-.02 
-.24 
-.21 

Variable 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

43* 

14. PMT exposure 94 
15. TQM implementation 
16. Size 94* 
17. Industry performance 94* 
18. Proportion inside directors 
19. Board size 
20. CEO tenure 
21. CEO as board chair 
*p < .05; *p  < .01; two-tailed tests. 
*Variable has been normalized around mean of 0. 

.46* 
.41y 
-.06 
.02 
-.09 
.09 
-.08 
-.07 

-.06 
.12 
-.04 
-.09 
-.20 
-.18 

.17 
-.06 
-.14 
-.15 
-.19 
-.06 

-.05 
.00 
.14 
-.18 
-.18 

-.09 
.03 
-.08 
-.04 

-.12 
-.05 
.01 

.11 
-.1 1 

.23 

implementation  noted  by Easton and Jarrell. The  results  of 
these  longitudinal analyses  showed  no effects  of TQM imple- 
mentation  on  corporate  performance. 

Corporate  Reputation 
Because  we  found  little relationship between  popular man- 
agement  techniques  and performance,  it is difficult to  argue 
(as does  H3) that performance  mediates  the  relationship 
between  these  techniques  and external  reputation (cf. Baron 
and  Kenny, 1986).  Although  it is unlikely that companies  will 

538/ASQ, September 2000 


Table 2 

Effects  of  Bandwagons 

Effects  of  Popular  Management  Techniques  on  1995  Firm Performance  and  on  Changes  in Firm Performance 
(N =  100)* 

Variable 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

.423" 
(.086) 
-.031 
(.085) 

.431 ... 
(.090) 
-.001 
(.088) 

.414. 
(.090) 
-.003 
(.088) 

.423. 
(.087) 
-.017 
(.086) 

-28.3" 
(8.83) 

-37.0 
(26.7) 

-24.8 
(24.4) 

-1 5.7g 
(5.89) 

Industry performance 

Size 

Prior firm performance 

94  Quality focus 

94  Team focus 

94  Empowerment  focus 

94  PMT focus 

92  PMT focus 

91  PMT focus 

90  PMT focus 

TQM implementation 

.412. 
(.1 1 1) 
.082 
(.090) 
.129 
(.122) 

.218 
(.105) 
.037 
(.088) 
.329g 
(.103) 

.171 
(.1 1 1) 
.015 
(.089) 
.358" 
(.112) 

.417. 
(.091) 
.053 
(.090) 

.217 
(.105) 
.035 
(.089) 
.362" 
(.105) 

-.341 
(4.42) 

-5.99 
(5.41) 

-2.56 
(5.88) 

-.101 
(.182) 
.185 

.159 
(.183) 
.223 

.199 
R2 
Op <  .05;  "p  <  .01;  ..p  <  .001;  two-tailed  tests. 
*  Standard errors are in parentheses. 

.262 

.191 

.239 

.254 

.258 

.250 

be  more  admired because  popular management  techniques 
have  improved their performance,  an examination  of table  3 
shows  several  direct effects  of  performance  on  corporate 
reputation. As  shown  in the  table,  1994  performance  was  a 
highly significant  predictor of  1 995  reputation. The better  a 
firm performed,  the  higher was  its corporate  reputation, sup- 
porting H2. There also  were  direct effects  of  size,  with 
respondents  to the  Fortune survey  tending  to  rate larger 
firms higher on  measures  of  corporate  reputation. 
As  illustrated in table  3,  when  both firm performance  and size 
were  held constant,  there  were  significant  effects  of  popular 
management  techniques  on  corporate  reputation. As  predict- 
ed  by H4, there  were  significant effects  of TQM implementa- 
tion on a firm's reputation. And, as  predicted  by H5, the  infor- 
mational linkage of firms with  quality, team,  and 
empowerment  techniques  was  significantly related to  its rep- 
utation. These  effects  were  more  consistent  using  exposure 
than focus  measures  of  popular management  techniques, 
although overall measures  (PMT focus  and PMT exposure) 
both showed  significant effects  on  reputation, controlling for 
size  and prior performance. 
In line with  H6 and  H7, there  also  were  significant  effects  of 
popular management  techniques  on the  ratings of firms' inno- 
vativeness  and quality of  management.  In results  not present- 
ed  here,  analyses  like those  shown  in table  3 yielded  signifi- 
cant effects  of  prior performance  and size  on  respondents' 
ratings of  innovativeness  and quality of  management.  And 
when  both prior performance  and size  were  controlled, there 
remained  significant  effects  of  quality, team,  and empower- 
ment techniques on these  perceptual ratings. As in table 3, 

539/ASQ, September 2000 


r- 0. 

CY GLo 
LC)~O 

00 

~ 

CY) 0c) r-  ~ ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  G 

OQG 

00 R 

CY) 

y 

CD  J(OGO  D 

LC) 

~  ~  ~  ~  ~ 

Lo 

Lq 

CY) 

:)CiC~ 

o6 

Go 

z 

40 

0~~~~~~~~0 

0. 

0 
( 14 

Ul 

I-0a 

, 

( 

-C 

toU 

Lc- 

CY~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~) 

) 

a 

U) 

to~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~a 

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

(U 

a)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~U 

U)  U) 

~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  ~  U) 

U 

~~ 

0 

0 

C) 

a) 

C) 
V) 
D 
00C 

a  ~~~~~~~~~~ 

~~  E 

U) 

EE 
U 

UC 

E  ~~~~~~ ~ ~  0 a)C 
~~a)  C 
a) 
0F 
E  E  w 
0) 
0) 

0) F-. 

0) 

f0 

0 

0 

a) 

0) 

0) 

CU 

C- W 

0j 
OC1 

540/ASQ,  September  2000 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

the  results  were  more  consistent  using  exposure  than focus 
measures  of  popular management  techniques.  Nonetheless, 
the  measures  of  PMT focus,  PMT exposure,  and TQM imple- 
mentation  all proved to  be  significant  predictors of the  firm's 
rated innovativeness  and quality of  management. 
Longitudinal  effects.  To check  if the  effects  on corporate 
reputation would  hold up over time,  we  conducted  a series 
of  longitudinal tests.  In each  of these  tests,  earlier measures 
of  popular management  techniques  and corporate  reputation 
(from 1990,  1991,  or 1992)  were  included in regression  equa- 
tions,  along  with  controls  for performance  and size.  The  lon- 
gitudinal equations  enabled  us to  examine  whether  popular 
management  techniques  could  predict changes  in corporate 
reputation over time  and controlled for the  possible  media- 
tion of  reputational effects  by firm performance.  Because 
measures  of  management  techniques  preceded  those  of  per- 
formance  by two,  three,  or four years,  any effects  on  reputa- 
tion due  to  changes  in performance  would  be  controlled  in 
the  analyses. 
Table 4  shows  seven  regression  equations  in which  PMT 
measures,  prior reputation, performance,  and size  were  used 
to  predict subsequent  (1995)  corporate  reputation. As  expect- 
ed,  each  equation  showed  prior performance  to  be  a highly 
significant predictor of  corporate  reputation. Also  as  expect- 
ed,  measures  of  prior reputation were  significant  predictors 
of  corporate  reputation in subsequent  years.  Nonetheless, 
controlling for prior performance  and reputation, there 
remained  significant  effects  of  PMT focus  and  PMT exposure 
on  corporate  reputation. The effects  of  popular management 

Table 4 

Effects  of  Popular  Management  Techniques  on  Changes  in  1995  Corporate  Reputation* 

1 

. 135 
(.062) 
.098 
(.049) 
.663w 
(.059) 
4.970 
(2.40) 

2 

.141 * 
(.060) 
.010. 
(.047) 
.661w 
(.057) 

.1 57* 
(.048) 

Variable 

94  Performance 

94  Size 

92  Reputation 

92  PMT focus 

92  PMT exposure 

91  Reputation 

91  PMT focus 

91  PMT exposure 

90  Reputation 

90  PMT focus 

90  PMT exposure 

TQM implementation 

3 

.224. 
(.073) 
.094 
(.059) 

4 

.226. 
(.072) 
.099 
(.058) 

5 

6 

.242w 
(.072) 
.073 
(.060) 

.246w 
(.070) 
.074 
(.059) 

7 

.240w 
(.072) 
.058 
(.058) 

.523w 
(.067) 
7.42 
(3.77) 

.522w 
(.066) 

.1 720 
(.060) 

.550* 
(.069) 
6.63 
(3.97) 

.545* 
(.066) 

.353" 
(.124) 
.617 

.548* 
(.067) 

.1 480 
(.062) 

.661 

.735 
R2 
Op <  .05;  "p  <  .01;  ..p  <  .001;  one-tailed  tests. 
*  Standard errors are in parentheses.  N =  91  for equations  1 and 2; N =  89  for equations  3-7. 

.598 

.617 

.598 

.717 

541 /ASQ, September 2000 


techniques  held regardless  of whether  the  equations  were 
used  to  predict changes  in reputation over three-,  four-, or 
five-year periods.  The effects  also  generalized  to the  mea- 
sure  of TQM implementation.  Results  showed  a significant 
improvement  in corporate  reputation from  1991  (the  last date 
of TQM implementation)  to  1995  that could  be  attributed to 
whether  total quality management  was  implemented  by the 
firm. 
Information  vs.  implementation.  To help separate  the 
effects  of  information about  popular management  techniques 
from their implementation,  we  conducted  a series  of  hierar- 
chical regression  analyses  predicting changes  in corporate 
reputation over three,  four, and five years.  In each  of these 
analyses,  we  first entered  the  control variables,  including ear- 
lier (1992,  1991,  or 1990)  measures  of  corporate  reputation. 
Second,  we  entered  the  measure  of TQM implementation. 
Finally, we  entered  the  PMT exposure  measure  for the  1992, 
1991,  or 1990  time  period.  Results  showed  that in each  of 
these  analyses  the  TQM measure  explained  a significant 
amount  of variance beyond  that of the  control variables.  In 
each  analysis,  the  PMT exposure  measure  also  explained  a 
significant amount  of variance beyond  that of TQM imple- 
mentation,  as  predicted  by H13. Thus,  not only did imple- 
menting  a popular management  technique  have  a positive 
influence  on a firm's reputation, information linking the  firm 
with  such  techniques  increased  the  company's  reputation 
above  and beyond  that of  implementation. 

CEO Compensation 
Table 5 shows  determinants  of  CEO compensation  (salary 
and bonus)  for our sample  of  U.S.  corporations. As  in much 
of the  previous  literature on  CEO pay (e.g.,  Crystal, 1991; 
Barkema and Gomez-Mejia,  1998),  there  were  no significant 
effects  of firm performance  on  CEO pay. Nor were  there  sig- 
nificant effects  of the  percentage  of  inside  directors,  board 
size,  and CEO tenure.  Some  effects  were  found for the  CEO 
also  being  board chair, yet  they  were  inconsistent  across  sev- 
eral of the  regression  equations.  Among  the  control variables, 
by far the  largest and most  consistent  effect  was  for firm 
size.  The  larger the  company  (as measured  by total assets 
and sales),  the  greater was  the  compensation  provided to the 
leader of the  firm. 
The equations  in table  5 also  show  significant effects  of  pop- 
ular management  techniques  on  CEO compensation,  holding 
constant  the  six other  predictors of  executive  pay. As with 
the  analyses  of  reputational data, the  exposure  measures 
were  more  consistent  predictors of  compensation  than were 
the  focus  measures.  Once  again,  however,  effects  for both 
the  overall measures  of  PMT focus  and PMT exposure 
proved significant. Although the  effect  for TQM implementa- 
tion was  in the  predicted  direction, it did not reach statistical 
significance. 
Longitudinal  effects.  Results  of a series  of  longitudinal tests 
on  CEO pay are depicted  in table  6.  As  in the  test  of  reputa- 
tional effects,  these  longitudinal analyses  used  data on  popu- 
lar management  techniques  from  1990,  1991,  and  1992.  In 
addition to  the  control variables depicted  in table  5, these 

542/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects of Bandwagons 

(0(0(00 
* D 
(D 
0  L  O0 
* 

LONG 
O 

(  1 

r0t 

. 
COLONM 

o  CD G5 
LO 
0 
ND 

00~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~( 

_ LOCt) 

(D 

0 

0  C)  LO 

0 

O  -0)( 

D 

* 

0- 

0 

oN "t 

(D 

h-N o 

o 
(0000b 

0) 

0 

C 

(04C 

N  N  CY) 

0)  0) 

Nh- 

I oI t  CD Y ) 

LO 

m  m  tt  r- 
_0OC0tOt 

Z;  Oy 6  4  m  -4  0 
_0_(0 

C) 

O 

0 

LONO 

n 

t 

S S 

n  CN  O  O 

t 

t 

O  O 

g q* 

_* 

nCt 

b  b~~~~~~~~~~~(. 

o' 

CY)  CY) 

(0 

_~~~~~~ 
Eo 
D  to  r-) 

tO 

Ms  0  r-  M  CND 0 

a 

m  * _  m 
- t 

n 

O 
a) 
h- 

| 
0 

|  2, 
* 
4 

( 0 r)  _ 
-)Ot 

-  I~~~~~~~~~- I-CDyn 

Lh -h 

r 

CD 

o 
~ 
0 

CY)  "It 

N_ 

* CY) 
C1 

ao 

L 

C.) 

0)CN0( 

0) 

(U 2 

LO 
0 

L O  xh 

O 

To( 

rCy)) 

? 

j 

. 

(0 

0) 

O0(D(00 

(0 

0)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~' 

0  OCD LO  0 

1  CY 

O 

D 

i 

(D  CD  O 

0  CY)X 

LC 

E 
G) 

co 

0. 
o. 

E. 

Co 
G)U-C) 
m 
0) 

H  LW  > 

)  0 

0) 

CD 

C- 
CU 
CD  ~~~~~ ~~~ ~~~ 

_ 

~  ~ 

~ 
0 
LLJ 
U 

0 
LLJ 
0 
o  U 

0) 

-- 

=3 

E0 
a 
X) 
CD 

0 
+0 

Cu 

0 

~ 
~ 

0 

) 
0 
0 
E 
C 
~ 
H- 

543/ASQ, September 2000 

a) 

o 
a 

0  ><~~~ 

0 

CD 

co 

C 
vc 
:2 

CD 

0 
0 
a 

ucoJ 

0 
0- 

>< 
E 
a 
DE 
J  WL  a_ 
~ 
H 

a 
E 
~ 

a_ 

E 
CD 

E 
0 

*C 
- 
:  C/) 
+ 

C0) 
V 

CZ 


analyses included previous CEO salary and bonus in the 
regression equations. As a result, the equations examined 
the effects  of popular management techniques on changes in 
pay over three-, four-, and five-year time spans. 
As illustrated in table 6, there were again few  effects  of firm 
performance on CEO pay, contradicting an assumption under- 
lying H8. Stronger and more consistent effects  on CEO pay 
were shown by organizational size, and, as expected, previ- 
ous CEO pay was a significant predictor of subsequent pay in 
all equations. Beyond the influence of these  and other control 
variables, the table shows  effects  of popular management 
techniques generally in line with H9 and H10. Equations 1 
and 2 show significant effects  of 1992 PMT exposure and 
PMT focus on 1995 CEO salary and bonus, controlling for 
prior compensation, prior performance, firm size, percentage 
of inside directors, board size, CEO tenure, and whether the 
CEO is also the board chair. In equations 3-6,  1990 and 1991 
PMT exposure measures were significant predictors of sub- 
sequent CEO pay using the same control variables. Equation 
7 showed a significant effect of TOM implementation on 
1995 compensation, controlling for CEO pay in 1991 as well 
as the other control variables. 
Long-term pay. We also analyzed the effects  of popular 
management techniques on long-term pay. For these  analy- 
ses,  we  aggregated the value of restricted stock grants, long- 
term incentive payouts, the Black-Scholes value of stock 
options, and all other long-term compensation. Regression 
equations were constructed as shown in table 6, using data 
available from 1992 to 1995. Like previous analyses, there 
were significant effects  of size on long-term compensation 
as well as significant effects  of prior years' pay on subse- 
quent (1995) compensation levels. There were also signifi- 
cant effects  of CEO tenure, such that more recently hired 
CEOs were given larger compensation packages. Unlike pre- 
vious analyses, however, there were no significant effects  of 
popular management techniques on long-term CEO pay. 
There were no effects  of PMT focus, PMT exposure, or TQM 
implementation on long-term compensation or any of its 
components. 
Mediation of CEO compensation.  We tested for whether 
the effects  on CEO compensation were mediated by either 
outsiders' opinions of the quality of a firm's management or 
overall reputation of the firm. To do this, we  reexamined the 
strongest effects found on CEO salary and bonus, those of 
1992 PMT focus and exposure and TOM implementation. To 
test  H1 1, we  added measures of perceived management 
quality to equations 1, 2, and 7 of table 6. To test  H12, we 
added measures of corporate reputation to the same equa- 
tions. In each case, we  used 1993 data on management qual- 
ity or overall reputation, since they were actually published by 
Fortune during 1994, approximately 9-10  months before 
compensation decisions were made by corporate boards of 
directors (i.e., either at the end of 1994 or early in the 1995 
fiscal year). We also used 1993 data on corporate perfor- 
mance and size, since ratings of management quality (and 
reputation) can be influenced by these  control variables. 

544/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects of Bandwagons 

- 

I (D 

CoY 

O 

b 
o 

00  LO  "It 
cD 
) 
0 

t 

L 

I 

0)b 

O CO0)0) 

_  (D 
n 
Cs 
O-  c:  Oc-) m 
O 

*  -~~~~~~~~0 

ON()OO)))t l 

LOO-CY) 

I- 

-: 

t 
cO 
-mLO 

) 

Ccy c 

_  *I0)~ 

Cy 
c 

O-  O- 

DC 

-o 

iD?1 

O 

*  N  c  _ 
Zt 

* 

_ 

Ion 

oIt 

r 

C 
0) 

*S 

o 

_ 

-C 

0 

* 

O t 

o 

oo  n 

t 

t 

$  n 

X 

I 
Cy o0 

?C.0rlrgtD(z 

N  Q 

LN 

C 

C ON 

o 
N  _ 

CoD 

m  0 

N 

O 

o 

IO 

o 

C 

or-o 

y 

r - 

t 
C) 

C_) 
CY) 

~~~ 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.0 

,CY) 

~ 

~ 

*_t 

r,  M 

O 

M 

0 

O D 

M 

jO~~~~~ssS~~y~~gtgtID 

- CY) 

LO  CY)_ n 

co 

T~r-(D 

C 

- 

*O 

- 

_ 

CY) 

c 

CY  CY  r 

C  00 
LO 

1  CY) 

00 
I 

1- -1 

, 
r 

"It00 

o) 

r-@ 

ot- 

c 

b  b 
o  C5) 

n 

-c 

b 

C5) 

00 

* 

rO- 

o 

_ 

U) 
(U 
(U 
1-  I 

0 
C.) 

C.) 

CN 

C 
stCD 

v 

o 
X~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~- 
C@0)t- 
5 

15)  00 t ~~~~~C) 
_ ~ Nt  Cy) 

O  CtO 

=  C) 

C 
-N 

C5) 

-) 

I 

I 

- 

Q 

C) 

E 

> 

~~~ 
E 

co 

I 

0)N0)~~~~~~~~NLO~~_ 
I- 

0C 
oInN- 

L-~  Co 
co 
co 

x0. 

(U~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

cos~i-* 
N 
y 
C 

c to o 
0 
O 

O 

U 

F  Ul  > 

Co  a) 
~ 

o 

uj 

- 
o 

0 
~ 
~ 
M~-  a) 

-0 
U 

co 
0 
O 

c 
~ 

U 

w 
- 

-m 

O 

O 

~ 

0' 

><) 

-') 

Q 

co 
0 
O 

cv 

Q 

_0 

co 
c 

co 
O 

04 
O 

O 

~ 

U)  ~~~~~ 
0 

><) 

-' 

: 
4-1 

o 

a c 

O 

O 

F 

z 

V 
0 
cZ 
* 
* 
LH 

' 

>< 
o 

0 

_U)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
a 
)* 
*v~~ 
a)U 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~V 

co 

CDn  ~ 4- 

545/ASQ, September 2000 


Overall, the results of these  analyses did not show strong 
evidence of mediation. There was, as expected, a reduction 
in the effects  of TQM implementation on CEO pay, rendering 
the effects  nonsignificant when either perceived manage- 
ment quality or corporate reputation was added to the predic- 
tive equations. The effects  of PMT focus and PMT exposure, 
however, remained highly significant in all the analyses. 
Moreover, in none of the analyses were there direct effects 
of perceived management quality or corporate reputation on 
CEO pay, relationships that should logically be present if 
these  variables were actually determining how top execu- 
tives were compensated (cf. Baron and Kenny, 1986). 
Information vs.  implementation. To test  H14, we  also con- 
ducted several analyses designed to separate the effects  of 
information linking companies to popular management tech- 
niques from their implementation. In a series of hierarchical 
regressions, we first entered all the controls for CEO pay, as 
well as earlier compensation levels (i.e., 1992, 1991, or 1990) 
in predicting 1995 salary and bonus. Next, we  entered the 
measure of TQM implementation. Finally, we  entered 1992, 
1991, or 1990 PMT exposure into the regression equations. 
The results showed a highly significant effect for TQM imple- 
mentation over and above that of the control variables in 
each of the analyses. In two of the three analyses (those 
using 1992 and 1990 measures of popular management tech- 
niques), the PMT exposure measure explained a significant 
amount of variance over and above that of TQM implementa- 
tion. 

DISCUSSION 
Organizational Performance 
We uncovered very few  effects  of popular management 
techniques on organizational performance. Using information- 
al measures of quality, teams, and empowerment, we  found 
scant effects  on corporate performance, no matter whether 
changes in performance were assessed  over one-, three-, 
four-, or five-year periods. Likewise, there were no significant 
effects  of TQM implementation on changes in performance 
over time. 
One might argue that informational measures do not accu- 
rately reflect the actions of corporations, that they are more a 
reflection of the reporting biases of the business press than 
the actual behavior of firms. Yet if this were true, one would 
expect business journalists to have written more articles link- 
ing successful firms with techniques like quality, teams, and 
empowerment. This was not the case. There were few  sig- 
nificant relationships between the informational measures 
and organizational performance, no matter whether popular 
management techniques were treated as leading, lagging, or 
concurrent indicators of performance. 
A second, related argument against using informational mea- 
sures linking companies with popular management tech- 
niques is that they may simply gauge public relations efforts 
rather than the real behavior of firms. Companies may project 
an image of using techniques such as quality, teams, and 
empowerment, even if they have not actually implemented 

546/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects of Bandwagons 

these  programs. There are two responses to this argument. 
First, because the focus measures hold constant the total 
amount of publicity a firm receives, they are less  likely to 
reflect impression management efforts than the exposure 
measures. Second, nearly all the findings using informational 
data were corroborated by similar results using the Easton- 
Jarrell measure of TQM implementation. Since none of the 
measures showed consistent effects  on performance, some 
doubt must be cast on relationships between  popular man- 
agement techniques and performance. 
The fact that we  did not find any effects  of popular manage- 
ment techniques on performance conflicts with recent com- 
mentary on the quality movement. For example, Cole (1999) 
noted that TQM programs, despite some  overzealous claims, 
have contributed to an unmistakable increase in U.S. product 
quality. There has been a reduction in the quality gap 
between American and Japanese goods, and the variance in 
quality has narrowed among U.S. producers of products such 
as automobiles and computer chips (Cole, 1999: chap. 9). 
Whether these  improvements in quality translate into 
improved financial performance remains an open question, 
however. Widespread implementation of programs on quality, 
teams, and empowerment may actually lessen the impor- 
tance of these  factors in predicting variance in organizational 
performance (cf. Meyer and Gupta, 1994). 
Though our performance results were not supportive of pop- 
ular management techniques, we  would not argue that they 
provide the definitive test  of these  procedures. More sup- 
portive results might have been found if we  had used plant- 
or division-level data, since implementation of innovations is 
rarely uniform within a large firm (Zbaracki, 1998). More sup- 
portive results might also have been found with proximal out- 
comes,  such as production downtime, product defects, or 
customer satisfaction, rather than distal outcomes, such as 
return on sales, assets,  and equity. Finally, it is possible that 
these  management techniques produce beneficial outcomes 
that are not included in traditional accounting measures, such 
as more satisfied workers, lower turnover, or more ethical 
work relationships. 
Although it may be possible to tease  out positive effects  with 
different units of analysis, different time periods, and differ- 
ent measures, the present findings are important in the fol- 
lowing sense.  They show that what the public reads about 
large corporations using popular management techniques is 
basically unrelated to how these  same corporations perform 
financially. There is not the kind of strong or obvious empiri- 
cal relationship that would seem  necessary for a public attri- 
bution of success.  And without such a visible and verifiable 
foundation, it is little wonder that the public view of popular 
management techniques has been so  unstable over time 
(Abrahamson, 1996). 

Reputational Effects of Popular Management Techniques 
Even though we  did not find significant performance effects, 
the influence of popular management techniques on corpo- 
rate reputation was quite consistent. Analyses showed that 
companies were more admired, seen  as being more innova- 

547/ASQ, September 2000 


tive, and rated as having higher-quality management when 
they followed management trends such as quality, teams, 
and empowerment. These reputational effects  were replicat- 
ed using two different informational measures of popular 
management techniques as well as a more conventional 
measure of TQM implementation. They were also replicated 
using several different time lags, holding constant earlier 
measures of corporate reputation, as well as firm size and 
performance. Some analyses showed the exposure mea- 
sures to be stronger predictors of corporate reputation than 
the focus measures. This is logical. Given that corporate rep- 
utations are determined by what observers hear or read 
about companies, one would expect the volume of these 
communications to be more influential than the proportion or 
focus of these  messages. 
It was also shown that media exposure affected corporate 
reputation above and beyond actual implementation. The 
importance of rhetoric was  underscored by the fact that infor- 
mation about popular management techniques influenced 
corporate reputation, even after holding constant TQM imple- 
mentation. Yet even with these  findings, we  would not go so 
far as to say that only rhetoric matters, that corporate reputa- 
tion is unaffected by the actual implementation of popular 
procedures. Our data showed that the effects  of TQM imple- 
mentation on corporate reputation were consistently signifi- 
cant. And not only were there effects  of information above 
and beyond those of implementation, additional analyses 
showed that there were also effects  of implementation when 
information (PMT exposure) was  held constant. Thus, one 
must interpret the results as supporting both rhetoric and 
reality in considering the effects  of popular management 
techniques on corporate reputation. 
Differences in reputational effects.  In analyzing reputational 
effects,  we  also examined whether there were any system- 
atic differences among the observers of a corporation. 
Because the Fortune survey was completed by both outside 
executives (from the same industry as the rated firm) and 
financial analysts, we  checked to see  whether one of these 
two groups was disproportionally responsible for the effects. 
One might argue, for example, that industry executives 
would be relatively immune to public reports of quality, 
teams, and empowerment, since they might have more 
direct ways of observing or interpreting the operations of the 
firm (e.g., through conversations with shared suppliers or 
customers). In contrast, one could argue that financial ana- 
lysts might be unswayed by reports of the use of popular 
techniques, since their job is to predict the earnings and well- 
being of firms in the industry. The results did not support 
either of these  positions. The data showed very similar 
effects for both executives and financial analysts, and, thus, 
the reputational findings did not appear to be due to any par- 
ticular group of respondents in the Fortune survey. 
We also investigated whether the effects  on corporate repu- 
tation were consistent across the various rating scales  used 
in the Fortune survey. Due to common-response bias or 
spillover, one might expect similar results across the various 
components of corporate reputation. Yet we  did find some 

548/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects of Bandwagons 

differences in the effects  of popular management techniques 
on the components of reputation. Analyses showed signifi- 
cant effects  for the global or management-related ratings and 
nonsignificant effects for more specific financial assess- 
ments, such as ratings of financial soundness,  use of assets, 
and long-term investment value. This pattern makes sense, 
given that popular management techniques had little actual 
effect on the financial performance of the firm. The pattern 
also fits with previous psychological research showing that 
perceptual biases are more likely to occur on subjective, 
hard-to-verify characteristics (Sherif, 1936; Allen, 1965; Nis- 
bett and Ross, 1980). 

Effects on CEO Compensation 
The results of this research showed  not only that popular 
management techniques led to improved corporate reputa- 
tion but that CEO pay (salary and bonus) was also positively 
influenced. Our analyses controlled for many previously 
researched determinants of pay, such as firm performance, 
size, percentage of inside directors, board size, CEO tenure, 
and whether the CEO was also chair of the board. As with 
reputational effects,  the exposure measures were the most 
consistent predictors of CEO pay. Exposure measures were 
all significant predictors of compensation, regardless of the 
technique or time period involved. In addition, there were sig- 
nificant effects  of PMT focus on CEO pay over one- and 
three-year time periods, as well as a significant effect of 
TQM implementation on changes in pay over time. 
Since we found few  effects  of popular management tech- 
niques on long-term compensation, we  initially thought there 
was a logical as well as an empirical inconsistency in the 
results. On reflection, however, we  realized that long-term 
compensation plans generally involve linking pay to perfor- 
mance or the attainment of specific performance goals. 
These plans are designed to align the interests of the CEO 
and the firm, to solve the agency problem that concerns 
economists and compensation experts (e.g., Jensen and 
Meckling, 1976; Jensen and Murphy, 1990; Crystal, 1991). 
Hence, long-term compensation schemes  may be less a 
reflection of trust in the CEO than an attempt to reduce 
opportunistic behavior by top managers (Beatty and Zajac, 
1994). One might therefore expect any increase in confi- 
dence stemming from a leader's advocacy of popular man- 
agement techniques to be manifested in greater short-term, 
rather than long-term, compensation. 
To understand why popular management techniques were 
associated with changes in CEOs' short-term compensation, 
we  checked for the mediation of pay effects. We first exam- 
ined whether compensation committees appeared to use 
outsiders' opinions as guidance in forming their opinions of 
the CEO's value. We then tested  whether corporate boards 
might be compensating CEOs for improving an organization's 
reputation. In neither of these  analyses did we find evidence 
for mediation. We found only direct effects  of popular man- 
agement techniques on CEO pay, regardless of whether 
these  management techniques were assessed  by informa- 
tional or implementation measures. 

549/ASQ, September 2000 


We also conducted several analyses to sort out the effects  of 
rhetoric vs. reality on CEO pay. Hierarchical regression analy- 
ses  showed effects  of PMT exposure over and above those 
of TQM implementation. These results mean that corporate 
boards are not just influenced by direct observations of a 
firm's implementation of popular management techniques. 
They can also be influenced by public information linking the 
firm with these  procedures, regardless of whether this infor- 
mation is fully accurate or not. Such a conclusion does  not, of 
course, undercut the strong influence of TQM implementa- 
tion on CEO pay. We consistently found significant effects  of 
TQM implementation on changes in CEO pay. And, in an 
additional series of hierarchical regressions, we  found effects 
of implementation over and above those of information link- 
ing firms to popular management techniques. Thus, it 
appears that corporate boards use multiple sources of infor- 
mation about popular management techniques. Their deci- 
sions about CEO pay seem  to be influenced by both public 
perceptions linking firms to popular techniques and the actual 
implementation of these  procedures. Both sources of data 
may serve as evidence that the CEO is someone  who is up 
to date and professional, someone  who is worthy of a high 
level of compensation. 

Implications for Institutional Theory 
The findings of this research fit well with the institutional per- 
spective on organizational innovation. They strengthen previ- 
ous arguments that firms do not necessarily choose the tech- 
nologically best or most efficient techniques but, instead, 
seek external legitimacy by adopting widely accepted and 
approved practices (Meyer and Rowan, 1977; DiMaggio and 
Powell, 1983). The evidence provided by this research was 
more direct than that from early institutional literature. 
Instead of demonstrating the absence of economic benefits 
from an innovation or the disparity in consequences  between 
early and late adopters (e.g., Tolbert and Zucker, 1983), this 
study showed how the reputation of companies could be 
improved by their association with popular management 
techniques. 
The demonstration of gains in reputation not only fills in a 
missing mechanism underlying institutional theory, it also pro- 
vides some  long-needed evidence on the positive sanctioning 
of organizations. Tests of institutional theory have tended to 
rely on rather negative control mechanisms, either in the 
realm of regulated industries or organizations subject to high 
degrees of public accountability (e.g., school, hospitals). As a 
result, there has been little distinction between coercive and 
normative processes  underlying institutional theory, save for 
the gravity of negative consequences  befalling an organiza- 
tion deviating from accepted standards. Thus, one contribu- 
tion of this research has been to demonstrate that gains in 
social approval (e.g., increased reputation) can result from the 
adoption of (or association with) popular management tech- 
niques. 
This study also illustrated some  important multilevel effects. 
Although institutional theory does  not usually delve into with- 
in-firm dynamics, it seems  reasonable to suggest  that there 

550/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects of Bandwagons 

is some  isomorphism between  intra- and interfirm processes. 
Like Westphal and Zajac (1998), we  found that the kind of 
actions that help legitimate a firm in its environment may 
also build credibility for managers who lead these  endeavors. 
This makes sense,  given the potential value brought to the 
organization by the initiating manager. But there need not be 
a precise payback between firms and their leaders. Just as 
organizations can gain legitimacy for pursuing popular pro- 
grams that do not necessarily yield economic benefits, man- 
agers may be able to gain credibility by initiating popular pro- 
grams, irrespective of the outcomes for the firm. The 
identification of the leader with a fashionable program may 
be more important than the effects  of the program on either 
economic or social outcomes. 
Potential decoupling of organizational programs and their con- 
sequences  should not be construed as meaning that out- 
comes  never matter. Surely there is a strong relationship 
between firm performance and reputation (e.g., McGuire, 
Schneeweis,  and Branch, 1990), and organizational perfor- 
mance can no doubt affect the job security of a CEO (e.g., 
Salancik and Pfeffer, 1980; Ocasio, 1994). Thus, a question 
for future research is how long the pursuit of popular man- 
agement techniques can legitimize a company or its leader in 
the absence of any performance effects. We know that legiti- 
macy can be built in the short and even intermediate term 
without any tangible economic benefits. But are popular man- 
agement techniques and organizational performance totally 
decoupled? If so, then it makes sense  for CEOs to pursue 
them each with a separate set of actions. On the one hand, 
the pursuit of fashionable programs may help the leader and 
his or her firm achieve internal and external legitimacy. On 
the other hand, the quest for sales and profits may necessi- 
tate the development of new markets as well as the efficient 
deployment of human and material resources. 

Some  Limitations to  Institutional Theory 
Although our findings support institutional theory, they still 
fall short of specifying the exact processes  underlying institu- 
tional effects.  Many theorists have described the adoption 
process as one of modeling and acceptance of taken-for- 
granted assumptions (e.g., Zucker, 1977; Haunschild and 
Miner, 1 997). Other theorists have argued that the pursuit of 
legitimacy can be a conscious strategic endeavor. Oliver 
(1991) noted that firms may actively pursue the approval of 
other organizations with as much diligence and foresight as 
used for other important decisions. Elsbach (1994) made a 
similar point in describing how organizations manage the 
impressions of various audiences. Although our data do not 
allow us to answer the question of whether the adoption of 
popular techniques is a strategic or mindless activity, we  do 
know that both corporate reputations and financial compen- 
sation can be influenced by these  actions. One might there- 
fore conclude that gains in corporate reputation are sufficient 
to induce strategic behavior by the firm and that the personal 
gains bestowed on leaders may activate key individuals like 
the CEO. Such a motivational explanation must be tentative, 
however, until further data are collected. Results such as 
these  should be corroborated by surveys on executive 

551/ASQ, September 2000 


motives  (Oliver, 1991:  172) and/or direct observations  of  orga- 
nizational decision  making. Only then  will we  know  for sure 
whether  gains  in legitimacy  and compensation  are the  calcu- 
lated ends  of  policy makers  or just the  fortuitous  conse- 
quences  of their behavior. 

Fashion  Revisited 
While this  study  demonstrates  institutional effects  with 
respect  to  management  techniques,  it does  not really make 
the  use  or popularity of these  techniques  more  predictable, 
nor does  prevailing thought  on  institutional theory.  Some 
scholars  have  noted  that  management  procedures  may per- 
sist  over  extended  periods  because  of their widespread 
acceptance  and taken-for-granted nature (Meyer and  Rowan, 
1 977;  Zucker, 1 977).  Others,  however,  have  used  institutional 
theory to  explain why  organizations appear to jump from one 
fashionable  practice to the  next  (DiMaggio and  Powell,  1983; 
Abrahamson,  1996).  To resolve  this  apparent paradox, we 
need  further knowledge  of the  temporal  dynamics  of  innova- 
tion,  including a better  understanding  of  how  social  and eco- 
nomic  outcomes  change  over time. 
At their simplest,  fashion  cycles  may be  created  by organiza- 
tions  continually searching  for improvement  in their opera- 
tions.  New  procedures  may be  adopted  when  they  are wide- 
ly hailed as  solutions  to  human and organizational problems, 
then  dropped after the  promised  results  fail to  materialize or 
are superceded  by another, even  more  promising alternative. 
What  institutional theory  adds  to this  straightforward descrip- 
tion of the  fashion  cycle  is the  role of social  sanctioning  and 
the  pursuit of  goals  other than economic  welfare.  Institutional 
processes  mean  that some  innovations  can  persist  when 
gains  in social  approval outweigh  shortfalls  in economic  or 
technical  performance.  But when  an innovation is supported 
primarily by social  approval or legitimacy,  rather than its more 
objective  merits,  it may be  highly subject  to  contagion  effects 
(Kerckhoff and Back, 1968;  Barley and  Knight, 1992).  Socially 
supported  innovations  may be  vulnerable to  sudden  or 
severe  falls  in social  approval, since  few  organizational lead- 
ers  want  to  be  caught  using yesterday's  solution. 

Leveling  Fashion  Cycles  with  Organizational  Research 
Given the  volatility of  many popular management  techniques, 
one  might ask whether  there  is anything the  organizational 
research  community  can do to  attenuate  fashion  cycles  in 
management.  Can researchers  act  as  a buffer to fashion 
trends  by conducting  and disseminating  findings  on the 
effectiveness  of  management  techniques?  Presumably, 
when  researchers  validate a particular procedure,  the  results 
should  provide additional staying  power  to  the  application. 
Likewise,  when  researchers  discredit a management  tech- 
nique (or the  theory  underlying it), such  information should 
preclude  its resurrection under other  rubrics. Thus, as  empiri- 
cal findings  on  managerial behavior accumulate,  one  might 
expect  changes  in organizational practices  to  become  less 
frequent  over time.  Unfortunately, however,  such  a scenario 
has  not materialized.  If anything, the  life cycle  of  manage- 
ment  techniques  appears  to  have  shortened  in recent  years 

552/ASQ, September 2000 


Effects  of  Bandwagons 

(Shapiro, 1995).  The ebb  and flow  of  popular management 
techniques  seem  to  be  more  a function  of  shifts  in societal 
ideology  (Barley and  Kunda, 1992),  the  social  dynamics  of 
fashion  leaders  (Abrahamson, 1991;  Pastor, Meindl, and 
Hunt, 1997),  and new  challenges  facing  corporations  (Jacoby, 
1984;  Abrahamson  and Fairchild, 1999)  than any accumulated 
research  findings.  Unlike those  using  the  application process 
in many of the  physical and biological sciences  as  a guide, 
managers  seldom  look to the  organizational research  commu- 
nity for guidance  in deciding  whether  to  adopt  new  tech- 
niques. 
Some  organizational researchers  have tried to  alter fashion 
trends  directly through trade publications. While such  writ- 
ings  have  likely had greater  impact on the  business  commu- 
nity than most  academic  research  publications, they  have  not 
yet  reduced  the  volatility or cyclical nature of  popular man- 
agement  techniques.  In fact,  the  faddish  nature of  manage- 
ment  techniques  may have  actually increased  due  to 
researchers'  modeling  their presentations  on the  very consul- 
tants  and business  writers  they  wish  to  supplant.  By confi- 
in a manner common  to 
dently touting formulas for success 
the  business  press,  organizational researchers  have  not dif- 
ferentiated  research-based  techniques  from others  in the 
marketplace. 
In our view,  a totally different tack should  be  taken.  By pub- 
licly expressing  doubts  about  unproven management  tech- 
niques,  in a manner akin to  professional  skepticism  about 
questionable  medical  practices,  we  believe  organizational 
researchers  might strengthen  their impact on  practitioners. 
By taking a more  skeptical  stance,  organizational researchers 
could  impede  the  diffusion of  doubtful management  tech- 
niques,  while  speeding  the  acceptance  of  practices  that are 
based  on  sound  research  data.  More importantly, a public 
dose  of  skepticism  might actually increase  the  credibility of 
the  research  process  itself,  providing greater value for the 
empirical validation of  management  practices.  Such  a change 
in orientation by the  organizational research  community 
would  not be  easy  to  implement,  nor would  its results  be 
assured.  Yet we  believe  that  increasing  demand  for accumu- 
lated knowledge,  as  opposed  to  providing yet  another  set  of 
solutions,  constitutes  one  of the  few  ways  researchers  may 
be  able to  dampen  fashion  cycles  in management. 

Abrahamson,  E., and  G. Fairchild 
1999  "Management  fashion:  Life- 
cycles,  triggers,  and collective 
learning processes."  Adminis- 
trative Science  Quarterly, 44: 
708-740. 

Allen,  V. L. 
1965  "Situational factors  in confor- 

mity." In L. Berkowitz (ed.), 
Advances  in Experimental 
Social  Psychology:  133-175. 
New  York: Academic  Press. 

Barkema,  H. C., and  L. R. Gomez- 
Mejia 
1998  "Managerial compensation 

and firm performance:  A gen- 
eral research  framework." 
Academy  of  Management 
Journal, 41:  135-145. 

Barley,  S.  R., and  D. B. Knight 
1992  "Toward a cultural theory  of 
stress  complaints."  In B. M. 
Staw  and  L. L. Cummings 
(eds.),  Research  in Organiza- 
tional Behavior, 14:1-48. 
Greenwich,  CT; JAI Press. 

553/ASQ,  September  2000 

REFERENCES 

Abrahamson,  E. 
1991  "Managerial fads  and fash- 

ions: The diffusion and rejec- 
tion of  innovations."  Acade- 
my of  Management  Review, 
16: 586-612. 

1996  "Management  fashion." 

Academy  of  Management 
Review,  21: 254-286. 


Barley,  S.  R., and  G. Kunda 
1992  "Design  and devotion:  Surges 
of  rational and  normative ide- 
ologies  of control in manager- 
ial discourse."  Administrative 
Science  Quarterly, 37: 
363-399. 

Baron,  R. M., and  D. A.  Kenny 
1986  "The moderator-mediator vari- 

able distinction in social  psy- 
chological  research:  Concep- 
tual, strategic,  and statistical 
considerations."  Journal of 
Personality and Social  Psy- 
chology,  51:  1173-1182. 
Beatty,  R. P,  and  E. J.  Zajac 
1994  "Managerial incentives,  moni- 

toring, and  risk bearing: A 
study  of  executive  compensa- 
tion, ownership,  and board 
structure  in initial public offer- 
ings."  Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 39: 313-335. 

Cole,  R. E. 
1999  Managing Quality Fads: How 
American  Business  Learned 
to  Play the  Quality Game. 
New  York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Crystal,  G. S. 
1991  In Search  of  Excess:  The 

Overcompensation  of Ameri- 
can  Executives.  New  York: 
Norton. 

Davis,  G. F. 
1991  "Agents  without  principles? 
The spread  of the  poison  pill 
through the  intercorporate 
network." Administrative Sci- 
ence  Quarterly, 36:  583-613. 

Deephouse,  D. L. 
1996  "Does  isomorphism  legiti- 

mate?"  Academy  of  Manage- 
ment  Journal, 39:  1024-1039. 

DiMaggio,  P. J. 
1991  "Constructing an organiza- 
tional field as  a professional 
project: U.S.  art museums, 
1920-1940.  " In W. W.  Powell 
and R J.  DiMaggio (eds.),  The 
New  Institutionalism in Orga- 
nizational Analysis:  1-40. 
Chicago: University of  Chica- 
go  Press. 

DiMaggio,  P. J.,  and  W. W. Powell 
1983  "The iron cage  revisited:  Insti- 
tutional isomorphism  and col- 
lective  rationality in organiza- 
tional fields."  American 
Sociological  Review,  35: 
147-1 60. 

Easton,  G. S.,  and  S.  L. Jarrell 
1998  "The effects  of total quality 

management  on corporate 
performance:  An empirical 
investigation."  Journal of 
Business,  71: 253-307. 

Kerckhoff, A.C.,  and  K. W. Back 
1968  The June  Bug: A Study of 
Hysterical Contagion.  New 
York: Appleton-Century- 
Crofts. 
Lawler, E. E. 
1992  The  Ultimate Advantage:  Cre- 

ating the  High Involvement 
Organization. San  Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 

Levitt,  B., and  J.  G. March 
1988  "Organizational learning." 

Annual Review  of  Sociology, 
14: 319-340.  Palo Alto, CA: 
Annual Reviews. 

Lorsch,  J.  W., and  E. Maciver 
1989  Pawns  or Potentates:  The 

Reality of America's  Corpo- 
rate Boards. Boston:  Harvard 
Business  School  Press. 

Mace,  M. L. 
1971  Directors: Myth and  Reality. 

Boston:  Harvard Business 
School  Press. 

Main,  B. G. M., C. A.  O'Reilly,  and 
J.  Wade 
1995  "The CEO, the  board of direc- 

tors,  and executive  compen- 
sation:  Economic  and psycho- 
logical perspectives." 
Industrial and Corporate 
Change,  4: 293-332. 

March,  J.  G., and  J.  P. Olsen 
1976  Ambiguity and Choice  in 

Organizations. Bergen:  Uni- 
versitetsforlaget. 

McGuire,  J.  B., T. Schneeweis, 
and  B. Branch 
1990  "Perceptions  of firm quality: 
A cause  or result of firm per- 
formance."  Journal of  Man- 
agement,  16: 167-180. 
Meyer,  M. W., and  V. Gupta 
1994  "The performance  paradox." 
In B. M. Staw  and  L. L. Cum- 
mings  (eds.),  Research  in 
Organizational Behavior, 16: 
309-369.  Greenwich,  CT: JAI 
Press. 

Meyer,  J.  W.,  and  B. Rowan 
1977  "Institutionalized organiza- 
tions:  Formal structure as 
myth and ceremony."  Ameri- 
can Journal of  Sociology,  83: 
340-363. 

1983  "The structure of  educational 

organizations."  In J. W. 
Meyer  and W. R. Scott  (eds.), 
Organizational Environments: 
Ritual and  Rationality: 71-97. 
Beverly  Hills, CA: Sage. 

Elsbach,  K. D. 
1994  "Managing organizational 

legitimacy  in the  California 
cattle  industry: The construc- 
tion and effectiveness  of ver- 
bal accounts."  Administrative 
Science  Quarterly, 39:  57-88. 

Fisher, A.  B. 
1996  "Corporate reputations  come- 

backs  and comeuppance." 
Fortune, March 6: 90-97. 

Fombrun,  C. J. 
1996  Reputation: Realizing Value 
from the  Corporate Image. 
Boston:  Harvard Business 
School  Press. 

Fombrun,  C. J.,  and  M. Shanley 
1990  "What's in a name?  Reputa- 

tion  building and corporate 
strategy."  Academy  of  Man- 
agement  Journal, 33: 
233-258. 

Hackman,  J.  R., and  R. Wageman 
1995  "Total quality management: 
Empirical, conceptual,  and 
practical issues."  Administra- 
tive  Science  Quarterly, 40: 
309-342. 

Haunschild,  P  R. 
1993  "Interorganizational imitation: 

The impact of  interlocks on 
corporate acquisition  activity." 
Administrative Science  Quar- 
terly, 38: 564-592. 

Haunschild,  P. R., and  A.  S.  Miner 
1997  "Modes  of  interorganizational 

imitation: The effects  of out- 
come  salience  and uncertain- 
ty." Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 42: 472-500. 

Jacoby,  S.  M. 
1984  Employing Bureaucracy: Man- 
agers,  Unions and the  Trans- 
formation of the  Labor 
Process.  New  York: Columbia 
University Press. 

Jensen,  M. C., and  W.  H. Meckling 
1976  "Theory of the  firm: Manager- 

ial behavior, agency  costs, 
and ownership  structure." 
Journal of  Financial Econom- 
ics, 3: 305-360. 

Jensen,  M. C., and  K. J.  Murphy 
1990  "CEO incentives-It's  not 

how  much you  pay, but 
how."  Harvard Business 
Review, 68 (3): 138-149. 

Johns,  G. 
1999  "A multi-level theory  of  self- 

serving  behavior in and by 
organizations."  In R. 1. Sutton 
and  B. M. Staw  (eds.), 
Research  in Organizational 
Behavior, 21:  1-38.  Green- 
wich,  CT: JAI Press. 

554/ASQ, September 2000 


Meyer,  J.,  and  W.  R. Scott 
1983  "Centralization and the  legiti- 

macy  problems  of the  local 
government."  In J. W.  Meyer 
and W. R. Scott  (eds.),  Orga- 
nizational Environments: Ritu- 
al and Rationality: 199-215. 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 

Nisbett,  R., and  L. Ross 
1980  Human Inference: Strategies 
and Shortcomings  of  Social 
Judgment.  Englewood  Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Ocasio,  W. 
1994  "Political dynamics  and the 
circulation of  power:  CEO 
succession 
corporations,  1960-1990." 
Administrative Science  Quar- 
terly, 39: 285-312. 

in U.S.  industrial 

Oliver, C. 
1991  "Strategic responses  to  insti- 
tutional processes."  Academy 
of  Management  Review,  13: 
79-90. 

O'Reilly,  C. A.,  B. G. M. Main,  and 
G. S.  Crystal 
1988  "CEO compensation  as  tour- 

nament  and social  compari- 
son:  A tale  of two  theories." 
Administrative Science  Quar- 
terly, 34:  21-37. 

Palmer,  D. A.,  P. D. Jennings,  and 
X. Zhou 
1993  "Late adoption  of the  multidi- 

visional form by large U.S. 
corporations:  Institutional, 
political, and economic 
accounts."  Administrative Sci- 
ence  Quarterly, 38:  100-131. 
Pastor,  J.  C., J.  R. Meindl,  and  R. 
Hunt 
1997  "The quality virus: Interorgani- 

zational contagion  of TQM." 
In J. L. Alvarez (ed.), The  Dif- 
fusion  and Consumption  of 
Business  Knowledge: 
201-218.  London: Macmillan. 

Pedhazur,  E. J. 
1982  Multiple Regression  in Behav- 

ioral Research.  New  York: 
Harcourt Jovanovich. 

Effects of Bandwagons 

Pfeffer,  J. 
1981  "Management  as  symbolic 

action: The creation and main- 
tenance  of  organizational par- 
adigms."  In L. L. Cummings 
and  B. M. Staw  (eds.), 
Research  in Organizational 
Behavior, 3:  1-52.  Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press. 

1994  Competitive  Advantage 

Through People:  Unleashing 
the  Power  of the  Workforce. 
Boston:  Harvard Business 
School  Press. 

Pfeffer, J.,  and  R. 1. Sutton 
1999  "The smart-talk trap." Har- 

vard Business  Review,  77  (3): 
134-142. 

2000  The  Knowing-Doing Gap- 

How  Smart Companies  Turn 
Knowledge  Into Action. 
Boston:  Harvard Business 
School  Press. 

Ruef,  M., and  W.  R. Scott 
1998  "A multidimensional  model  of 

organizational legitimacy: 
Hospital survival in changing 
institutional environments." 
Administrative Science  Quar- 
terly, 43: 877-904. 

Salancik,  G. R., and  J.  Pfeffer 
1978  "A social  information process- 

ing approach to  job attitudes 
and task  design."  Administra- 
tive  Science  Quarterly, 23: 
224-253. 

1980  "Effects  of  ownership  and 
performance  on executive 
tenure  in U.S.  corporations." 
Academy  of  Management 
Journal, 23: 653-664. 

Scott,  W. R. 
1995  Institutions and Organiza- 
tions.  Thousand  Oaks,  CA: 
Sage. 
Selznick,  P. 
1949  TVA and the  Grass  Roots. 

Berkeley:  University of  Cali- 
fornia Press. 

Shapiro,  E. C. 
1995  Fad Surfing in the  Boardroom. 

Reading,  MA: Addison-Wes- 
ley. 
Sherif,  M. 
1936  The  Psychology  of  Social 

Norms.  New  York: Harper and 
Row. 

Staw,  B. M. 
1975  "Attribution of the  'causes'  of 
performance:  A new  alterna- 
tive  interpretation of cross- 
sectional  research  on organi- 
zations."  Organizational 
Behavior and Human Perfor- 
mance, 13: 414-432. 

1980  "Rationality and justification 

in organizational life." In B. M. 
Staw  and  L. L. Cummings 
(eds.),  Research  in Organiza- 
tional Behavior, 2: 45-80. 
Greenwich,  CT: JAI Press. 
Tolbert,  P. S.,  and  L. G. Zucker 
1983  "Institutional sources  of 

change  in the  formal struc- 
ture of organizations: The dif- 
fusion  of civil service  reform, 
1880-1935."  Administrative 
Science  Quarterly, 28: 22-39. 
Wagner,  J. A.,  and  R. Z. Gooding 
1987  "Effects  of  societal  trends  on 

participation research." 
Administrative Science  Quar- 
terly, 32: 241-262. 

Westphal,  J.  D., R. Gulati,  and 
S.  M. Shortell 
1997  "Customization or conformi- 
ty? An institutional and net- 
work perspective  on the  con- 
tent  and consequences  of 
TQM adoption."  Administra- 
tive  Science  Quarterly, 42: 
366-394. 

Westphal,  J.  D., and  E. J.  Zajac 
1998  "The symbolic  management 
of  stockholders:  Corporate 
governance  reforms and 
shareholder  reactions." 
Administrative Science  Quar- 
terly, 43: 127-153. 

Zald,  M.N.,  and  P. Denton 
1963  "From evangelism  to  general 
service:  The transformation of 
the  YMCA." Administrative 
Science  Quarterly, 8: 
214-234. 
Zbaracki,  M. J. 
1998  "The rhetoric and  reality of 
total quality management." 
Administrative Science  Quar- 
terly, 43: 602-638. 

Zucker,  L. G. 
1977  "The role of  institutionaliza- 
tion  in cultural persistence." 
American Sociological 
Review, 42: 726-743. 

APPENDIX: Corporations 

in the  Sample 

3M 
Abbott  Laboratories 
Allied Signal 
Aluminum Co. of 

America 

Amerada  Hess 

American Brands 
American  Home  Prod- 

ucts 
Amoco 
Anheuser-Busch 
Apple Computer 

555/ASQ,  September  2000 

Archer-Daniels-Mid- 

land 

Ashland Oil 
Atlantic Richfield 
Baxter International 
Bethlehem  Steel 


Black and Decker 
Boeing 
Bristol-Myers Squibb 
Campbell Soup 
Caterpillar 
Champion Internation- 

Chevron 
Chrysler 
Coastal  International 

al 

Oil 

Colgate-Palmolive 
Compaq Computer 
Cooper  Industries 
Corning, Inc. 
CPC International 
Cummins  Engine 
Dana Corp. 
Deere 
Digital Equipment 
Dow  Chemical 
Dresser  Industries 
DuPont 
Eastman  Kodak 
Eaton Corp. 
Eli Lilly 
Emerson  Electric 
Exxon 
Ford 
General Electric 

General Motors 
Georgia Pacific 
Gillette 
Goodyear Tire 
H.J. Heinz 
Hewlett-Packard 
Honeywell 
IBM 
IBP 
Intel 
International Paper 
James  River Corp. 
Johnson  and Johnson 
Johnson  Controls 
Kellogg 
Kimberly-Clark 
McDonnell  Douglas 
Mead 
Merck 
Mobil 
Monsanto 
Motorola 
Navistar 
Northrop Grumman 
Occidental 
Pepsico 
Pfizer 
Philip Morris 
Phillips Petroleum 
PPG Industries 

Procter and Gamble 
Quaker Oats 
R.R. Donnelley  and 

Sons 

Ralston Purina 
Raytheon 
Reynolds  Metals 
RJR Nabisco 
Rockwell  International 
Sara Lee 
Stone  Container 
Sun  Microsystems 
Tenneco 
Texaco 
Texas  Instruments 
Textron 
TRW 
Union Carbide 
Unisys 
United Technologies 
USX 
VF 
W.R. Grace 
Warner-Lambert 
Westinghouse 
Weyerhaeuser 
Whirlpool 
Xerox 

556/ASQ,  September  2000 

