Industrial Marketing Management 39 (2010) 744–751

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Industrial Marketing Management

Distinguishing supplier reputation from trust in buyer–supplier relationships☆
Taewon Suh a,1, Mark B. Houston b,⁎
a Department of Marketing, McCoy College of Business Administration, Texas State University—San Marcos, 601 University Drive, San Marcos, TX 78666-4616, United States
b Department of Marketing, M.J. Neeley School of Business, Texas Christian University, TCU Box 298530, Fort Worth, TX 76129, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 26 June 2008
Received in revised form 3 March 2009
Accepted 1 June 2009
Available online 20 March 2010

Keywords:
Firm reputation
Governance mechanisms
Interﬁrm relationships
Trust

1. Introduction

We argue that a ﬁrm's reputation (i.e., central, enduring, and distinctive corporate associations held by
individuals outside of an organization), although under-researched relative to trust, is more important than
trust in impacting buyer–supplier relationships. Our conceptualization draws on theories and extant
research related to transaction cost economics, information economics, and interﬁrm trust. The constructs of
trust and reputation are distinguished and their relative impacts on relationship commitment and
willingness to invest in the future of the relationship are examined. Suggestive empirical evidence is
provided from a survey of industrial buyers, and implications and speciﬁc directions for future research are
discussed.

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Suppliers and buyers in business-to-business (hereafter, B2B)
transactions seek to build closer relationships to improve the
effectiveness and efﬁciencies of their transactions. For example,
joint information technologies that link the ordering, manufacturing,
and inventory control systems of a supplier and a buyer can result in
long term efﬁciencies by reducing waste and provide long term sales
gains by avoiding stock outs. Alternatively, when a supplier cus-
tomizes a product to the speciﬁc needs of a buyer or coordinates
marketing efforts with a downstream channel partner, synergistic
results can emerge. However, closer relationships between suppliers
and buyers also create vulnerabilities. For example, relationships
expose valuable assets to trading partners. Further, to the degree that
a ﬁrm makes investments that are tied to a speciﬁc partner, the ﬁrm's
dependence on that partner is increased. In turn, as a ﬁrm's ﬁnancial
resources or market positions are at increased risk, concerns over
protection from partner opportunism rise to the forefront (William-
son, 1996). Relationship dependence also implies opportunity costs of
forsaking other potential trading partners. Thus, ﬁrms should
structure relationships in ways that protect assets and ensure access
to key resources (Webster, 1992).

Trust and reputation are each considered within the extant
research literature to play important roles in business-to-business
(B2B) buyer–supplier relationship decisions. Although the intercon-

☆ “Corporate Reputation and Image in B2B Markets” for selected papers of the
concepts presented at the 5th International CI/ARG conference.

⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 817 257 7153.

E-mail addresses: ts21@txstate.edu (T. Suh), m.b.houston@tcu.edu (M.B. Houston).

1 Tel.: +1 512 245 3239.

0019-8501/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2010.02.013

nectedness of the two constructs is not generally debated (reputation
is normally seen as an antecedent to trust), a great deal of ambiguity
exists between the two. The terms are often used imprecisely and
interchangeably. Researchers repeatedly use reputation as a proxy for
trust (e.g., Bennett & Gabriel, 2001) or consider the trust construct as a
distinct conceptual stream within the study of reputation (Berens &
van Riel, 2004). Although different perspectives exist across the
literature, we argue that precise deﬁnitions and consistent usage are
needed in order for the ﬁeld to make systematic progress towards
more fully understanding these constructs. Consistent with Rousseau,
Sitkin, Burt, and Camerer (1998), we view trust as a relationship-
based concept, which is created, reinforced, or decreased by bilateral,
relational activities in a series of economic exchanges. On the other
hand, we view an organization's reputation as consisting of beliefs
about the organization (or “corporate associations,” Brown & Dacin,
1997, p. 69) that are held by others. Speciﬁcally, reputation refers to
“the set of corporate associations that individuals outside an
organization believe are [central, enduring, and distinctive] to the
organization” (Brown, Dacin, Pratt, & Whetten, 2006, p. 104).

Although trust has been the construct of primary interest in the
extant stream of B2B relationship marketing literature (cf. Morgan &
Hunt, 1994), we develop a conceptualization that suggests that
partner reputation is more important than trust in impacting key
relationship decisions and outcomes. Choosing to focus on partner
reputation, versus a ﬁrm's own reputation, differs from the extant
literature. Speciﬁcally, researchers typically study the ﬁrm's reputa-
tion as a strategic asset (Fombrun & Shanley, 1990). For example,
channels scholars often view a positive reputation as a valuable asset
that can generate rents and increase customer loyalty (Andreassen &
Lindestad, 1998; Weigelt & Camerer, 1988; Wilson, 1985). Brand
management scholars demonstrate the positive outcomes that can be


T. Suh, M.B. Houston / Industrial Marketing Management 39 (2010) 744–751

745

attributed to brand-level reputation (Lane & Jacobson, 1995; Simon &
Sullivan, 1993). Erdem and Swait (1998) argue that a brand's
reputation sends a quality signal to the market, reducing buyer
uncertainty.

In contrast, this study asks whether the reputation of a relationship
partner impacts attitudes and intentions concerning the relationship
which, in turn, impact a range of relationship governance decisions.
Several under-explored questions are identiﬁed concerning the role
that partner reputation plays in the structure and outcomes of
business relationships. First, regarding governance issues, Chiles and
McMackin (1996) utilize TCE to argue that trust between potential
transaction partners reduces the degree of vertical
integration
required to govern the relationship (Rindﬂeisch & Heide, 1997).
However, reputation and trust are distinct constructs. Are the
governance implications of reputation similar to those of trust?
While reputation provides potentially positive governance beneﬁts
(cf. Rao & Ruekert, 1994), it also raises some concerns. For example, to
the degree that a buyer's strategies rely on a high-reputation supplier,
the buyer may become increasingly “locked-in” (Heide & Weiss,
1995). Gundlach, Achrol, and Mentzer (1995, p. 79) argue that “[w]
hen a distributor like Computerland agrees to carry a manufacturer's
product line, for example, IBM, explicit and implicit cost-bearing
decisions (e.g., training of sales personnel and development of
promotional programs) are made that limit the capacity and freedom
to deal with other manufacturers … and therefore yield commit-
ment.” Thus, the beneﬁts that accrue from a high-reputation partner
may be partially offset by increased switching and opportunity costs.
The ﬁrst contribution of this paper, then, relates to addressing the
impact of reputation versus trust on behavioral
intentions and
attitudes within a supplier–buyer relationship.

Second, gaining access to a partner's assets (brand names,
technology, etc.) is a common motivation for forging a relationship
(Combs & Ketchen, 1999; Spekman, Forbes, Isabella, & MacAvoy,
1998). While there is general evidence of beneﬁts that accrue from
partners' investments in transaction-speciﬁc assets (e.g., Dyer, 1996),
there exists little theory or evidence as to the impact of intangible
assets, such as partner reputation. This gap in the literature is made
more relevant by the “ever increasing rate” at which alliances are
being formed and their pervasiveness across industries (Spekman
et al., 1998, p. 747).

The overall purpose of the present article is to take an initial step in
setting the research agenda for understanding the often-understated
impact of reputation in supplier–buyer relationships. While several
dimensions of reputation are in need of conceptual development, the
present paper focuses on one critical aspect: supplier reputation.
Supplier reputation has be characterized as the beliefs that people and
ﬁrms within an industry hold about the supplier's characteristics and
abilities as a trading partner (Doney & Cannon, 1997; Ganesan, 1994).
Speciﬁcally, we develop a theoretical framework that draws from TCE
theory, information economics/signaling, and resource dependence
theory to specify how supplier reputation can impact relationship
attitudes and behavioral intentions. Given the rich context that it
provides, we review extant theory on B2B relationship governance,
and then examine the respective roles of reputation and trust.
Organizing the discussion around these themes, we also present initial
empirical evidence from a cross section of buyer–supplier relation-
ships regarding the respective roles of reputation and trust (oper-
ationalized as both benevolence and integrity) in order to examine
the validity of the framework.

2. Buyer–supplier relationship governance

Why do supplier–buyer relationships require governance? Buyers
transact with sellers in order to access needed resources. While
alternative motivations may drive speciﬁc transactions (e.g., to pre-
empt a competitor's access to a key supplier; to support a relationship

partner's ﬁnancial viability), the buyer's impetus for entering an
exchange usually involves the need to acquire assets that the supplier
exposes to the market (e.g., goods for resale, raw materials, operating
supplies and services, unique knowledge and/or skills, high reputa-
tion, etc.) (Combs & Ketchen, 1999; Dyer, 1996; Hall, 1992; Mitchell &
Singh, 1992). A supplier's ability to gather rents from buyers depends
heavily on the desirability of that supplier's exchange assets to buyers
in the market. As the supplier's assets are generic to the marketplace
and there are no long- or short-term beneﬁts (volume pricing,
reduced transaction costs) to be had from engaging in relational
exchange with a particular supplier, buyers have incentive to acquire
needed assets from the market. However, when a particular supplier's
assets are unique, or when other valuable beneﬁts accrue from
repeatedly transacting with that particular supplier (e.g., enhanced
monitoring or reduction of uncertainty), ﬁrms face switching costs
and have an incentive to move along a continuum from discrete
exchange to more integrated transactions (Heide & Weiss, 1995;
Webster, 1992). These more integrated exchanges may be highly
informal (e.g., repeated contracts) or legally formalized (e.g., a
franchise agreement, joint venture, or merger).

Relational exchanges reduce social uncertainty (Yamagishi, Cook, &
Watabe, 1998) via formal and informal mechanisms that support
cooperative behavior over a longer expected horizon of repeated
exchanges (Lazzarini, Miller, & Zenger, 2008). However, relational
exchanges (and the “lock-in” they create) can exacerbate concerns
over exchange value uncertainty, i.e., whether a current exchange
partner will in the future remain optimal relative to alternative
suppliers (Kranton & Minehart, 2000). Thus, neither discrete nor
relational exchange structures dominate the other in all conditions.
Our knowledge of the motives that underlie the formation of
alternative relationship structures has developed extensively (Dwyer,
Schurr, & Oh, 1987; Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Spekman et al., 1998). Two
predominant perspectives exist. Transaction cost economics scholars
assert that trading partners move transactions from market
exchanges to more integrated, hierarchical arrangements when
transaction-speciﬁc assets are exposed, when partners have oppor-
tunity and motivation to behave opportunistically, and when
uncertainty can be reduced by closer alliances (Williamson, 1996).
As the degree of ownership in a partner increases, the ﬁrm's
legitimate control over the partner increases. Resource advantage
scholars, on the other hand, argue that ﬁrms seek relationship forms
that create synergy (e.g., enhanced market power, distribution
efﬁciencies, etc.) to acquire needed assets from other ﬁrms (Combs
& Ketchen, 1999).

Williamson (1985) argues that ﬁrms will choose a relationship
structure that will minimize transaction costs while providing
effective governance. Transaction costs go beyond the costs of
organizing and legal contracting to include expenses for monitoring
inputs and measuring outputs, losses incurred as a result of inaccurate
monitoring and measuring, specialized assets investments, and
dividing future gains and losses (Kogut, 1988). TCE theory suggests
that protection is required because of partner opportunism and the
uncertainty created by imperfect knowledge. Even without oppor-
tunism, disagreements over how to divide revenues or unexpected
expenses can be present. Thus, when parties have goals that differ,
imperfect knowledge, and/or incentive to behave opportunistically,
then the beneﬁts from employing transaction governance mechan-
isms should exceed the costs (Williamson, 1975).

Vertical integration gains appeal as supplier opportunism becomes
difﬁcult to detect, as ﬁrms invest in specialized assets (which cannot
be easily shifted to other uses,
increasing “lock-in”), and as
contingencies and/or product attributes cannot be precisely speciﬁed
a priori. In these conditions, market transactions provide inadequate
governance (Heide & John, 1988; Williamson, 1975). Market transac-
tions have low organizing costs, but the costs from imperfect
monitoring may be excessive. In turn, integration can be costly and


746

T. Suh, M.B. Houston / Industrial Marketing Management 39 (2010) 744–751

complex, but provides more control and the potential for enhanced
monitoring of a partner's behaviors. Thus, only when the beneﬁts
from the improved control and monitoring exceed the additional
costs should ﬁrms prefer increased integration.

2.1. Reputation and relationship governance

Reputation can act as a deterrent to opportunistic behavior. Since
protection from opportunism is costly, trustworthy ﬁrms are at-
tractive transaction partners (Dyer, 1996). Thus, if the costs of being
revealed as opportunistic are great, it is to a supplier's beneﬁt to send
hard-to-falsify signals of honesty to the market and to behave
honestly (Akerlof, 1970; Boulding & Kirmani, 1993; Fombrun &
Shanley, 1990; Srivastava & Mitra, 1998). Doney and Cannon (1997, p.
38) argue “Buyers also can use the calculative process to estimate that
the costs of a supplier acting in an untrustworthy manner are quite
high for ﬁrms with good reputations.” Reputations thus inhibit
opportunism since word of opportunistic behavior would spread
through the network of ﬁrms in which the supplier is embedded,
resulting in the loss of future contracts, creating a negative payoff for
the actions (Boulding & Kirmani, 1993; Hennart, 1993; Klein & Lefﬂer,
1981; Shrum & Wuthnow, 1988; Williamson, 1985).

A transaction governance structure choice (e.g., whether to invest
in parter-speciﬁc relational assets) can thus be impacted by ﬁrm
reputation (Houston & Johnson, 2000). Indeed, Garvey (1995) argues
that reputation and vertical (i.e., ownership) integration are sub-
stitutes. As reputation increases, thus offering assurances that both
explicit and implied contractual terms will be fulﬁlled, the need for
costly and risky integration decreases (Das & Teng, 1998). Thus it is
unclear from a TCE perspective, why a ﬁrm would incur the greater
costs and risks of integration if it has other assurances (i.e., the
partner's hard-earned reputation is at stake) that a given partner will
fulﬁll its obligations. Since reputation gives reason to avoid oppor-
tunism, the governance advantages provided by formal vertical
integration mechanisms (hereafter, ownership integration) are less
important when transacting with a high-reputation supplier. In fact, a
low-cost contract may provide sufﬁcient governance unless other
beneﬁts offset the greater costs and complexities of integration
(Hennart, 1993; Houston & Johnson, 2000; Kogut, 1988). With lower
reputation suppliers, however, TCE suggests that a buyer should
prefer to gain the control and monitoring beneﬁts of increased
ownership integration, which also forces the supplier to share in the
contingent outcomes of the exchange.

Little empirical evidence exists in the extant literature regarding
the impact of reputation on relational governance and commitment,
but the existing ﬁndings are mixed. Houston and Johnson (2000)
examined a cross-industry sample of buyer–supplier transactions that
were organized as simple contracts or as joint ventures, focusing on
the relationships between supplier ﬁrm characteristics and the choice
of a governance structure for the transaction. They found that supplier
ﬁrm reputation was signiﬁcantly negatively related to the likelihood
of forming a joint venture (a more vertically-integrated structure).
This result held even when supplier resource constraints were
considered. The authors concluded that supplier reputation served
as an alternative to the formation of a costly and complex joint
venture. However, Houston and Johnson's work compared only two
speciﬁc relationship structure alternatives. It is an empirical question
whether the direction and magnitude of their results would persist
across the continuum of alternative relationship structures (cf.
Webster, 1992).

On the other hand, Combs and Ketchen (1999) studied a sample of
restaurant chains and found a negative relationship between the
brand name reputation of a franchisor and interﬁrm cooperation (i.e.,
non-ownership integration) with restaurant partners.
Interﬁrm
cooperation was operationalized as the percentage of growth
(speciﬁcally, new restaurants) over a two-year period. They found

that “… in order to gain access to critical resources … restaurant
chains with unknown brand names and little slack capital used more
interﬁrm cooperation than did their resource-adundant counterparts”
(Combs & Ketchen, 1999, p. 882, emphasis added). Thus, capital
resource constraints could have been the driving force. However, their
results demonstrate clearly that research ﬁndings can vary greatly as a
function of construct operationalization and measurement.

2.2. Trust and relationship governance

Supplier reputation is not the only factor that increases a buyer's
conﬁdence. Chiles and McMackin (1996) carefully specify the manner in
which the presence of interﬁrm trust can reduce the degree of
integration required to govern a relationship that entails a given degree
of risk and uncertainty. Other scholars support the governance beneﬁts
of trust (Gulati, 1995; Lazzarini et al., 2008; Morgan & Hunt, 1994;
Rousseau et al., 1998). Trust and reputation are argued to have
individual, but similar, impacts on governance mechanism choice.
Increased supplier reputation or increased trust by the buyer in the
supplier should reduce the degree of ownership integration desired and
increase partners' willingness to invest in the future of the relationship.
Interestingly, trust is operationalized in two different ways —
benevolence and integrity — across the organizational trust literature
(e.g., Kumar, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 1995; Larzelere & Huston, 1980;
Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995; Schoorman, Mayer, & Davis, 2007).
Benevolence is described as a type of trust that exists within the context
and as a consequence of an interorganizational relationship, and it
varies across relationships (Mayer et al., 1995). Benevolence means
that, within their relationship, the partner protects the focal
company's welfare (Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna, 1985) and, thus, will
refrain from taking unexpected actions to harm the focal company
(Anderson & Narus, 1990; Suh & Kwon, 2006). On the other hand,
conceptualizations of integrity view it as more dispositional and trait-
like, deﬁned as the belief that the partner fulﬁlls its promises, being
consistent, reliable, and responsible (Anderson & Narus, 1990; Morgan
& Hunt, 1994). Integrity is thought to vary less across relationships
than is benevolence. Although these two types of trust are conceptu-
ally distinct, theory does not differentiate their consequences.

Channels scholars have been more active in examining the
relationship between trust and behavioral integration (e.g., commit-
ment, joint action, cooperation, etc.) versus ownership integration
(i.e., Gulati and Westphal (1999) speculated about but did not
measure the role of trust in joint venture formation). As might be
expected, the conﬁdence-inspiring impact of interﬁrm trust that
reduces the need for hierarchical governance also should improve the
relational dimensions of a transaction. Studies report positive
relationships between trust and relationship formation and cooper-
ation (Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Schurr & Ozanne, 1985), relationship
continuance and commitment (Doney & Cannon, 1997; Ganesan,
1994, Morgan & Hunt, 1994), effort (Anderson, Lodish, & Weitz,
1987), and satisfaction, while reporting that trust reduces conﬂict
(Anderson & Narus, 1990) and uncertainty (Morgan & Hunt, 1994).

2.3. An important distinction

Trust and reputation must be carefully distinguished. Morgan and
Hunt (1994, p. 23) deﬁne trust as the “conﬁdence in an exchange
partner's reliability and integrity.” However, a partner may refrain
from opportunism for reasons other than their reliability and integrity.
Das and Teng (1998, p. 492) deﬁne conﬁdence in partner cooperation
as “a ﬁrm's perceived certainty about satisfactory partner coopera-
tion.”2 They then distinguish between trust and conﬁdence by noting

2 Partner cooperation is deﬁned as “the willingness of a partner ﬁrm to pursue
mutually compatible interests in the alliance rather than act opportunistically” (Das &
Teng, 1998, p. 492).


T. Suh, M.B. Houston / Industrial Marketing Management 39 (2010) 744–751

747

that “trust relates to expectations about the motives of the trustee ….
Thus, the key difference is that whereas trust refers to expectations
about positive motives, conﬁdence refers to certainty about cooper-
ative behaviors” (p. 494). Certainty about partner cooperation can
also be increased by the presence of governance mechanisms,
including controls, such as monitoring and contracts, and hostages,
such as reputation or transaction-speciﬁc investments. Gulati refers to
the conﬁdence that comes from governance mechanisms as “deter-
rence-based trust” (1995, p. 93), a term also used by Rousseau et al.
(1998). This perspective posits that conﬁdence in partner cooperation
emerges when opportunistic “behavior by a partner can lead to costly
sanctions that exceed any potential beneﬁts that opportunistic
behavior may provide” (Gulati, 1995, p. 93).

While the constructs are distinct, they are not completely
independent. There is solid conceptual and empirical support for
arguing that reputation and trust should be positively related, with
reputation as one antecedent contributing to trust. The network of
ﬁrms in which a buyer is embedded can provide information
regarding potential suppliers (Gundlach et al., 1995; Klein & Lefﬂer,
1981). In this network, buyers can “infer the trustworthiness of a
supplier through the words and actions of other people and
organizations...[which] predict a positive relationship between sup-
plier reputation” and the buyer's trust in the supplier (Doney &
Cannon, 1997, p. 38). In fact, reputation can provide a signal of
credibility to a potential partner on which a relationship can be
initiated. Das and Teng (1998, p. 504) argue that a supplier ﬁrm's
reputation gives a buyer “the needed ﬁrst piece of evidence to take
some initial risk” on the road to developing a trusting relationship.

The present paper does not attempt to identify all antecedents to
trust. However, a consensus from previous literature is that trust has a
strong experiential component (Rindﬂeisch & Heide, 1997). In fact,
Dwyer et al. (1987, p. 18), in their seminal work on relationship
formation, argue that “direct experience is likely to be the principle
basis for judging trustworthiness” in a potential partnership that has
no history. Empirically, Gulati (1995) found that repeated interactions
between trading partners lead to the development of trust. Thus, while
there is evidence to suggest a positive relationship between reputation
and trust, reputation is not argued to be the sole antecedent.

Empirical evidence for reputation as an antecedent to trust is
provided by Ganesan (1994) and Doney and Cannon (1997). Ganesan
(1994) found that supplier reputation was positively related to a
retailer's perception of the supplier's credibility, but not benevolence.
He interpreted these ﬁndings as suggesting that retailers could rely on
external cues (e.g., supplier reputation) more heavily than actual
interactions in determining the trustworthiness of trading partners.
Doney and Cannon (1997) failed to detect any relationship between
supplier ﬁrm reputation and trust. However, their three-item
reputation scale focuses only on general honesty and concern while
their eight-item trust scale has a higher degree of speciﬁcity and
covers multiple aspects of interﬁrm trust. Still, there is inconsistent
evidence on the relationship between supplier reputation and trust.
We now turn to an exploratory empirical examination of the
relative roles of supplier reputation and trust in explaining important
relationship attitudes and decisions. Given many ways that trust has
been deﬁned across the marketing and management literatures, we
examine both benevolence-focused trust and integrity-focused trust.

3. Methodology and analysis

We collected data for two exogenous variables (trust and
reputation) and two endogenous and dependent variables (affective
commitment and willingness to invest). Adapting measures from the
extant literature where available, multiple item scales were used for
each construct and all coefﬁcient alphas were above .75. Following
Kumar et al. (1995), trust was measured with two distinct ope-
rationalizations: one with trust based on the trustee's benevolence

(ﬁve items) and the other with trust based on the trustee's integrity
(ﬁve items). Conﬁrmatory factor analyses supported the discriminant
validity of the two scales. Supplier reputation was measured with
three items, affective commitment with three items, and willingness
to invest in the relationship with two behavioral intention items. All
survey items are provided in the Appendix A.

A mail survey was administered to 1000 managers in buyer
companies that were randomly chosen from a database. We received
completed surveys from 201 (response rate=20.1%). Using the
question “there are other companies than the supplier that could
provide your company with comparable business,” we distinguished
between those buyers who were locked-in to their current supplier
(n=28) versus those who had alternatives (n=173). Because our
interest is in buyer–supplier relationship decisions, we focused our
analyses on the 173 respondents who had choice in their relationship.
We used AMOS 6.0 for statistical analyses and examined two different
models in which trust and reputation each were modeled as
antecedents to both affective commitment and willingness to invest
in the relationship. For a model using the “benevolence” measure of
trust, model ﬁt statistics were NFI=.927; TLI=.955; CFI=.965;
RMSEA=.069;χ2/df=1.816. For the model that included the “integ-
rity” measure of trust, model statistics were NFI=.902; TLI=.925;
CFI=.942; RMSEA=.085; χ2/df= 2.255.

4. Results

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics and the correlations among

constructs.

Reputation is signiﬁcant in both of the two models. In the model in
which trust is operationalized as benevolence (see Table 2, panel a),
reputation relates positively to affective commitment (t = 3.90,
p b.001) and to willingness to invest (t=3.67, p b.001). In the model
in which trust is operationalized as integrity (Table 2, panel b),
reputation also relates positively to affective commitment (t=2.01,
p b.05) and to willingness to invest (t=2.10, p b.05). Turning to trust,
however, when trust is operationalized as benevolence, it does not
relate to affective commitment, but it does relate to willingness to
invest. Surprisingly, however, the impact is negative (t=−2.74,
p b.01). When trust operationalized as integrity, it does not relate to
affective commitment or to willingness to invest. Results are
illustrated in Fig. 1. These ﬁndings, including the consistent, positive
role of reputation and the unexpected, negative role for trust reinforce
our assumption that trust is calculative and risk-related in decisions
related to a business relationship. We return to these ﬁndings in the
discussion.

5. Discussion and implications for future research

We found that supplier reputation was consistently a signiﬁcant
and positive antecedent to a buyer's affective commitment to a
relationship and to that buyer's willingness to invest in the future
of the relationship. However, surprisingly, trust — regardless of

Table 1
Descriptive statistics and correlations.

AC a CR b AVE c Mean s.d.

1

2

3

4

1. Supplier reputation
2. Trust–benevolence
3. Trust–integrity
4. Affective commitment
5. Willingness to invest

.82
.92
.87
.86
.54*

.82
.92
.88
.85
.73

.61
.71
.61
.66
.58

5.72
5.21
5.08
4.51
4.96

.97
1.09 .76
1.14 .76
1.32 .53
1.10 .42

.82
.43
.25

.53
.33 .52

Note: construct correlations, italicized, are located off the diagonal in the last four
columns. All are signiﬁcant at the .05 level.

a The alpha coefﬁcient (* inter-item correlation).
b Construct reliability.
c Average variance explained.


T. Suh, M.B. Houston / Industrial Marketing Management 39 (2010) 744–751

748

Table 2
Regression results.

Path

Standardized path
weight

t-value

Panel (a): model with trust operationalized as benevolence
Reputation → affective commitment
Reputation → willingness to invest
Trust–benevolence → affective commitment
Trust–benevolence → willingness to invest

1.04
1.32
−.46
−.91

Panel (b): model with trust operationalized as integrity
Reputation → affective commitment
.71
Reputation → willingness to invest
1.00
−.08
Trust–integrity → affective commitment
Trust–integrity → willingness to invest
-.52

⁎ p b.05.
⁎⁎ p b.01.
⁎⁎⁎ p b.001.

3.96⁎⁎⁎
3.67⁎⁎⁎
−1.82
−2.74⁎⁎

2.01⁎
2.10⁎
−.23
-1.12

operationalization — did not relate positively to the outcomes.
Although the preponderance of evidence in the extant literature
suggests the importance of trust to B2B relationship outcomes, our
exploratory results provide evidence that is suggestive that future
research should account for the impact of reputation before drawing
conclusions regarding the impact of trust. Few studies have included
both constructs in their conceptualizations or operationalizations.
Clearly our study does not test a comprehensive model of the
antecedents to affective commitment or willingness to invest.
However, given the supposedly powerful roles of reputation and
trust, and in light of not including other antecedents that might extract
meaningful portions of the variance in the outcome variables, we
expected both to be signiﬁcant and positive antecedents. Also, given
that a sole source was used to measure each construct for each buyer–

supplier relationship, concerns could be raised about common source
bias. However, given that our intent is to examine the relative impacts
of reputation versus trust on each outcome, this concern should be
minimized. Any common source bias could accentuate relationships
between an antecedent and an outcome, but it is not clear that there is
any reasonable argument for such bias to affect trust→outcomes and
reputation→outcomes relationships differently. Further, given extant
theory and the wording of our items, any common source biases
should increase the likelihood of both reputation and trust relating
positively to these outcomes. Our ﬁnding of non-signiﬁcance (and one
negative relationship) for trust are thus fairly conservative.

Supplier reputation, in speciﬁc, and ﬁrm reputation, in general,
remains under-researched given their important roles in theoretical
frameworks regarding the ﬁnancial outcomes and governance
structures of interﬁrm alliances. This is somewhat puzzling given
the attention that management and marketing scholars devote to
reputational issues (e.g., brand equity; the “ﬁt” between a ﬁrm and a
celebrity endorser, etc.) An underlying reason for the lack of activity in
this area may stem from the “fuzzy” nature of the reputation
construct, unclear speciﬁcations of its nomological relationships
with key constructs, and the resulting measurement difﬁculties. It is
hoped that this paper provides motivation and direction for future
research in the topic area.

Explicit tests of the relationship between supplier reputation and a
buyer's ﬁnancial outcomes are needed. Two approaches provide
alternative ways that such tests might be structured. First, following
Kerin and Sethuraman (1998), supplier ﬁrm reputation measures
could be gathered and empirically related to changes in a buyer's
market value. A researcher could then test whether buyer ﬁrms with
higher accumulations of supplier reputation have higher market
values. Second, event study methods (cf. MacKinlay, 1997) could be
utilized to examine the impact of supplier reputation on buyers' stock

Fig. 1. Model results: statistically signiﬁcant paths (standardized path coefﬁcients). Panel a: model with trust operationalized as benevolence. Panel b: model with trust
operationalized as integrity.


T. Suh, M.B. Houston / Industrial Marketing Management 39 (2010) 744–751

749

prices. This approach would involve identifying a sample of supplier–
buyer transaction announcements, supplier reputation measures, and
buyer stock price returns over an appropriate period of time. After
isolating stock price changes that are attributable to the transaction
announcement, the researcher would then use regression to inves-
tigate the relationship between supplier reputation and the stock
price changes.

Both research approaches are dependent on the researcher's ability
to gather primary or secondary measures of supplier reputation. The
most commonly used measures of ﬁrm reputation result from Fortune
magazine's annual “Most Admired Corporations” survey, where nearly
10,000 executives and analysts annually are asked to reveal their
beliefs regarding the largest ﬁrms in their respective industries. This
data is readily available,3 incorporates a broad sample of knowledge-
able respondents, and can be selected so that the reputation data
precedes the ﬁnancial outcomes data. It is criticized primarily on two
counts. First, can the diverse questions that comprise the Fortune
survey be combined as a measure of a single reputation construct?
Scholars disagree (Houston & Johnson, 2000). Weigelt and Camerer
(1988) and Fryxell and Wang (1994) argue that reputation is a multi-
dimensional construct. On the other hand, Fombrun and Shanley
(1990) demonstrate that commonly cited dimensions of reputation
cannot be distinguished empirically from a “global” reputation.
Second, the Fortune survey includes only the largest ﬁrms in an
industry, thus it is possible that results may not generalize to smaller
organizations whose reputations are likely not as well known on a
national basis. Another consideration when researching exchanges
that involve these relatively large ﬁrms in the Fortune sample is that
the transactions are likely to be of a magnitude that makes them
relatively more important to trading partners, allowing transaction
size to potentially confound the impact of reputation.

As indicated by the debate surrounding the operationalization of
the reputation construct, the deﬁnition, speciﬁcation, and measure-
ment of reputation remains a fruitful area for further work, including
the possibility of alternative dimensions of supplier reputation. In the
buyer–supplier context it would be informative to investigate the
relative impact of a supplier's ﬁrm-level reputation compared to that
of the individual reputations of that supplier's products. For example,
the content and consequences of the reputations of Dove and Axe, two
brands owned by Unilever, differ signiﬁcantly from each other and
from the reputation of Unilever, as a whole (Deighton, 2008). Lane
and Jacobson (1995) provide information on secondary sources of
brand-level reputation data. At either level,
locating or eliciting
reputation data for a sample of ﬁrms of various sizes would help
researchers provide some needed insight to the literature.

Further studies are needed in at least four areas. First, researchers
must specify precisely whether their focus is on partner selection (e.g.,
“should I pick ﬁrm A or B?”) versus governance structure choice (e.g.,
“what mechanisms provide effective governance for my relationship
with ﬁrm A”). This distinction allows us to explain why a ﬁrm should
prefer to build cooperative relationships with trustworthy partners
(Dollinger, Golden, & Saxton, 1997), while their trust in a partner may
actually reduce the amount of ownership integration needed to
govern a relationship (Chiles & McMackin, 1996). Second, based on
our exploratory evidence, larger studies are needed that simulta-
neously incorporate both trust and reputation in more comprehensive
frameworks and tests. While the conceptual distinction between the
two constructs is relatively clear, there is little empirical evidence as
to their relative impacts and the interrelationship between trust
and reputation. Such studies could assess the generalizability of our
surprising failure to ﬁnd positive relationships between trust and
the outcome variables. Note that in our multivariate test, it is in the

3 This data can be obtained from OCCAM Research Corporation, 170 Linden Street,

Wellesley, MA 02181-7919, (617) 431-0210.

presence of reputation that trust is not a positive antecedent to
willingness to invest or commitment. In bivariate correlations, the
constructs do relate as expected. Thus, our study is suggestive of the
salience of reputation in our B2B setting. Additionally, we would note
that we deﬁned and operationalized trust as a relational construct and
reputation as consisting of corporate associations. Although we
examined two relational conceptualizations of trust in our empirical
study, other treatments of our core constructs may yield different
insights. Third, scholars have yet to empirically investigate the impact
of trust on ownership (versus behavioral) integration. Finally, since
reputational considerations may be more important in some contexts
than others, sampling methods in future studies should systematically
investigate reputation in alternative industries and at various levels of
the supply chain.

In the area of governance, one additional need is to resolve the
conceptual differences among alternative uses of “vertical integration.”
Economists such as Williamson (1996) have traditionally viewed
vertical integration as taking an ownership position in a partner to
beneﬁt from the increased control that comes from ownership or
“administrative ﬁat.” Marketing scholars have broadened the concept of
vertical integration to include joint or coordinated action (cooperation)
(Rindﬂeisch & Heide, 1997), even though no legitimate (i.e., authority)
control comes from these structures. Instead, because of relational
beliefs and norms, ﬁrms are willing to engage in these cooperative
behaviors and, in turn, refrain from opportunism. The constructs of
reputation and trust may be expected to increase relational cooperation
while decreasing the need for formal ownership control. Thus, if the
term “vertical integration” is not clearly deﬁned, the direction of the
relationship with another variable cannot be speciﬁed.

Finally, this paper did not speak to the issue of buyer ﬁrm
reputation. While buyer reputation should have important impacts on
governance and relative dependency,
its role in supplier–buyer
relationships has not been speciﬁed.
It is likely that important
interactions exist between various combinations of levels of supplier
reputation and buyer reputation. Thus, work in developing a more
complete model of the impact of reputation in interﬁrm relationships
is needed.

6. Conclusion

The goal of this paper is to explicate the roles of supplier
reputation and trust in buyer–supplier relationships. Although trust
has received far more attention in the B2B relationship literature, our
results suggest that supplier reputation may be more impactful on
important attitudes and intentions. Because ﬁrms invest time, effort,
and ﬁnancial resources towards the development and maintenance of
positive relationships, it is important to practice and theory that
marketing scholars further develop our understandings of the unique
nature and relative impact of supplier reputation — not only trust.

Appendix A

A.1. Scale items

Reputation

• In the market, this partner ﬁrm has a good reputation.
• This partner ﬁrm is positively perceived in the market.
• This partner ﬁrm is negatively perceived in the market.

Trust (benevolence)

• Though circumstances change, we believe that the partner will be

ready and willing to offer us assistance and support.

• When making important decisions, the partner is concerned about

our welfare.


750

T. Suh, M.B. Houston / Industrial Marketing Management 39 (2010) 744–751

• When we share our problems with the partner, we know that it will

respond with understanding.

• In the future, we can count on the partner to consider how its

decisions and actions will affect us.

• When it comes to things that are important to us, we can depend on

the partner's support.

Trust (integrity)

• Even when the partner gives us a rather unlikely explanation, we are

conﬁdent that it is telling the truth.

• The partner has often provided us information that has later proven

to be inaccurate.

• The partner usually keeps the promises that it makes to our ﬁrm.
• Whenever the partner gives us advice on our business operations,

we know that it is sharing its best judgment.

• Our organization can count on the partner to be sincere.

Affective commitment

• Even if we could, we would not drop the partner because we like

being associated with it.

• We want to remain a member of the partner's network because we

genuinely enjoy our relationship with it.

• Our positive feelings towards the partner are a major reason we

continue working with it.

Willingness to invest

• We are willing to put more effort and investment in building our

business with the partner.

• If the partner requested it, we would be willing to make further

investment in supporting the partner.

References

Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for lemons: Qualitative uncertainty and the market

Anderson, E., Lodish, L. M., & Weitz, B. A. (1987). Resource allocation behavior in

mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 488−500.
conventional channels. Journal of Marketing Research, 24(1), 85−97.
working partnerships. Journal of Marketing, 54(1), 42−58.
of customer loyalty. Journal of Service Research, 1(1), 82−92.

Andreassen, T. W., & Lindestad, B. (1998). The effect of corporate image in the formation

Anderson, J. C., & Narus, J. A. (1990). A model of distributor ﬁrm and manufacturer ﬁrm

Bennett, R., & Gabriel, H. (2001). Corporate reputation, trait covariation and the
averaging principle — The case of the UK pensions mis-selling scandal. European
Journal of Marketing, 35(4–5), 387−413.

Berens, G., & van Riel, C. (2004). Corporate associations in the academic literature:
Three main streams of thought in the reputation measurement literature. Corporate
Reputation Review, 7(2), 161−178.

Boulding, W., & Kirmani, A. (1993). A consumer-side experimental examination of
signaling theory: Do consumers perceive warranties as signals of quality? Journal of
Consumer Research, 20(1), 111−123.
consumer product responses. Journal of Marketing, 61(1), 68−84.

Brown, T., & Dacin, P. (1997). The company and the product: Corporate associations and

Brown, T., Dacin, P., Pratt, M., & Whetten, D. (2006). Identity, intended image, construed
image, and reputation: An interdisciplinary framework and suggested terminology.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34(2), 99−106.
transaction cost economics. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 73−99.

Chiles, T. H., & McMackin, J. F. (1996). Integrating variable risk preferences, trust, and

J.,

Combs,

J. G., & Ketchen, D.

Jr. (1999). Explaining interﬁrm cooperation and
performance: Toward a reconciliation of predictions from the resource-based view
and organizational economics. Strategic Management Journal, 20(9), 867−888.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. S. (1998). Between trust and control: Developing conﬁdence in
partner cooperation in alliances. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 491−512.
Deighton, J. (2008). Dove: Evolution of a brand. : Harvard Business School Publishing

Dollinger, M. J., Golden, P. A., & Saxton, T. (1997). The effect of reputation on the

Doney, P. M., & Cannon, J. P. (1997). An examination of the nature of trust in buyer–

(Case #9-508-047).
decision to joint venture. Strategic Management Journal, 18(2), 127−140.
seller relationships. Journal of Marketing, 61(2), 35−51.
Journal of Marketing, 51(2), 11−27.
Dyer, J. H. (1996). Does governance matter? Keiretsu alliances and asset speciﬁcity as
sources of Japanese competitive advantage. Organization Science, 7(6), 649−666.

Dwyer, F. R., Schurr, P. H., & Oh, S. (1987). Developing buyer–seller relationships.

Erdem, T., & Swait, J. (1998). Brand equity as a signaling phenomenon. Journal of

Fombrun, C., & Shanley, M. (1990). What's in a name? Reputation building and

Fryxell, G. E., & Wang, J. (1994). The Fortune corporate ‘reputation’ index: Reputation

Consumer Psychology, 7(2), 131−157.
corporate strategy. Academy of Management Journal, 33(2), 233−258.
for what? Journal of Management, 20(1), 1−14.
ships. Journal of Marketing, 58(2), 1−19.

Ganesan, S. (1994). Determinants of long-term orientation in buyer–seller relation-

Garvey, G. T. (1995). Why reputation favors joint ventures over vertical and horizontal
integration — A simple model. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 28(3),
387−397.
Gulati, R. (1995). Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties for
contractual choice in alliances. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 85−112.
Gulati, R., & Westphal, J. D. (1999). Cooperative or controlling? The effects of CEO–
board relations and the content of interlocks on the formation of joint ventures.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(3), 473−506.
exchange. Journal of Marketing, 59(1), 78−92.
Journal, 13(2), 135−144.

Gundlach, G. T., Achrol, R. S., & Mentzer, J. T. (1995). The structure of commitment in

Hall, R. (1992). The strategic analysis of intangible resources. Strategic Management

Heide, J. B., & Weiss, A. M. (1995). Vendor consideration and switching behavior for

Heide, J. B., & John, G. (1988). The role of dependence balancing in safeguarding
transaction-speciﬁc assets in conventional channels. Journal of Marketing, 52(1),
20−35.
buyers in high-technology markets. Journal of Marketing, 59(3), 30−43.
of ‘market’ and ‘hierarchy’. Organization Science, 4(4), 529−547.

Hennart, J. F. (1993). Explaining the swollen middle: Why most transactions are a mix

Houston, M. B., & Johnson, S. A. (2000). Buyer–supplier contracts versus joint ventures:
Determinants and consequences of transaction structure. Journal of Marketing
Research, 37(1), 1−15.

Klein, B., & Lefﬂer, K. B. (1981). The role of market forces in assuring contractual

Kogut, B. (1988). Joint ventures: theoretical and empirical perspectives. Strategic

Kerin, R. A., & Sethuraman, R. (1998). Exploring the brand value–shareholder value
nexus for consumer goods companies. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
26(4), 260−273.
performance. Journal of Political Economy, 89(4), 615−641.
Management Journal, 9(4), 319−332.
of Economics, 31(3), 570−601.
on dealer attitudes. Journal of Marketing Research, 32(3), 348−358.

Kranton, R., & Minehart, D. (2000). Networks versus vertical integration. RAND Journal

Kumar, N., Scheer, L., & Steenkamp, J. (1995). The effects of perceived interdependence

Lane, V., & Jacobson, R. (1995). Stock market reactions to brand extension
announcements: The effects of brand attitude and familiarity. Journal of Marketing,
59(1), 63−77.

Larzelere, R., & Huston, T. (1980, August). The dyadic trust scale: Toward understanding
interpersonal trust in close relationships. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 42,
595−604.

Lazzarini, S., Miller, G., & Zenger, T. (2008). Dealing with the paradox of embeddedness:
The role of contracts and trust in facilitating movement out of committed
relationships. Organization Science, 19(5), 709−728.
Literature, 35(1), 13−39.
trust. Academy of Management Review, 29(3), 709−734.

MacKinlay, A. (1997). Event studies in economics and ﬁnance. Journal of Economic

Mayer, R., Davis, J., & Schoorman, F. (1995). An integrative model of organizational

Mitchell, W., & Singh, K. (1992).

Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment–trust theory of relationship

Rao, A. R., & Ruekert, R. W. (1994). Brand alliances as signals of product quality. Sloan

Rempel, J., Holmes, J., & Zanna, M. (1985). Trust in close relationships. Journal of

Rindﬂeisch, A., & Heide, J. B. (1997). Transaction cost analysis: past, present, and future

Incumbents' use of pre-entry alliances before
expansion into new technical subﬁelds of an industry. Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 18(3), 347−372.
marketing. Journal of Marketing, 58(3), 20−38.
Management Review, 36(1), 87−97.
Personality and Social Psychology, 49(1), 95−112.
applications. Journal of Marketing, 61(4), 30−54.
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after all: A
cross-discipline view of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 393−404.
Schoorman, F., Mayer, R., & Davis, J. (2007). An integrative model of organizational
trust: Past, present, and future. Academy of Management Review, 32(2), 344−354.
Schurr, P. H., & Ozanne, J. L. (1985). Inﬂuences on exchange processes: Buyers'
preconceptions of a seller's trustworthiness and bargaining toughness. Journal of
Consumer Research, 11, 939−953.
systems. American Journal of Sociology, 93(4), 882−912.
equity: A ﬁnancial approach. Marketing Science, 12(1), 28−52.

Shrum, W., & Wuthnow, R. (1988). Reputational status of organizations in technical

Simon, C. J., & Sullivan, M. W. (1993). The measurement and determinants of brand

Spekman, R. E., Forbes, T. M., III, Isabella, L. A., & MacAvoy, T. C. (1998). Alliance
management: A view from the past and a look to the future. Journal of Management
Studies, 35(6), 747−772.
Srivastava, J., & Mitra, A. (1998). Warranty as a signal of quality: The moderating effect
of consumer knowledge on quality evaluations. Marketing Letters, 9(4), 327−336.
Suh, T., & Kwon, I. (2006). Matter over mind: When speciﬁc asset investment affects
calculative trust in supply chain partnership. Industrial Marketing Management, 35,
191−201.
Marketing, 56(4), 1−17.

Webster, F. (1992). The changing role of marketing in the corporation. Journal of


T. Suh, M.B. Houston / Industrial Marketing Management 39 (2010) 744–751

751

Weigelt, K., & Camerer, C. (1988). Reputation and corporate strategy: A review of recent

theory and applications. Strategic Management Journal, 9(5), 443−454.
Williamson, O. E. (1975). Markets and hierarchies. New York: The Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalism. New York: The Free

Press.

Williamson, O. E. (1996). The mechanisms of governance. New York: Oxford University

Press.

Wilson, R. (1985). Reputations in games and markets. In A. Roth (Ed.), Game–theoretic

models of bargaining. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Yamagishi, T., Cook, K., & Watabe, M. (1998). Uncertainty, trust, and commitment
formation in the United States and Japan. American Journal of Sociology, 104(1),
165−194.

