This article was downloaded by: [131.193.251.47] On: 02 August 2017, At: 11:39
Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA

Information Systems Research

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://pubsonline.informs.org
IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in
Interfirm Partnerships

Nilesh Saraf, Christoph Schlueter Langdon, Sanjay Gosain,

To cite this article:
Nilesh Saraf, Christoph Schlueter Langdon, Sanjay Gosain,  (2007) IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interfirm
Partnerships. Information Systems Research 18(3):320-339. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1070.0133

Full terms and conditions of use: http://pubsonline.informs.org/page/terms-and-conditions

This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use

or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher
approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.

The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or
inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or
support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.

Copyright © 2007, INFORMS

Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages

INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research, management
science, and analytics.
For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org


Information Systems Research
Vol. 18, No. 3, September 2007, pp. 320–339
issn 1047-7047(cid:1) eissn 1526-5536(cid:1) 07(cid:1) 1803(cid:1) 0320

informs ®

doi 10.1287/isre.1070.0133
© 2007 INFORMS

IS Application Capabilities and Relational

Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships

Nilesh Saraf

Faculty of Business Administration, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive,

Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6, nsaraf@sfu.ca

Christoph Schlueter Langdon

Center for Telecom Management, University of Southern California, 444 South Flower Street,

Los Angeles, California 90089, clangdon@marshall.usc.edu

Capital Group Companies, Inc., 16370 Barranca Parkway, Irvine, California 92618, gosain@gmail.com

Sanjay Gosain

This study examines how capabilities of information systems (IS) applications deployed in the context of

interﬁrm relationships contribute to business performance. We propose that these capabilities augment the
relational value that a ﬁrm derives from its business partners—channel partners and customer enterprises—in
the context of the distribution channel. Two cospecialized relational assets are considered as key to realization of
relational value—knowledge sharing and process coupling. Hypotheses linking two IS capabilities (IS ﬂexibility
and IS integration) to the relational asset dimensions, and ultimately to ﬁrm performance, are proposed. The
research model is tested based on data collected through a survey of business units of enterprises embedded in
customer and channel partner ties in the high-tech and ﬁnancial services industries. We ﬁnd that IS integration
with channel partners and customers contributes to both knowledge sharing and process coupling with both
types of enterprise partners, whereas IS ﬂexibility is a foundational capability that indirectly contributes to value
creation in interﬁrm relationships by enabling greater IS integration with partner ﬁrms. We ﬁnd that two types
of relational assets are signiﬁcantly associated with business performance—knowledge sharing with channel
partners and process coupling with customers—pointing to underlying mechanisms that differentially leverage
resources of different types of channel partners. Implications for theory development and practice based on
these ﬁndings are proposed.
Key words: interorganizational information systems; competitive impacts of IS; strategic management of IT;

IS applications management; relational value; marketing channels

History: Robert Zmud, Senior Editor. This paper was received on August 15, 2005, and was with the authors

9 months for 3 revisions.

Introduction

1.
Researchers have proposed the relational view of
the ﬁrm as an extension of
the resource-based
view. The relational view suggests that, rather than
being fully housed internally, a ﬁrm’s critical re-
sources may also span its boundaries and may be
embedded in interﬁrm routines and processes (Dyer
and Singh 1998). Increasingly, IS applications are
being used to enable interorganizational relation-
ships (Hagel and Brown 2005, Schlueter Langdon
2003b). For example, ﬁrms such as Cisco and Dell
have created an extended enterprise network on
which they depend for their core value creation
(Häcki and Lighton 2001). This network consists

of a variety of external entities, including contract
manufacturers, suppliers, subcontractors, and resource
planners—all
through IS
applications.

linked to one another

Our objective is to understand the sources of busi-
ness value from information technology (IT) deployed
in the context of interorganizational relationships. In
particular, greater attention is now paid to IS applica-
tions as the layer in the IT infrastructure stack that is
in most direct contact with IT users within ﬁrms (Weill
and Vitale 1999). However, despite organizational
efforts toward IT standardization, signiﬁcant hetero-
geneity persists at the IS applications level because
of factors such as the rapid changes in the business

320

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

321

environment and products markets, as well as mergers
and acquisitions activity (Markus 2000). Although the
role of interorganizational ISs in supporting process
coordination in the extended enterprise is well under-
stood, recent studies have also begun to characterize
IS applications1 as enabling knowledge-based pro-
cess linkages with partners and thus value creation
(Malhotra et al. 2005, Sambamurthy et al. 2003). To
better characterize such value, we use the term rela-
tional value to refer to the economic rents generated
within a relationship by unique combinations of com-
plementary relation-speciﬁc resources that partnering
ﬁrms bring to bear (Dyer and Singh 1998). A ﬁrm’s
IS applications base provides a platform for this com-
bination of resources to occur and thus yields rela-
tional value (Bensaou and Venkatraman 1996). Given
that organizations today face increasing scrutiny with
respect to their IT investments, it is imperative to
establish if and which speciﬁc characteristics of the IS
applications contribute to better ﬁrm performance by
enhancing relational value.

An emerging body of IS literature suggests the need
to characterize IT investments in terms of IS capabil-
ities. The IS capability of an organization is its abil-
ity to combine IS components (resources) and direct
efforts toward achieving business objectives or capi-
talizing on business opportunities (Bharadwaj 2000).
For an organization aiming to leverage its IT assets
for managing its interﬁrm relationships, IS capabili-
ties have to be developed to address relational chal-
lenges such as those that arise in the face of business
ﬂuctuations (e.g., changes in business partners, inter-
ﬁrm transaction volumes, product or process adapta-
tions) or those that arise from the lack of integration
of information across business partners.

Studies have started to examine the relational value
of well-designed IS applications, but there tends to
be a selective focus on speciﬁc capabilities, such as
IT integration (Rai et al. 2006) or IT ﬂexibility (Byrd
and Turner 2001, Ray et al. 2005). On the one hand,
research on IS in supply chains has shown that IT
can lead to “electronic integration” (Hart and Estrin

1991). On the other hand, research also suggests that
IS integration is not unequivocally beneﬁcial (Gosain
et al. 2004). Highly partner-speciﬁc IT investments
face the risk of lock-in because they lose their value if
the relationship is terminated (Hart and Estrin 1991).
Therefore, apart from IS integration, particularly, in
business markets, we highlight the importance of the
ﬂexibility of IS applications.

Additionally, very few studies focus on more than
one type of interﬁrm relationship, be it with suppli-
ers, customers, or channel partners. In reality, ﬁrms
conﬁgure their relational networks to include all three
types of entities; and depending on the business con-
tingencies, they place differing emphases on generat-
ing relational value in these partnerships (Sa Vinhas
and Anderson 2005). This aspect limits the general-
izability of prior studies and thus limits the under-
standing of the role of IT in the extended enterprise.
So although linking the IS applications with a sin-
gle partner maybe beneﬁcial for an enterprise, more
realistically, extracting business value from IT invest-
ments in multiple business-to-business (B2B) relation-
ships appears to be signiﬁcantly more challenging.
Finally, as recommended in the IS literature (Barua
et al. 1995), we will identify appropriate mediating
mechanisms to understand the role of IS capabilities
on relational value. We pose the following research
questions: How do a ﬁrm’s IS application capabilities
enable relational value to be derived in conjunction with
its business partners? What mediating mechanisms lead to
the creation of relational value? Do these effects vary across
types of business partnerships?

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The
following section presents the theoretical develop-
ment with two subsections that describe the rela-
tional assets followed by the hypotheses linking these
dimensions to ﬁrm performance. The next subsec-
tion conceptualizes the capabilities of the IS applica-
tions salient to the extended enterprise and proposes
hypotheses relating them to the relational assets. Sec-
tion 3 describes the operationalization of constructs
and data collection. Section 4 presents the results of
our analysis, followed by the discussion and limita-
tions in §5 and implications in §6.

1 By the term IS application we mean a piece of software function-
ality that is developed and installed on speciﬁc IT platform(s) to
perform a set of one or more business tasks independently of other
surrounding IS components.

2. Theory Development
Because our study addresses value-creation activity
at the interﬁrm level, the mediating constructs of

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
322

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

interest to this study pertain to the relationship net-
work of enterprises. The term network is conceptually
broad, but we draw on a ﬁner conceptualization of the
relationship network (Lorenzoni and Lipparini 1996)
that proposes that organizations deliberately shape
and design a narrower set of tightly related partners.
The intensity of exchanges is greater and the con-
tent of exchanges within this select network is richer
and more varied than in other ties. In this study,
these select relationships are seen as constituting the
extended enterprise for a ﬁrm. Further, some enterprises
may focus more on generating value through their
customer relationships compared with their channel
partner relationships, whereas others may place more
emphasis on channel partner relationships (Sa Vinhas
and Anderson 2005). This deliberate conﬁguring of a
relationship network also occurs in the supply chain
of a ﬁrm as it maintains closer relationships with dis-
tributors and dealers of production inputs, compared
with manufacturers (Weiss and Kurland 1997). Fig-
ure 1 depicts our conceptual model, which includes
the two speciﬁc types of relational assets: interﬁrm
knowledge sharing and process coupling with chan-
nel partners and customers. Relational assets medi-
ate the link between capabilities of the IS applications
and business unit (BU). It is important to note that in
our theory development, we conceptualize relational
value not within a (single) dyad, but we aggregate
the relational value across a ﬁrm’s key relationships.
We do this for two reasons. One, aggregation across
multiple relationships allows us to better understand
the role of IS application capabilities, because IS appli-
cations are intended to help manage the vagaries of
multiple relationships. Further, an “aggregate view”
of relational value is also useful empirically in trac-
ing the link between relational assets and business

Figure 1

Conceptual Model

BU level

IS application
capabilities

Cospecialized
relational assets
Knowledge sharing
with customers and
channel partners

Process coupling
with customers and

channel partners

BU

performance

performance. Therefore, even though the concept of
relational value was initially proposed at a dyadic
level (Dyer and Singh 1998), we draw on this litera-
ture to support our theory development in the context
of the favored trading partners of a focal ﬁrm.

Our conceptual model (Figure 1) is proposed in the
context of operational relationships between ﬁrms,
their customers, and their channel partners. Dyer
and Singh’s (1998) framework of relational value
and its antecedents is general enough to apply to
a variety of interﬁrm relationships, including scien-
tiﬁc alliances (e.g., to share know-how) and marketing
alliances (e.g., for market expansion). In IS research,
these insights have been used to understand supply
chain relationships, for example (Malhotra et al. 2005).
Therefore, the speciﬁc context of our study allows us
to exclude strategic antecedents such as complemen-
tary resources (and capabilities), effective governance
of relationships, partner scarcity, resource indivisibil-
ity, and institutional environment. These antecedents
are a part of Dyer and Singh’s framework as well
but are more salient to other types of relationships
such as joint ventures and R&D collaborations. How-
ever, the relational assets in our framework closely
map to Dyer and Singh’s 1998 constructs: interﬁrm
knowledge sharing routines, relation-speciﬁc assets,
and interﬁrm asset interconnectedness. Therefore, our
framework with two mediating constructs of inter-
ﬁrm knowledge sharing and process coupling is con-
veniently sparse to be tested and at the same time is
theoretically grounded.

The unit of analysis in this study is a BU of a
multiunit enterprise performance—where a BU typi-
cally focuses on a single (or select) industry segments
or products of large diversiﬁed ﬁrms (per Mendel-
son and Pillai’s [1998] deﬁnition of a BU). By focus-
ing on a BU, we can focus on explaining variance
in performance that can be speciﬁcally attributed
to relational value generated through its relation-
ships and eliminate countervailing effects that are
due to aggregation across units at the corporate level
that can mask underlying effects. A similar approach
was taken in some earlier studies where one of the
purposes behind selecting the BU level of analysis
was to avoid the confounding effects of divergent
business strategies (Chan et al. 1997, Massetti and
Zmud 1996, Mendelson and Pillai 1998). Borrowing

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

323

from Venkatraman and Ramanujam (1986), we deﬁne
business performance as organizational effectiveness
of a BU in terms of its ﬁnancial and operational
performance relative to its competitors. In strategy
literature, performance is deﬁned depending on the
stakeholder. Therefore, our theory development is
based on the assumption that BUs are sufﬁciently
independent of the corporate managers to be able to
direct their IS investments and their interactions with
customers and channel partners and thus inﬂuence
their own performance.

2.1.

Interﬁrm Knowledge Sharing and
Firm Performance
Firms attach signiﬁcant
importance to knowledge
sharing with business partners because they derive
competitive advantage from knowledge resources
embedded in their key interﬁrm relationships (Loren-
zoni and Lipparini 1996). Depending on the business
domain of the relationship, the content of knowledge
exchanges varies. For instance, the major subcon-
tractors in the Toyota network intensely exchanged
knowledge about best practices and new produc-
tion methods that subsequently led to a quantum
improvement in the quality of Toyota products (Dyer
and Nobeoka 2000). Similarly, in the sales channel
context it is known that the knowledge gleaned from
the key sales channel partners (distributors, logistics
providers, retailers) contributes signiﬁcantly to ﬁrm
performance (Day 1994).

We deﬁne interﬁrm knowledge sharing as the ex-
tent to which an enterprise shares insights and know-
how about its business context with its partners.
Direct knowledge sharing with key customers will
help a ﬁrm better understand market needs. Knowl-
edge sharing with key channel partners will help the
ﬁrm ﬁne tune product offerings in conjunction with
other ﬁrms that can help serve these needs (Weiss and
Kurland 1997). Both these types of knowledge shar-
ing will also lead to other outcomes, such as better
responsiveness to customer needs, leading to greater
customer satisfaction and loyalty (Narus and Ander-
son 1996), resulting in gains in long-term ﬁnancial
performance. Hence, we propose that:

Hypothesis 1A (H1A). Knowledge sharing with cus-

tomers positively affects BU performance.

Hypothesis 1B (H1B). Knowledge sharing with chan-

nel partners positively affects BU performance.

2.2.

Interﬁrm Process Coupling and
Firm Performance

Process coupling refers to the intermeshing of activi-
ties of a focal ﬁrm with its business partners such that
processes spanning ﬁrm boundaries are operationally
integrated. It is an outcome of coordinated inter-
ﬁrm activities such that each ﬁrm works to accom-
plish its set of collective tasks (Van de Ven et al.
1976). This concept is similar to operational integra-
tion (Robicheaux and Coleman 1994), which is indi-
cated by joint actions and quicker assistance with
exception handling, whereas low operational
inte-
gration is characterized by one-shot exchanges with
reduced or no interaction or assistance after the trans-
action is complete.

Process coupling is derived in part from asset inter-
connectedness—where partners link their processes,
thus adding some degree of speciﬁcity to the relation-
ship or cospecialization in the degree to which a ﬁrm
invest in assets speciﬁc to its relationships with key
trading partners (Dyer and Singh 1998). A tightly cou-
pled system consists of interdependent elements so
joined that a disturbance in any one element requires
a readjustment in other elements (Orton and Weick
1990). As against a decoupled system, tight coupling
also requires a merging of the elements such that they
lose their distinctiveness. Drawing from this concep-
tualization, a tightly coupled (or coordinated) busi-
ness process between a seller and a customer is one
in which the seller responds to the idiosyncrasies in
the customer’s processes. Process coupling, however,
may or may not be associated with sharing of knowl-
edge that is more strategic in nature.

Past studies suggest that process coupling is chal-
lenging and takes signiﬁcant time and resources. If a
ﬁrm wants to terminate a given relationship and initi-
ate a relationship with another ﬁrm, it will again have
to restructure its interfaces with the new partner and
make the required organizational changes (Gosain
et al. 2004). Further, an initial level of relation-speciﬁc
investment makes additional relation-speciﬁc invest-
ment more viable. This is so especially in the key
B2B relationships of ﬁrms. Such relationships involve
a process of continuous enactment of routines and

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
324

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

thus result in experiential learning. Partners engage
in “congruent sense making” processes to result in an
incremental adaption of their processes (Ring and Van
de Ven 1994). It is this path-dependent nature of pro-
cess coupling that provides competitive advantage to
ﬁrms by precluding quick imitation and replication
by competitors (Dyer and Singh 1998).

Tightly coupled relationships become a source of
value to partners because they form the basis on
which their joint capabilities are exploited (Dyer and
Singh 1998). For example, highly coupled channel
partners can help a supplier launch and market
newer products swiftly in response to competitive
moves (Van Camp 2004), or they can provide a quick
response to customer problems (El Sawy and Bowles
1997). This is not to argue that coupling processes
tightly with their partners is unequivocally beneﬁ-
cial to ﬁrms, because that may constrain them oper-
ationally in executing their strategic plans (Gosain
et al. 2004). However, overall, the importance of pro-
cess coupling as a cospecialized relational asset is evi-
dent from past instances of failures of collaborative
agreements, attributed to coordination or communica-
tion breakdowns at organizational boundaries (Tucker
2004).

In sales channel relationships, process coupling
can take the form of channel partners setting aside
inventory to satisfy preferred customers or sellers
adjusting their production schedule to accommo-
date the demand from preferred channel partners
and customers, instant rerouting of shipments, rapid
repricing of product bundles to favor the customers,
etc. Such adaptations take place seamlessly and with-
out delay, as in the case of Enterprise Rent-A-Car’s
implementation of an automated rental management
system (ARMS) (Premkumar et al. 2004). This has
tangibly increased Enterprise’s market share in the
B2B insurance segment. Hence, we propose that:

Hypothesis 2A (H2A). Process coupling with cus-

tomers positively affects BU performance.

Hypothesis 2B (H2B). Process coupling with channel

partners positively affects BU performance.

IS Application Capabilities

2.3.
As IT increasingly enables interﬁrm relationships, IS
application capabilities are an obvious set of orga-
nizational variables that need to be managed. The

IS literature suggests that the outcomes of myriad
IS management processes—such as standardization
initiatives (Dewan et al. 1995), enterprise software
implementations (Markus 2000), and incremental IS
development and maintenance—can be expressed in
terms of the overall IS application capability con-
structs (Sambamurthy et al. 2003, Schlueter Lang-
don 2006), such as the reach-range framework (Keen
1991), interface integration in the EDI context (Tru-
man 2000), or IT infrastructure integration (Rai et al.
2006).

In literature the two capabilities of IS integration
and IS ﬂexibility can be viewed as representing efﬁ-
ciency and ﬂexibility, which conceptually are consid-
ered as at odds with each other (Adler et al. 1999).
This mirrors the paradox between the need for adapt-
ability in interﬁrm links versus the need to maintain
rich integration (Gosain et al. 2004). Therefore, consid-
ering both these constructs in our model is essential
if we want to test our intuition that IS ﬂexibility and
IS integration together balance an organization’s need
to maintain adaptable electronic links with multiple
business partners and at the same time maintain suf-
ﬁcient richness in the electronic links so as to support
creation of relational assets.

IS Integration

2.4.
We deﬁne IS integration as the extent to which the
IS applications of a focal ﬁrm work as a functional
whole in conjunction with the IS applications of its
business partners. Whereas other prior frameworks
(Broadbent et al. 1999) measure the capability of the
enterprisewide infrastructure to internally integrate
diverse IS components, we restrict our notion of IS
integration to the interﬁrm interface. Also, integra-
tion is assessed in functional terms without reference
to governance outcomes such as vertical or business
integration (Zaheer and Venkatraman 1994). Further,
we refer to functional IS integration at higher lev-
els (the functional application level), which subsumes
integration at the lower levels of the technology stack
(such as network or hardware). Finally, there are mul-
tiple approaches with which IS integration may be
achieved internally by ﬁrms (Markus 2000). The same
approaches can be used for external IS integration
with suppliers, customers, and other business part-
ners. Thus, our deﬁnition of IS integration refers to

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

325

the aggregate result of a combination of any of these
technological approaches, including not just techni-
cal compatibility of software applications at the code
level but also IT skills that render a higher degree
of IS integration at the functional levels. Unlike in
the earlier decades, when external integration was
achieved using primarily EDI technology, nowadays
a large number of IT components support external IS
integration and offer a variety of functional features
(Straub and Watson 2001).

A high level of IS integration can be character-
ized by data, once captured by a ﬁrm, being imme-
diately accessible by its partners. This involves not
just syntactic integration between the databases or
implementing a single enterprisewide database, but it
also requires integration at the semantic level as well
(Yang and Papazoglou 2000). It is only when such
semantic integration exists that interorganizational IS
applications can be integrated to process orders, col-
laboratively forecast sales, project earnings, or share
customer data.

IS integration with customer enterprises allows a
focal enterprise’s business processes that deliver value
to customers to be intermeshed with consumption
processes at the customer end. This can be done in
a variety of ways, including joint forecasting, buffer-
ing inventories for customers, managing logistics,
and transportation (Rai et al. 2006). For instance, the
American Hospital Supply Corporation’s case (Short
and Venkatraman 1992) illustrates how Baxter’s hos-
pital ordering system was used to respond to the
needs of customers and improve their internal sup-
plies management. The higher level of IS integration,
achieved by the supplier (Baxter), resulted in higher
efﬁciency of ordering, tracking, and managing sup-
plies; in addition, it also helped customers eventually
eliminate many manual steps. Hence, we expect,

Hypothesis 3A (H3A). IS integration positively affects

process coupling with customers.

Hypothesis 3B (H3B). IS integration positively affects

process coupling with channel partners.

The knowledge-based view of the ﬁrm emphasizes
that the ability of organizations to create cross-func-
tional and interﬁrm capabilities helps in knowledge
integration (Grant 1996). A high level of IS integration
across ﬁrms forms the basis of a critical organizational
capability—that of acquiring, transforming, mixing,

and matching knowledge objects across ﬁrms and
business partners. The impact of IS integration on
knowledge creation is well known at the ﬁrm level.
In a qualitative study that explores the impact of inte-
grated systems on cross-functional knowledge ﬂows,
D’Adderio (2003) views the activity of integrating IS
as essentially promoting communication and coordi-
nation of viewpoints by imposing similar product and
process representations throughout the organization
or by enhancing shared meanings. Recent interﬁrm-
level
literature suggests why IS integration helps
enhance knowledge sharing, and not just to auto-
mate business activities. In the context of a supply
chain, Malhotra et al. (2005) describe how integration
through standardized interfaces reduces the effort
required to process valuable information from supply
chain partners. IS applications connecting ﬁrms not
only automate repetitive, supply chain-related tasks in
real time but also provide “latitude to focus on richer,
higher value-adding information exchange” (p. 10).
Similarly, using the theoretical anchors of knowledge
and insights, Christaanse and Venkatraman (2002)
study how American Airlines’ usage of its electronic
reservation system enabled it to exploit the expertise
of their travel agents. We propose that by making
available large quantities of high-quality and reliable
information through IS integration, it becomes easier
for ﬁrms to harness the resources of their partners or
customers and generate richer insights about the mar-
ket. Hence:

Hypothesis 4A (H4A). IS integration positively affects

knowledge sharing with customers.

Hypothesis 4B (H4B). IS integration positively affects

knowledge sharing with channel partners.

IS Flexibility

2.5.
Flexibility connotes the ability of an organization to
incur relatively small penalties for departure from
an optimal conﬁguration of assets (Carlsson 1989).
Depending on which functional area they are de-
ployed for, ﬂexible assets enable an organization
to withstand ﬂuctuations in its customer demand,
changes in products or manufacturing processes, or
changes in partners. In supply chains, ﬂexible busi-
ness processes may render a ﬁrm relatively immune
to changes in partners (Gosain et al. 2004). We view
such ﬂexibility in terms of changing products or

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
326

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

partners as dimensions of organizational ﬂexibility,
deﬁned as “the ease with which organizations’ struc-
tures and processes can be changed” (Huber and
McDaniel 1986, p. 583). Just as organizational ﬂexi-
bility is of strategic importance, our interest lies in
examining the link between ﬂexibility of IS applica-
tions and the (relational) value derived from interﬁrm
relationships.

Flexibility has often been recognized as an impor-
tant aspect of how IS applications are conﬁgured. In
the IS literature, an enterprise possessing ﬂexible IS
applications lowers its IT-related costs when its prod-
ucts, environment, or partners change. Thus, in our
paper, IS ﬂexibility refers to the ability to quickly and
economically adapt the IS applications to changing
business requirements (Kumar 2004, Schlueter Lang-
don 2006).

However, the value of IS ﬂexibility to organiza-
tions depends on the type of business requirements
that can emerge either at the operational level or at
the tactical or strategic level. For example, if the abil-
ity to switch business partners quickly is important,
then IS ﬂexibility generates business value by lower-
ing the costs of switching business partners (Gosain
et al. 2004); if the ability to scale up the volume of
transactions with partners or to adapt the interﬁrm
business processes is important, then IS ﬂexibility can
generate value by enabling such local adjustments in
the IT assets. This results in better alignment of IT
applications across partners. This notion of ﬂexibil-
ity is echoed by Duncan (1995), who notes that “the
ideally ﬂexible infrastructure would be one that was
designed to evolve, itself, with emerging technologies
and [that] would support the continuous redesign of
business and related IS processes” (1995, p. 44). We
borrow the deﬁnition of IS ﬂexibility proposed by
Nelson and Ghods (1998) as “the ability of the IT
assets to adapt to both incremental and revolution-
ary changes in the business or business process with
minimal penalty to current time, effort, cost, or per-
formance” (p. 233).

Several initiatives led by internal IT organizations
underlie the ﬂexibility of IS applications. For example,
selection of standardized lower-level IT infrastructure
components such as operating systems, networking
components, or IT architectures (Allen and Boynton
1991, Dietrich et al. 2007) can help maintain ﬂexibility

of IS applications. These are labeled as the structural
elements of the IS ﬂexibility that pertain to the design
and organization of the artifacts constituting IT in
organizations (Nelson and Ghods 1998). Apart from
such structural elements, IS ﬂexibility is also enabled
by the processes managed by the internal IT organiza-
tion, such as expertise creation through training of IT
staff or creation of governance standards that pertain
to the rate of response of IT support activities (Nelson
and Ghods 1998).

Despite the importance of IS ﬂexibility to business
operations, we argue that ﬂexibility per se does not
directly lead to the creation of relational assets; rather
it facilitates integration—making IS applications spe-
ciﬁc to each partner. Such incremental change and
improvement, also termed as adaptation, of IT appli-
cations for speciﬁc partners is important because it is
the relationship-speciﬁc nature of assets that leads to
relational value for partnering ﬁrms (Dyer and Singh
1998). That is, we propose that the link from IS ﬂexi-
bility to relational assets is mediated by IS integration
with customer and channel partners.

However, just because IS ﬂexibility can help achieve
higher IS integration at the application level does not
mean that partner organizations will attempt to main-
tain these linkages. For this to happen, the organiza-
tions have to be willing to link their IS applications
electronically. We argue that such incentives are cre-
ated because ﬂexible IS applications lower the risk to
a focal ﬁrm that it will be locked into an unproﬁtable
relationship because of partner-speciﬁc IT deploy-
ments. In transaction costs literature the risk that
partner-speciﬁc investments pose to organizations is
that its value will be lost once the relationship is ter-
minated (Williamson et al. 1996). This renders ﬁrms
vulnerable to opportunism by their partners. There-
fore, we propose that higher IS ﬂexibility increases
not only the ability, but also the willingness of orga-
nizations to integrate the applications more tightly.
Speciﬁcally,

Hypothesis 5A (H5A). IS ﬂexibility positively affects

IS integration with customers.

Hypothesis 5B (H5B). IS ﬂexibility positively affects

IS integration with channel partners.

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

327

2.6. Control Variables
We also control for market orientation and ﬁrm size
in explaining business unit performance.

2.6.1. Market Orientation. Past

literature sug-
gests that market-oriented ﬁrms can be expected to
perform better than other ﬁrms (Kohli and Jaworski
1990). It is important to control for market orientation
in the sales channel context because organizations dif-
fer in their tendency to derive value from their selling
activities. For example, some ﬁrms may place more
emphasis on quality improvements and cost cutting
in their supply chains than on generating revenues
from their sales channels. Market orientation is the
organizationwide generation of market intelligence
pertaining to current and future customer needs, dis-
semination of the intelligence across departments, and
organizationwide responsiveness to it (Santos and
Eisenhardt 2004). A consistent view is that market ori-
entation is a “state of mind” of the organization or its
philosophy of business management, or, alternately,
it is recognition of the importance of customer focus
and intelligence gathering. A highly market-oriented
organization is likely to have a signiﬁcant stock of
market intelligence and to recognize the importance
of reaching and retaining customers, either directly or
indirectly through channel partners.

2.6.2. Firm Size. Larger ﬁrms have a higher level
of resources that can lead to differences in rela-
tive performance. Multi-unit ﬁrms with signiﬁcantly
larger revenues have considerable clout to coerce their
partners in sharing knowledge; they also have signif-
icant slack to outperform competitors.

Figure 2 illustrates the research model.

Figure 2

Research Model

IS application capabilities

IS integration with

customers

H5A

IS flexibility

H5B

IS integration with
channel partners

H3B

H4B

H4A

Knowledge sharing

with customers

H3A

Process coupling with

customers

Process coupling with

channel partners

H1A

H2A

H2B

BU

performance

Knowledge sharing with

channel partners

H1B

3. Research Design
A questionnaire was developed for a single-respon-
dent, cross-sectional survey-based data-collection ef-
fort with the BU as the level of analysis. Our research
employs an embedded design (Phillips and Bagozzi
1986) in which the BU is seen as embedded in a net-
work of relationships that impact its performance.
Though a multiple-respondent,
longitudinal study
would provide a stronger basis to claim our hypoth-
esized effects, a single-respondent, cross-sectional de-
sign was chosen to maintain an acceptable response
rate.

B2B sales executives were targeted for answering
our survey because we framed our research model
in the sales channel context. Speciﬁcally, the selected
respondents were mid-level managers; they are the
ones who are most likely to be aware of tactical
as well as operational details. This follows the key
informant approach, where the individual within the
organization who is most knowledgeable about the
aspects of the topic is selected (Sabherwal and Chan
2001, Wall et al. 2004). Because our model addresses
the interﬁrm level, and in the marketing context busi-
ness partners can be either customers or channel part-
ners, we used two sets of questions, with one set
referring to the channel partnerships and the other
referring to the customer relationships. To ensure that
a single respondent could provide accurate answers
to all questions, we kept the questions as broad as
possible, and the IT-related constructs were elicited
from a functional rather than a technical perspective.
Those who did not have sufﬁcient knowledge about
both types of relationship and the BU’s IS applications
were asked to leave the questionnaire incomplete and
were then excluded from further analysis. A pretest
of our survey instrument was carried out with prac-
titioners and doctoral students.

3.1. Measures
Most of the scales were adapted from prior liter-
ature. For measuring all constructs (except for IS
ﬂexibility, market orientation, and performance), the
respondents were asked to keep in mind only those
customers (channel partners) most important to their
BUs. This helped avoid respondents’ “averaging”
their responses across all partners (see Table 1 for
scales). Further, considering that the target respon-
dents were from the high-tech and ﬁnancial services-

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
328

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

Table 1

Construct Operationalization

Construct name
Abbreviation
Composite reliability
Type of scale

(cid:1)1 = Strongly disagree, 2 = Somewhat disagree, 3 = Neutral, 4 = Somewhat agree, 5 = Strongly agree(cid:2)

[VARIABLE NAME] (Item loadings in PLS output)

Indicators

Over the past 3 years, our BU’s ﬁnancial performance has exceeded our competitors’. [PERFORM1] (0.9051)
The past 3 years have been more proﬁtable than our competitors’. [PERFORM2] (0.9292)
Over the past 3 years, our BU’s sales growth has exceeded our competitors’. [PERFORM3] (0.7973)

Business unit
performance (PERFORM)
0.910
Reﬂective
Market orientation
(MORT)
0.864
Reﬂective
Please indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements describing your BU’s ties with its large accounts and channel

Business strategies are driven by the goal of increasing customer value. [MORT1] (0.9351)
We emphasize “putting customers ﬁrst” throughout our BU. [MORT2] (0.7178)
Our philosophy of doing business is driven by the need of putting customers ﬁrst. [MORT3] (0.8107)

partners only. Examples can include remote maintenance, systems monitoring, etc.

Process coupling with

customers
(PROCCST)
0.865
Reﬂective

Process coupling with

channel partners

(PROCCP)
0.90
Reﬂective

Our way of doing business is closely linked with our customers’. [PROCCST1] (0.7977)
The business procedures and routines of our business unit are highly coupled with the ones of our customers.

[PROCCST2] (0.8571)

Some of our operations are closely connected with the ones of our customers. [PROCCST3] (0.8286)
To operate efﬁciently, we rely on procedures and routines of our customers. [PROCCST4] (0.6469)
Dropped item: To facilitate operations, our BU’s business procedures and routines are linked with the ones of

our customers.

To facilitate operations, our BU’s business procedures and routines are linked with the ones of our channel partners.

[PROCCP1] (0.81111)

Our way of doing business is closely linked with our channel partners. [PROCCP2] (0.8644)
The business procedures and routines of our business unit are highly coupled with the ones of our channel partners.

[PROCCP3] (0.8108)

Some of our operations are closely connected with the ones of our channel partners. [PROCCP4] (0.7413)
To operate efﬁciently, we rely on procedures and routines of our channel partners. [PROCCP5] (0.7774)

Questions below pertain to your BU and its relationships with channel partners and customers. Please indicate the extent to which you

agree or disagree with the following statements about your largest channel partners and large accounts.

Knowledge sharing with
customers (KSCST)

0.863
Reﬂective
Knowledge sharing with

channel partners

We frequently share knowledge about our business environment (e.g., other business relationships) with our customers.

[KSCST1] (0.7999)

Knowledge about all of our channel partners, competitors, etc., is shared with our other customers. [KSCST2] (0.8972)
Business insights are exchanged between us and our other customers. [KSCST3] (0.7672)
We frequently share knowledge about our business environment (e.g., other business relationships) with our channel

partners. [KSCP1] (0.8811)

Knowledge about all of our channel partners, competitors, etc., is shared with our other channel partners.

(KSCP)
0.912
Reﬂective
Because the questions in this section pertain to your IS capabilities, we welcome the inputs of your IS personnel in answering this section. Please indicate the

Business insights are exchanged between us and our other channel partners. [KSCP3] (0.8547)

[KSCP2] (0.9041)

extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements: In terms of channel partners and customers, only consider your largest ones.

IS integration with

customers (INTCST)

0.797
Reﬂective

IS integration with
channel partners

(INTCP)
0.897
Reﬂective

Flexibility
(FLEX)
0.932
Reﬂective

Data are entered only once to be retrieved by most applications of our customers. [INTCST1] (0.6181)
We can easily share our data with our customers. [INTCST2] (0.7737)
We have successfully integrated most of our software applications with the ones of our customers. [INTCST3] (0.8572)
Dropped items: (i) Most of our software applications work seamlessly across our customer. (ii) Software applications on

multiple machines of multiple vendors are interoperable with each other across our customers.

Data are entered only once to be retrieved by most applications of our channel partners. [INTCP1] (0.7433)
We can easily share our data with our channel partners. [INTCP2] (0.7529)
We have successfully integrated most of our software applications with the ones of our channel partners [INTCP3] (0.8367)
Most of our software applications work seamlessly across our channel partners [INTCP4] (0.8631)
Software applications on multiple machines of multiple vendors are interoperable with each other across our channel

partners [INTCP5] (0.7829)

The manner in which the components of our information systems are organized and integrated allows for rapid changes.

[FLEX1] (0.8607)

Our information systems are highly scalable. [FLEX2] (0.8474)
Our information system is designed to support new business relationships easily. [FLEX3] (0.8922)
Our information systems are designed to accommodate changes in business requirements quickly. [FLEX4] (0.9161)

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

329

related sectors, we expected their actual business
context to be highly diverse, such that creating a
formative scale grounded in their actual decision con-
text was not possible. Our extensive review of liter-
ature did not lead to any past scale suitable for our
purposes. Therefore, we created reﬂective scales that
leave room for the respondents to interpret the items
in their speciﬁc context before responding. During
pretests and face-to-face interviews with profession-
als, these scales were further reﬁned prior to ﬁnalizing
the survey instrument.

3.1.1. Business Performance (PERFORM). We re-
fer to business performance in terms of the overall
ﬁnancial performance relative to competitors. Because
of a diversity of industries in our sample, there is no
single objective measure comparable across the en-
tire sample. Perceptual measures afford comparability
across ﬁrms (during data analysis) and accordingly
can be considered appropriate proxies for objective
measures (Chan et al. 1997, Grewal and Tanushaj
2001, Homburg and Pﬂesser 2000, Matsuno et al.
2002). To address the sales channel context of this
study, we included items that captured the extent to
which a respondent’s BU performed better than its
competitors in terms of sales growth, proﬁts, over-
all ﬁnancial performance, company reputation, and
return on investment. This initial set of ﬁve items was
adapted from a survey of prior studies (Hansen 2002,
Tsai 2002).

3.1.2. Knowledge Sharing (KSCST and KSCP).
Knowledge sharing entails sharing insights and
understanding of the business context with busi-
ness partners. Scales for knowledge-related constructs
need to be very speciﬁc to the context. A number
of prior studies helped us to develop the ﬁve-item
reﬂective scale. Examples scales are interunit knowl-
edge sharing (Dyer 1996), degree of information shar-
ing (Monczka et al. 1998), and information sharing
(Cannon and Perreault 1999, Robicheaux and Coleman
1994). However, to avoid semantic overlap with the
scale items for IS integration, the items for the knowl-
edge sharing were worded so as to capture the intelli-
gence aspect of the exchange rather than exchange of
raw sales data.

3.1.3. Process Coupling (PROCCST and PRO-
CCP). A reﬂective scale was developed from prior lit-
erature on operational-integration in the sales channel

context (Hasselbring 2000, Yang and Papazoglou 2000).
The items were developed keeping in mind the concep-
tual difference between knowledge sharing and process
coupling. Care was taken not to word the scale exclu-
sively in terms of information-based coordination but
in terms of operational procedures and routines.

3.1.4.

IS Integration (INTCST and INTCP). Five
reﬂective scale items were initially identiﬁed based
on the literature on workﬂow and Internet-based
applications that stresses interoperability and from
Truman’s (2000) EDI-related scale on internal integra-
tion. The dimensions most referred to in the current
literature on integration are application and data inte-
gration (Markus 2000), which are captured by our
measures. The scale items essentially focus on the
seamlessness with which data and applications inter-
operate across BU boundaries and channel partners
or customers. It is to be noted that rather than captur-
ing the list of various technological solutions imple-
mented by organizations to integrate their BUs (e.g.,
ERP, EAI, data warehousing), we used outcome-based
measures to capture the degree of IS integration.

3.1.5.

IS Flexibility (FLEX). A four-item reﬂec-
tive scale was constructed that captures the extent to
which the IS applications can be adapted quickly to
the changes in business requirements, including part-
nerships and volume of business. The items broadly
cover three aspects of ﬂexibility: operational, tactical,
and strategic. The operational dimension pertains to
short-run business requirements, tactical dimension
refers to scalability, and strategic dimension refers to
changing products or relationships (Carlsson 1989).

Market orientation was operationalized using a
reﬂective scale based on past research (Kohli and
Jaworski 1990, Slater and Narver 1995). The high-
level construct of market orientation has three dimen-
sions: customer focus, competitor focus, and inter-
functional coordination. Because our objective is to
use this construct as a control variable, and because
customer orientation is the “heart of market orienta-
tion” (Slater and Narver 1994), two of our scale items
tap the customer dimension. The third item taps the
strategic effort that a ﬁrm exerts to satisfy its cus-
tomers’ needs. We excluded the intelligence-gathering
dimension from this scale so as not to overlap with
the knowledge-sharing construct. The scale items
were therefore created solely to measure the overall

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
330

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

importance a ﬁrm attaches to its selling goals. Firm
size was operationalized in terms of revenue at the
corporate level.

3.2. Data Collection
Data collection for this study was done in three waves
and targeted BUs of enterprises mainly in the high-
tech (computing) and the ﬁnancial services sector.
A sample was drawn from three different sources:
(i) a respondent database maintained by an academic
research center, (ii) a database of member companies
of the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Associa-
tion (CTIA), and (iii) a database maintained by a mar-
ket research agency. The sample excluded companies
whose revenue ﬁgures were very small (less than $15
million). Most respondents varied in their designa-
tions, and included director of marketing, vice pres-
ident of marketing, sales executives, sales managers,
and new product development manager. One of the
coauthors spoke brieﬂy to each of them before seek-
ing their response to the questionnaire. We found that
being users of various types of marketing and sales
ISs, most respondents were knowledgeable about
the customer and channel partner-related IS appli-
cations and data-level integration issues. Those who
denied being knowledgeable were not administered
the questionnaire or directed the questionnaire to oth-
ers within their departments. Thirty-four respondents
who were contacted denied being knowledgeable and
did not have a colleague respond to the survey (13, 15,
and 6, respectively, for each of the three data sources
mentioned earlier, that is, the academic research cen-
tre, CTIA member list, and market research agency).
There were 18 missing values in the data set, which
is less than 0.5% of the total number of values. We
performed Little’s MCAR test (Little and Rubin 1987)
and found that these values were missing completely
at random (p > 0(cid:3)05). Therefore, a multiple imputation
method was applied (Hair et al. 1998) to create a com-
plete data set of 63 observations. The ﬁnal sample has
11, 41, and 11 distinct companies each from the three
waves of data collection, for a total of 63 responses.
The data collection was complete within four months
and the three waves overlapped in time. The response
rate was 27%, 18%, and 24% for each wave. There
were 46 respondents in the high-tech computing sec-
tor and 17 in the ﬁnancial services-related sector. The
overall response rate was 23%.

The average number of key channel partners was
33 (standard deviation, −161) and the average num-
ber of key customer accounts was 580 (standard devi-
ation, −3(cid:4)369). The sales revenues for the enterprises
to which the BUs belonged were acquired from sec-
ondary sources. Though some respondents provided
BU-level revenues, others declined for conﬁdential-
ity reasons. For many of these enterprises, BU-level
ﬁnancial results are not reported. Fifty percent of the
multiunit organizations in our sample had revenue of
at least US$764 million, the minimum revenue was
US$19 million, and the highest revenue was US$31
billion. About 95% of the responses were collected
in the ﬁrst attempt and the rest in the second call-
back. Further, the callbacks indicated that nonrespon-
dents did not participate largely because of the lack
of time. These reasons are unrelated to the survey
variables and thus reduce the possibility of nonre-
sponse bias (Colombo 2000). To test for nonresponse
bias, ANOVA and t-tests indicated absence of such
bias (p = 0(cid:3)42 for sales revenue and 0.64 for employee
size). ANOVA tests to check for differences across
subsamples (data collection waves) yielded no signif-
icant differences. Tests for differences in means again
revealed no signiﬁcant difference in revenue or sur-
vey response items across the subsamples. The results
of the PLS structural model also remain unchanged
after including two dummy variables in the model to
account for the subsamples.

We also analyzed the data for halo effects using
Harmon’s one-factor test (Harmon 1967). Accord-
ingly, a principal components analysis of all con-
structs in our model yielded 11 factors that had
eigenvalues greater than 1.0 and accounted for 80% of
the total variance, with no single factor accounting for
more than 11.1% of the variance. This suggests that
a signiﬁcant level of common method bias does not
appear to be present (Podsakoff and Organ 1986). To
further eliminate the confounding effects of the com-
mon factor, we tested the “method” model, which did
not yield any evidence of common method bias (see
Appendix B in the online version).2

2 An online supplement to this paper is available on the Information
Systems Research website (http://isr.pubs.informs.org/ecompanion.
html).

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

331

Figure 3

PLS Analysis

KSCST

0.226

INTCUST

0.476***

0.241

0.491***

0.325***

MORT

0.297***

FLEX

PROCCST

0.106

PROCCP

0.181

0.254**

PERFORM

0.262

0.479***

INTCP

0.23

0.425***

0.523***

Not significant

***p<0.01
**p<0.05
*p<0.1

Note. R-square values are inside the circles.

0.283*

0.274

KSCP

REV

4. Results
The research model was tested using partial least
squares (PLSGraph version 3.0) (Chin 1998b) because
of the lower requirement for sample size, unlike in
other structual equation modeling (SEM) techniques
such as LISREL. Heuristics suggest that the sample
size is adequate for our data analysis. For PLS the
required sample size should be 10 times the max-
imum number of paths leading into any one con-
struct in the structural equation model (Tabachnick
and Fidell 1989). For our model, a sample size greater
than 60 (6 incoming paths × 10) affords sufﬁcient
power, considering that a maximum of six constructs
are hypothesized to lead to PERFORM (see Figure 3).

4.1. Measurement Model
The mean, range, and standard deviation for each
construct are reported in Table 2. Path loadings for all
items are signiﬁcant at 1% level. For multi-item reﬂec-
tive constructs, the composite reliability estimates are
above 0.8 for all constructs (Table 1), indicating good

internal consistency (Fornell and Larcker 1981). The
constructs were also assessed for reliability using a
standardized Cronbach’s alpha, which is above 0.75
for all constructs (Cronbach 1971). Preliminary checks
of data such as the normal Q-Q plot of construct
scores do not indicate any deviation from a nor-
mal distribution. The results from the PLS analysis
also support the convergent and discriminant valid-
ity of our constructs (Table 2).3 Discriminant validity
is established when the square root of the average
variance extracted (AVE) by each construct is larger

3 Because the correlation between KSCP and KSCST is 0.609, addi-
tional steps were taken to check whether multicollinearity is sup-
pressing the signiﬁcance of path estimate of KSCST. Considering
that the PLS algorithm is a series of iterated multiple regressions
(Chin 1998b), we used the latent variable scores from PLSGraph to
run a multiple regression with PERFORM as the dependent vari-
able and the six constructs in Figure 3 (those loading on PERFORM)
as the independent variables. We ﬁnd that the highest variance
inﬂation factor (Hair et al. 1998) is 2.23, which is signiﬁcantly less
than the threshold of 10 normally considered the point beyond
which multicollinearity is a concern.

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
332

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

Table 2

Construct Means, Standard Deviations, and Interconstruct Correlations (cid:1)N = 63(cid:2)

1 PERFORM
2 KSCST
3 KSCP
4 PROCCST
5 PROCCP
6 INTCST
7 INTCP
8 FLEX
9 MORT
10 REV

Mean

3(cid:5)67
3(cid:5)40
3(cid:5)45
3(cid:5)79
3(cid:5)47
3(cid:5)07
2(cid:5)93
3(cid:5)45
4(cid:5)08
6(cid:5)54

Std.

1(cid:5)02
0(cid:5)91
0(cid:5)92
1(cid:5)15
0(cid:5)87
0(cid:5)95
0(cid:5)92
1(cid:5)04
0(cid:5)90
2(cid:5)20

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

0(cid:5)879
0(cid:5)089
0(cid:5)294
0(cid:5)307
0(cid:5)271
0(cid:5)217
0(cid:5)285
0(cid:5)272
0(cid:5)419
−0(cid:5)049

0(cid:5)823
0(cid:5)609
0(cid:5)381
0(cid:5)149
0(cid:5)476
0(cid:5)378
0(cid:5)127
0(cid:5)222
−0(cid:5)111

0(cid:5)880
0(cid:5)229
0(cid:5)428
0(cid:5)347
0(cid:5)523
0(cid:5)065
0(cid:5)357
−0(cid:5)118

0(cid:5)787
0(cid:5)474
0(cid:5)325
0(cid:5)182
0(cid:5)190
0(cid:5)323
0(cid:5)071

0(cid:5)802
0(cid:5)198
0(cid:5)425
−0(cid:5)078
0(cid:5)302
0(cid:5)092

0(cid:5)756
0(cid:5)698
0(cid:5)491
0(cid:5)211
−0(cid:5)279

0(cid:5)797
0(cid:5)479
0(cid:5)387
−0(cid:5)329

0(cid:5)880
0(cid:5)297
−0(cid:5)157

0(cid:5)826
0(cid:5)002

1(cid:5)00

Note. Square root of AVE is shown along the diagonal.

than the interconstruct correlations (Chin 1998a). This
is also ascertained by comparing the correlations of
each indicator variable with its own construct (i.e.,
path loading) and with its correlations with other con-
structs (Table 3, Appendix A in the online version).
We note that all the cross-loadings for the individual
construct items are less than construct-speciﬁc load-
ings, which supports the convergent and discriminant
validity of our main constructs.

4.2. Structural Model
To assess the signiﬁcance of the path coefﬁcients in
the structural model, PLSGraph was used to generate
200 samples using a bootstrapping technique (Chin
1998b). The full model has an R2 of 26.2% for the
business performance construct. R2 for the mediating
constructs ranges from 10.6% (PROCCST) to 27.4%
(KSCP) (see Figure 3).

The results indicate broad support for most of the
hypothesized effects in the research model. Knowl-
edge sharing with channel partners and process cou-
pling with customers is found to contribute to ﬁrm
performance (H1B and H2A). However, process cou-
pling with channel partners is not found to be signiﬁ-
cantly linked to performance (H2B is not supported),
and knowledge sharing with customers is also not
found to be signiﬁcant (H1A). Of the two dimen-
sions of the IS application capability, we ﬁnd that IS
integration is positively associated with process cou-
pling and knowledge sharing in the customer as well
as channel partner relationships (H3A, H3B, H4A,
H4B). Both the hypothesized effects of IS ﬂexibility
are supported. Thus, IS ﬂexibility is positively asso-
ciated with IS integration with customers (H5A) and

channel partners (H5B). Finally, the control variable,
market orientation, is signiﬁcant, thus validating its
importance as indicated in the prior literature; orga-
nizational size is not signiﬁcant. The R-square of the
entire model excluding market orientation is 19.2%.
The results for the structural model did not differ
when a dummy variable representing the industry
was included in the model.4

The mediating effects of knowledge sharing and
process coupling were tested using two different pro-
cedures. As recommended by Baron and Kenny (1986),
ﬁrst, a sparser model was tested that included only
customer-related constructs (PROCCST and KSCST)
and paths only between INTCST and PERFORM.
The coefﬁcient of INTCST is signiﬁcant and positive.
When the paths between KSCST and PROCCST with
PERFORM are also included, then the direct link
between INTCST and PERFORM becomes nonsignif-
icant, whereas the link between PROCCST becomes
signiﬁcant. Similar analysis was done for the other
two constructs, INTCP and FLEX. We found sup-
port for full mediation of IS integration constructs;
i.e., INTCP and INTCST are completely mediated
by knowledge sharing and process coupling. How-
ever, we ﬁnd that FLEX is only partially mediated—
the path coefﬁcient between FLEX and PERFORM is
positive and signiﬁcant in the full model. Follow-
ing Rai et al. (2006), we also compared the hypoth-
esized model with competing models that propose
partial mediation of IS integration and IS ﬂexibility.

4 Post hoc analysis also yielded similar estimates (and nonsignif-
icance) for KSCST and PROCCP when the structural model ex-
cluded KSCP and PROCCST in turn.

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

333

For this, we computed pseudo F statistics for each
of the three competing models formulated by adding
a direct
link between IS capabilities and perfor-
mance (INTCST → PERFORM, INTCP → PERFORM,
FLEX → PERFORM) in the hypothesized model. The
pseudo F statistics are computed in a way similar to
that for testing the signiﬁcance of moderating effects
(Carte and Russell 2003).5 The pseudo F statistics
(F (cid:8)1(cid:4)55(cid:9)(cid:9) are 1.84, 0.755, and 0.45, all of which are
not signiﬁcant at p = 0(cid:3)1 level. This supports full
mediation of IS capabilities by the two constructs,
knowledge sharing with channel partners, and pro-
cess coupling with customers.

5. Discussion
The ﬁndings yield a rich set of insights. First, our
expectation that IS integration yields a higher-order
beneﬁt by providing a substrate for richer informa-
tion exchange and greater process coupling are con-
ﬁrmed. This is because on the one hand integrated
ISs strengthen the information processing capacity
at the interorganizational level (Rai et al. 2006) and
thus facilitates coordination of interﬁrm business pro-
cesses. Tight coordination is possible because infor-
mation is available in real time and in an interpretable
format throughout the supply chain, spanning part-
nering ﬁrms. On the other hand,
integrated data
formats and applications facilitate communication of
viewpoints by imposing similar product or process
representations (D’Adderio 2003, Tenkasi and Boland
1996). Thus, IS integration also creates a second-order
beneﬁt by establishing a common semantic platform
that facilitates reinterpretation of information from
diverse sources and thus sharing of knowledge with
customers and channel partners.

However, even though the link between IS inte-
gration and all four relational value dimensions is
strong, only two are signiﬁcantly associated with
performance—knowledge sharing with channel part-
ners and process coupling with customers. This
implies that while IS integration with customers may

5 The formula used for computing the f 2 statistic was (R2 Par-
tial mediation − R2 Full mediation)/(1 − R2 Partial mediation)/
(n− k − 1) where n− k − 1 is the degrees of freedom of the partial
mediation model, n, the sample size, k − the number of constructs
in the hypothesized model linked to ﬁrm performance.

lead to an increase in knowledge sharing with cus-
tomers; this may not result in higher performance.
Similarly, IS integration may also strengthen the pro-
cess coupling with channel partners, but, against our
expectations, we do not ﬁnd that this translates into
signiﬁcantly higher performance.

Results strongly support the hypothesized effects of
IS ﬂexibility. That is, IS ﬂexibility enhances the inte-
gration of the IS applications across customers and
channel partners. Intuitively, the challenge of main-
taining high IS ﬂexibility is at odds with maintain-
ing high IS integration—and is therefore viewed as
a trade-off. This intuition is rooted in the EDI con-
text where, to maintain high IS integration, enter-
prises had to create highly partner-speciﬁc EDI links
that afforded minimal ﬂexibility in reconﬁguring
the IT linkages (Hart and Estrin 1991, Hart and
Saunders 1998). Contemporary IT advancements such
as standardized and modular software components
(e.g., Web services and extensible markups) may ren-
der higher IS ﬂexibility, which in turn can enable a
higher degree of IS integration (Hagel and Brown
2001). This suggests that the conventional views of
an IS integration—ﬂexibility trade-off—may be less
applicable to contemporary information technologies,
particularly when ﬁrms need to forge and maintain
ties with a multitude of partners.

The results that show that

the two mediating
constructs, knowledge sharing with channel part-
ners and process coupling with customers, lead to
higher performance is interesting. They suggest that
channel partners are the tactically and strategically
important partners of an enterprise, e.g., for gaining
insights to respond to markets needs. Channel part-
ners help to collect important market-related infor-
mation that can be recombined by the focal ﬁrm
to general deeper insights into the market (Cohen
and Levinthal 1990, Lorenzoni and Lipparini 1996).
These knowledge elements in turn will enable a ﬁrm
to better respond to current customers or acquire
additional customers, thus resulting in better perfor-
mance (Narus and Anderson 1996, Weiss and Kurland
1997). The product-innovation literature also illus-
trates the importance of external partners. It ﬁnds
that a signiﬁcant number of innovations can be traced
back to customers and suppliers (von Hippel 1994).

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
334

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

The mediation analysis reveals that the effect of IS
integration on business performance is fully medi-
ated by the relational assets, whereas the effect of
IS ﬂexibility is only partially mediated. Although
a complete theoretical explanation is beyond the
scope of our model, the partial mediation could per-
haps be caused by conceptualization of integration
in relationship-speciﬁc terms. Apart from strengthen-
ing IS integration simultaneously with multiple cus-
tomers and channel partners, IS ﬂexibility can also
potentially generate economies of scope across rela-
tionships by transferring knowledge and resources, a
key capability in business networks (Anderson et al.
1994). Therefore, in the extended enterprise we sug-
gest that the positive link between IS ﬂexibility and
performance can be explained not only by the medi-
ated pathways hypothesized in this study but also by
alternative explanations grounded in the literature on
transaction costs and opportunism (Williamson 1985)
or social exchange theories (Anderson et al. 1994). It
is also possible that the direct positive link between IS
ﬂexibility and performance appears because of inter-
nal factors such as scope economies, instead of rela-
tional factors.

The role of the market orientation is consistent
with prior empirical studies establishing its impact
on performance. This construct captures about 8% of
the variation in the performance construct and thus,
not surprisingly, is the most signiﬁcant of the inde-
pendent variables. This effect is likely to be strong
in relatively turbulent contexts of the high-tech and
ﬁnancial services-related companies, where customers
are a valuable resource and market shares can change
rapidly. Kohli and Jaworski (1990) predicted that mar-
ket orientation would have a stronger relationship
with business performance in more turbulent mar-
kets, which was conﬁrmed by Narver and Slater
(1990) through their empirical study. Our study has
conﬁrmed that market orientation is signiﬁcant even
after we control for process coupling and knowledge
sharing, two key relational assets.

5.1. Limitations
In applying the insights from this study, it is impor-
tant to recognize some of its limitations. First, we
did not use formative measures of knowledge shar-
ing such as technology transfer, sharing of product

designs, customer proﬁles/tastes, etc., which would
have more pointedly captured the interorganizational
context. Second, to maintain higher response rates,
we used cross-sectional data from survey responses
provided by single respondents. This did not pro-
vide more accurate data, as is gathered using mul-
tiple respondent surveys. A multirespondent sur-
vey would have helped to avoid the bias in our
sample because we excluded respondents who did
not have sufﬁcient technical knowledge to answer the
IT-related questions. As a result this may have limited
us to ﬁrms whose business partners were most likely
to have established process and knowledge linkages.
Third, a smaller sample size also precluded us from
testing a more comprehensive multitheoretic model
that includes the entire range of beneﬁts and lim-
itations of IS application capabilities. For example,
the model can conceptualize constructs to represent
the losses an enterprise faces from opportunism aris-
ing from partner-speciﬁc IS integration and ﬂexibil-
ity. Fourth, we have limited ourselves to the contexts
of the sales channel relationships in the high-tech
and ﬁnancial services-related sectors. Finally, because
the sample is drawn from member companies of a
research center and the clients of a market research
agency, these ﬁrms are more likely to represent ﬁrms
closer to the leading edge of practice.

It is also important to point out that interpersonal
trust plays a critical role as an enabler of relational
exchanges. Organizations that trust each other may
undertake joint activities that exhibit a level of risk
that would preclude others from doing so (Ghoshal
and Moran 1996). Interpersonal trust may also lead
partners to be proactive in exploring opportunities for
increased collaboration (Dyer and Singh 1998). Given
our research goals, we have implicitly controlled for
trust between partners by restricting our analysis to a
focal ﬁrm’s closest long-term partners, where there is
evidence of a continuing association.

Implications
Implications for Theory

6.
6.1.
The main theoretical implications of our ﬁndings lie
in two areas. First, we uncover the interrelation-
ships between two key IS characteristics, showing
that IS ﬂexibility is a foundational capability that
contributes to integration with channel partners and

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

335

customers; and IS integration is
the proximal
antecedent of co-specialized relational assets. Second,
our ﬁndings suggest a need to consider not only
value creation, but also value appropriation as the
end goals of ﬁrms’ IT investments. The antecedents in
our model, process coupling and knowledge sharing,
are mechanisms by which relational value is created,
whereas the performance construct in our model mea-
sures to what extent the value has been appropriated
by the focal ﬁrm. We ﬁnd that not all relational assets
are equally valuable. In dynamic industry contexts,
knowledge sharing with customers may not confer
competitive insights, and process coupling with chan-
nel partners may not allow the ﬁrm to react to new
opportunities. We discuss these issues in the follow-
ing section.

The ﬁnding that IS integration can enhance rela-
tional assets and thus contribute to performance sug-
gests that IS integration can play a strategic value
in the extended enterprise. Although the role of IS
integration in enabling process efﬁciencies is well
understood in IS literature,
its role in enhancing
knowledge sharing and recombination across enter-
prises needs to be further explored using more gran-
ular constructs.

that

Our ﬁndings suggest

the ﬂexibility of the
IS applications is a critical foundational capability
underlying IS integration. This is not to suggest that
ﬂexibility does not beneﬁt an enterprise in other ways.
For example, by helping enterprises to curb oppor-
tunism arising from their partner-speciﬁc IT invest-
ments, IS ﬂexibility may enable a ﬁrm to retain its
bargaining power vis-à-vis its partners (Bakos and
Brynjolfsson 1993) and thus enjoy higher prices or bet-
ter service. However, this can only be ascertained by
a holistic, multitheoretic model that factors in gov-
ernance and appropriability concerns (Gulati et al.
2005). Further, the beneﬁts of ﬂexibility may be bet-
ter assessed with a longitudinal study than with
snapshot measures. Indeed, our analysis reveals that
the relational assets—knowledge sharing and process
coupling—do not fully mediate the effect of IS ﬂexi-
bility on performance, which implies that other theo-
retical arguments (in addition to the logic of relational
value) can link IS ﬂexibility to performance.

The result that only two of the four relational assets,
knowledge sharing with channel partners and process

coupling with customers, lead to higher performance
is interesting. This suggests that it is the channel part-
ners that are strategically important partners to an
enterprise in terms of sharing knowledge to create
business value (Achrol 1999). Knowledge about the
market environment is important, but the negative
(but not signiﬁcant) link of knowledge sharing with
customers and performance being in line with the
recent literature suggests that deep relationships with
customers are even likely to generate myopia and
may be detrimental to ﬁrms (Danneels 2003). Thus,
our results may be indicative of a counter-productive
relationship, where the knowledge gathered from
deep relationships with customers does not contribute
to competitive performance. This is consistent with
the theory of weak ties (Granovetter 1973), which
suggests that under certain circumstances strong ties
lead to misdirected efforts by an organization and
thus may be detrimental to its performance (Uzzi
1997).6 The customers in our study are the largest cus-
tomers of the focal enterprises and therefore are the
ones with whom the focal enterprise may have the
strongest ties. Along similar lines, the recent litera-
ture in organization theory suggests that only ﬁrms
that employ organizational features that push the ﬁrm
toward exploration and pull it toward stability tend to
have high performance (Rivkin and Siggelkow 2003).
Further, dynamic structural changes such as reinte-
gration of “temporarily decentralized” organizational
units have been shown to allow the ﬁrm to avoid
poor-performing activity conﬁgurations and to even-
tually coordinate across its divisions (Siggelkow and
Levinthal 2003).

Our study contributes an interenterprise perspec-
tive to extend the above idea that business value
can be enhanced by balancing conﬂicting needs by
strategically developing IS capabilities. Thus, high IS
integration achieved by customizing IS applications
to an individual customer can result in higher efﬁ-
ciency through tight coordination; but when the goal
is to coordinate processes and share knowledge with

6 We suggest that the weak-tie argument does not apply as well
to channel partner relationships directly because they play a more
active role as an aggregator of rich, market-related information for
enterprises. The study by Uzzi (1997) is in the buyer-supplier net-
works similar to the customer ties in our context.

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
336

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

a number of different partners, the role of ﬂexibility as
a critical foundational capability comes into play. The-
oretically, IS integration across multiple relationships
can therefore be viewed as an “ambidextrous” capa-
bility (Gibson and Birkinshaw 2004), and its empirical
elaboration can be a basis for future studies.

Our ﬁndings suggest that the value of strong cus-
tomer ties lies not in conveying richer knowledge
about the market, but more in facilitating quicker
adaptation by enterprises to customer needs and thus
faster response in the face of uncertainty. However,
unexpectedly, process coupling with channel partners
was not found to be signiﬁcantly associated with
business performance. This unexpected result may be
caused by a “loosely coupled” coordination paradigm
employed in the industry setting. By modular struc-
turing of interﬁrm interfaces, dependencies among
channel partners may be minimized, resulting in a
lower need to couple processes (Gosain et al. 2004).
A similar explanation may not apply to customer
relationships because perhaps it is less feasible to
codesign modular process interfaces with customer
enterprises. Although this difference in modularity
across relationship types is a possible reason (because
suppliers are generally more dependent on customers
than on channel partners), the argument needs to
be tested in future empirical studies. We also have
not measured modularity in this study and there-
fore recognize this as a limitation to testing the above
conjecture.

Implications for Practice

6.2.
Our study reveals several ﬁndings that have impor-
tant implications for the design of the IT applications
of a ﬁrm that aims to harness the resources embedded
in its relationship network. To our knowledge, no past
study has tested a model linking multiple dimensions
of the IS application capability to business-level out-
comes. This study directs managers to focus on the
ﬂexibility of their IS applications as a foundational
capability that will aid IS integration across multiple
and simultaneous relationships with key customers
and channel partners. Further, the business case for
IS ﬂexibility has to be made by highlighting the per-
formance impacts based on relational value generated
from a number of relationships, rather than consider-
ing ties in isolation.

Another important implication for managers lies
in a nuanced understanding of how IT investments
link to business value through mediating constructs.
Appreciation of
this causal pathway is likely to
help managers devise IT investment policies directed
toward functional ends that are likely to bear greater
gains in business performance. For instance, we pro-
pose that managers conceive of knowledge sharing
with channel partners and process coupling with cus-
tomer enterprises as value-generating assets that will
lead to improved business performance in the longer
term. In recent work, Hagel and Brown (2005, p. 158)
suggest: “Companies that master techniques required
to accelerate capability building across broad net-
works of enterprises will be in the best position to
generate superior returns.” Our study highlights spe-
ciﬁc IT-focused pathways to hone such capabilities,
particularly in light of current evidence that con-
temporary technologies are being used to a signiﬁ-
cant extent in interenterprise IT infrastructures (The
McKinsey Quarterly 2007).

7. Electronic Companion
An e-companion to this paper is available as part of
the online version that can be found at http://isre.
pubs.informs.org/.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Robert W. Zmud and Arun Rai for their
thoughtful suggestions, as well as anonymous reviewers,
and participants at the ISR special issue workshop at the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, for their generous help
in improving this manuscript. The authors thank Omar
El Sawy, Bernie Jaworski, Ann Majchrzak, V. Sambamurthy,
Huseyin Tanriverdi, and seminar participants at the Uni-
versity of Southern California for valuable feedback. The
authors also thank the Institute for the Study of Busi-
ness Markets, Penn State University, and afﬁliated faculty
for feedback and access to their respondent database. This
study is partially based on the ﬁrst author’s dissertation,
which won the runner-up award in the ICIS 2003 Best Doc-
toral Dissertation Competition.

References
Achrol, R. S. 1999. Marketing in the network economy. J. Marketing

63(Special Issue) 146–163.

Adler, P. S., B. Goldoftas, D. Levine. 1999. Flexibility versus efﬁ-
ciency? A case study of model changeovers in Toyota produc-
tion system. Organ. Sci. 10(1) 43–68.

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

337

Allen, B. R., A. C. Boynton. 1991. Information architecture: In search

of efﬁcient ﬂexibility. MIS Quart. 15(4) 435–445.

Anderson, J. C., H. Hakansson, J. Johanson. 1994. Dyadic business
relationships within a business network context. J. Marketing
58(4) 1–15.

Bakos, Y. J., E. Brynjolfsson. 1993. From vendors to partners: Infor-
mation technologies and incomplete contracts in buyer-seller
relationships. J. Organ. Comput. 3(3) 301–328.

Baron, R. M., D. A. Kenny. 1986. The moderator-mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strate-
gic, and statistical considerations. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 51(6)
1173–1182.

Barua, A., C. H. Kriebel, T. Mukhopadhyay. 1995. Information tech-
nologies and business value: An analytic and empirical inves-
tigation. Inform. Systems Res. 6(1) 3–23.

Bensaou, M., N. Venkatraman. 1996. Inter-organizational relation-
ships and information technology: A conceptual synthesis and
a research framework. Eur. J. Inform. Systems 5(2) 84–91.

Bharadwaj, A. S. 2000. A resource-based perspective on informa-
tion technology capability and ﬁrm performance: An empirical
investigation. MIS Quart. 24(1) 169–193.

Broadbent, M., P. Weill, B. S. Neo. 1999. Strategic context and pat-
terns of IT infrastructure capability. J. Strategic Inform. Systems
8(2) 157–187.

Byrd, T. A., D. E. Turner. 2001. An exploratory examination of the
relationship between ﬂexible IT infrastructure and competitive
advantage. Inform. Management 39(1) 41–52.

Cannon, J. P., W. D. Perreault. 1999. Buyer-seller relationships in

business markets. J. Marketing Res. 36(4) 439–460.

Carlsson, B. 1989. Flexibility and the theory of the ﬁrm. Internat. J.

Indust. Organ. 7(2) 179–203.

Carte, T. A., C. J. Russell. 2003. In pursuit of moderation: Nine
common errors and their solutions. MIS Quart. 27(3) 479–501.
Chan, Y., S. Huff, D. Barclay, D. Copeland. 1997. Business strate-
gic orientation, information systems strategic orientation, and
strategic alignment. Inform. Systems Res. 8(2) 125–150.

Chin, W. 1998a. Issues and opinions on structural equation model-

ing. MIS Quart. 22(1) vii–xvi.

Chin, W. 1998b. The partial least squares approach to structural
equation modeling. G. A. Marcoulides, ed. Modern Methods
for Business Research. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale,
NJ, 304, 295–336.

Christiaanse, E., N. Venkatraman. 2002. Beyond SABRE: An empir-
ical test of expertise exploitation in electronic channels. MIS
Quart. 26(1) 15–38.

Cohen, W. M., D. A. Levinthal. 1990. Absorptive capacity: A new
perspective on learning and innovation. Admin. Sci. Quart.
35(1) 128–152.

Colombo, R. 2000. A model for diagnosing and reducing non-

response bias. J. Advertising Res. 40(1/2) 85–93.

Cronbach, L.

J. 1971. Test validation. R. L. Thorndike, ed.
Educational Measurement. American Council on Education,
Washington, D.C., 443–507.

D’Adderio, L. 2003. Conﬁguring software, reconﬁguring memo-
ries: The inﬂuence of integrated systems on the reproduc-
tion of knowledge and routines. Indust. Corporate Change 12(2)
321–350.

Danneels, E. 2003. Tight-loose coupling with customers: The enact-
ment of customer orientation. Strategic Management J. 24(6)
559–576.

Day, G. 1994. The capabilities of market-driven organizations.

J. Marketing 58(4) 37–52.

Dewan, R. M., A. Seidmann, S. Sundaresan. 1995. Strategic choices
in IS infrastructure: Corporate standards versus “best of breed”
systems. 16th Internat. Conf. Inform. Systems. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 97–108.

Dietrich, A. J., S. Kirn, V. Sugumaran. 2007. A service-oriented
architecture for mass customization a shoe industry case study.
IEEE Trans. Engrg. Management 54(1) 190–204.

Duncan, N. 1995. Capturing ﬂexibility of information technology
infrastructure: A study of resource characteristics and their
measure. J. Management Inform. Systems 12(2) 37–57.

Dyer, J. H. 1996. Does governance matter? Keiretsu alliances and
asset speciﬁcity as sources of Japanese competitive advantage.
Organ. Sci. 7(6) 649–666.

Dyer, J. H., K. Nobeoka. 2000. Creating and managing a high perfo-
mance knowledge-sharing network: The Toyota case. Strategic
Management J. 21(3) 345–367.

Dyer, J. H., H. Singh. 1998. The relational view: Cooperative strat-
egy and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage.
Acad. Management Rev. 23(4) 660–679.

El Sawy, O. A., G. Bowles. 1997. Redesigning the customer sup-
port process for the electronic economy: Insights from storage
dimensions. MIS Quart. 21(4) 457–483.

Fornell, C., D. F. Larcker. 1981. Evaluating structural equation mod-
els with unobservable variables and measurement error. J. Mar-
keting Res. 18(1) 39–50.

Ghoshal, S., P. Moran. 1996. Bad for practice: A critique of transac-

tion cost theory. Acad. Management Rev. 21(1) 13–47.

Gibson, C. B., J. Birkinshaw. 2004. The antecedents, consequences,
and mediating role of organizational ambidexterity. Acad. Man-
agement J. 47(2) 209–226.

Gosain, S., A. Malhotra, O. A. El Sawy. 2004. Coordinating for ﬂex-
ibility in e-business supply chains. J. Management Inform. Sys-
tems 21(3) 7–45.

Granovetter, M. S. 1973. The strength of weak ties. Amer. J. Sociol.

78(6) 1360–1380.

Grant, R. M. 1996. Prospering in dynamically competitive envi-
ronments: Organizational capability as knowledge integration.
Organ. Sci. 7(4) 375–387.

Grewal, R., P. Tanushaj. 2001. Building organizational capabilities
for managing economics crisis: The role of market orientation
and strategic ﬂexibility. J. Marketing 65(2) 67–80.

Gulati, R., P. R. Lawrence, P. Puranam. 2005. Adaptation in vertical
relationships: Beyond incentive conﬂict. Strategic Management J.
26(5) 415–440.

Häcki, R., J. Lighton. 2001. The future of the networked economy.

McKinsey Quart. 2001(3) 26–39.

Hagel, J., J. B. Brown. 2005. The Only Sustainable Edge. Harvard

Business School Press, Boston, MA.

Hagel, J. I., J. S. Brown. 2001. Your next IT strategy. Harvard Bus.

Rev. 79(9) 105–113.

Hair, J., R. Anderson, R. Tatham, W. Black. 1998. Multivariate Data

Analysis, 5th ed. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Hansen, M. T. 2002. Knowledge networks: Explaining effective
knowledge sharing in multi-unit companies. Organ. Sci. 13(3)
232–248.

Harmon, H. H. 1967. Modern Factor Analysis. University of Chicago

Press, Chicago, IL.

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
338

Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

Hart, P., D. Estrin. 1991. Inter-organization networks, computer
integration, and shifts in interdependence: The case of the
semiconductor industry. ACM Trans.
Inform. Systems 9(4)
370–398.

Hart, P. J., C. S. Saunders. 1998. Emerging electronic partnerships:
Antecedents and dimensions of EDI use from the supplier’s
perspective. J. Management Inform. Systems 14(4) 87–111.

Hasselbring, W. 2000. Information system integration. Comm. ACM

43(6) 33–38.

Homburg, C., C. Pﬂesser. 2000. A multiple-layer of market-oriented
organizational culture: Measurement issues and performance
outcomes. J. Marketing Res. 37(4) 449–462.

Huber, G. P., R. R. McDaniel. 1986. The decision-making paradigm

of organizational design. Management Sci. 32(5) 572–589.

Keen, P. G. W. 1991. Shaping the Future: Business Design Through
Information Technology. Harvard Business School Press, Boston,
MA.

Kohli, A. K., B. J. Jaworski. 1990. Market orientation: The construct,
research propositions, and managerial implications. J. Market-
ing 54(2) 1–18.

Kumar, R. 2004. A framework for assessing the business value of
information technology infrastructures. J. Management Inform.
Systems 21(2) 11–32.

Little, R. J. A., D. A. Rubin. 1987. Statistical Analysis with Missing

Data. John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Lorenzoni, G., A. Lipparini. 1996. The leveraging of interﬁrm rela-
tionships as a distinctive organizational capability: A longitu-
dinal study. Strategic Management J. 20(4) 317–338.

Malhotra, A., S. Gosain, O. A. El Sawy. 2005. Absorptive capacity
conﬁgurations in supply chains: Gearing for partner-enabled
market knowledge creation. MIS Quart. 29(1) 145–187.

Markus, L. 2000. Paradigm shifts in e-business and business/

systems integration. Comm. AIS 4(10).

Massetti, B., R. W. Zmud. 1996. Measuring the extent of EDI usage
in complex organizations: Strategies and illustrative examples.
MIS Quart. 20(3) 331–345.

Matsuno, K., J. T. Mentzer, A. Ozsomer. 2002. The effects of
entrepreneurial proclivity and market orientation on business
performance. J. Marketing 66(3) 18–32.

Mendelson, H., R. Pillai. 1998. Clockspeed and information
response: Evidence from the information technology industry.
Inform. Systems Res. 9(4) 415–433.

Monczka, R. M., K. J. Petersen, R. B. Handﬁeld, G. L. Ragatz. 1998.
Success factors in strategic supplier alliances: The buying com-
pany perspective. Decision Sci. 29(3) 553–577.

Narus, J. A., J. C. Anderson. 1996. Rethinking distribution. Harvard

Bus. Rev. 74(4) 112–120.

Narver, J. C., S. F. Slater. 1990. The effect of market orientation on

business proﬁtability. J. Marketing 54(4) 20–35.

Nelson, K. M., M. Ghods. 1998. Measuring technology ﬂexibility.

Eur. J. Inform. Systems 7(4) 232–240.

Orton, J. D., K. E. Weick. 1990. Loosely coupled systems: A recon-

ceptualization. Acad. Management Rev. 15(2) 203–223.

Phillips, L. W., R. P. Bagozzi. 1986. On measuring the organizational
properties of distribution channels: Methodological issues in
the use of key informants. Res. Marketing 8 313–369.

Podsakoff, P., D. Organ. 1986. Self-reports in organizational
research: Problems and prospects. J. Management 12(4) 531–545.

Premkumar, G., V. J. Richardson, R. Zmud. 2004. Sustaining com-
petitive advantage through a value net: The case of enterprise
rent-a-car. MISQ Executive 3(4) 189–199.

Rai, A., R. Patnayakuni, N. Patnayakuni. 2006. Firm performance
impacts of digitally enabled supply chain integration capabili-
ties. MIS Quart. 30(2) 225–246.

Ray, G., W. Muhanna, J. Barney. 2005. Information technology and
the performance of the customer service process: A resource-
based analysis. MIS Quart. 29(4) 625–652.

Ring, P. S., A. H. Van de Ven. 1994. Developmental processes
of cooperative interorganizational relationships. Acad. Manage-
ment Rev. 19(1) 90–118.

Rivkin, J. W., N. Siggelkow. 2003. Balancing search and stability:
Interdependencies among elements of organizational design.
Management Sci. 49(3) 290–311.

Robicheaux, R. A., J. S. Coleman. 1994. The structure of marketing

channel relationships. J. Acad. Marketing Sci. 22(1) 38–51.

Sa Vinhas, A., E. Anderson. 2005. How potential conﬂict drives
channel structure: Concurrent (direct and indirect) channels.
J. Marketing Res. 42(4) 507–515.

Sabherwal, R., Y. Chan. 2001. Alignment between business and IS
strategies: A study of prospectors, analyzers and defenders.
Inform. Systems Res. 12(1) 11–33.

Sambamurthy, V., A. Bharadwaj, V. Grover. 2003. Shaping agility
through digital options: Reconceptualizing the role of infor-
mation technology in contemporary ﬁrms. MIS Quart. 27(2)
237–263.

Santos, F. M., K. M. Eisenhardt. 2004. Constructing Markets and
Organizing Boundaries: Entrepreneurial Action in a Nascent Field.
Academy of Management, New Orleans, LA.

Schlueter Langdon, C. 2003a. Information systems architecture
styles and business interaction patterns: Toward theoretic cor-
respondence. J. Inform. Systems E-Bus. 1(3) 283–304.

Schlueter Langdon, C. 2003b. The state of Web services. IEEE Com-

put. 36(7) 93–95.

Schlueter Langdon, C. 2006. Designing information systems capa-
bilities to create business value: A theoretical conceptualizaton
of the role of ﬂexibility and integration. J. Database Management
17(3) 1–18.

Short,

J. E., N. Venkatraman. 1992. Beyond business process
redesign—Redeﬁning Baxter business network. Sloan Manage-
ment Rev. 34(1) 7–21.

Siggelkow, N., D. A. Levinthal. 2003. Temporarily divide to con-
quer: Centralized, decentralized, and reintegrated organiza-
tional approaches to exploration and adaptation. Organ. Sci.
14(6) 650–669.

Slater, S. F., J. C. Narver. 1994. Market orientation, customer value,

and superior performance. Bus. Horizons 37(2) 22–28.

Slater, S. F., J. C. Narver. 1995. Market orientation and the learning

organization. J. Marketing 59(3) 63–74.

Straub, D. W., R. T. Watson. 2001. Research commentary: Trans-
formational issues in researching IS and net-enabled organiza-
tions. Inform. Systems Res. 12(4) 337–345.

Tabachnick, B. G., L. S. Fidell. 1989. Using Multivariate Statistics.

Allyn & Bacon, Harper, NY.

Tenkasi, R. V., R. J. J. Boland. 1996. Exploring knowledge diver-
sity in knowledge intensive ﬁrms: A new role for information
systems. J. Organ. Change Management 9(1) 79–91.

The McKinsey Quarterly. 2007. How businesses are using Web 2.0:

A McKinsey Global Survey. McKinsey Quart. 2–9.

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 
Saraf, Langdon, and Gosain: IS Application Capabilities and Relational Value in Interﬁrm Partnerships
Information Systems Research 18(3), pp. 320–339, © 2007 INFORMS

339

Truman, G. E. 2000. Integration in electronic environment. J. Man-

agement Inform. Systems 17(1) 209–244.

Tsai, W. 2002. Social structure of “coopetition” within a multiu-
nit organization: Coordination, competition, and intraorgani-
zational knowledge sharing. Organ. Sci. 13(2) 179–190.

Tucker, A. L. 2004. The impact of operational failures on hospital

nurses and their patients. J. Oper. Management 22(2) 151–170.

Uzzi, B. 1997. Social structure and competition in interﬁrm net-
works: The paradox of embeddedness. Admin. Sci. Quart. 42(1)
35–67.

Van Camp, S. 2004. New platform distributes marketing content to

CE partners. Adweek Magazines’ Tech. Marketing.

Van de Ven, A. H., A. L. Delbecq, R. J. Koenig. 1976. Determinants
of coordination modes within organizations. Amer. Sociol. Rev.
41(2) 322–338.

Venkatraman, N., V. Ramanujam. 1986. Measurement of business
performance in strategy research: A comparison of approaches.
Acad. Management Rev. 11(4) 801–814.

von Hippel, E. 1994. The Sources of Innovation. Oxford University

Press, New York.

Wall, T. B., M. Jonathan, M. Patterson, S. J. Wood, M. Sheehan, C. W.
Clegg, M. West. 2004. On the validity of subjective measures
of company performance. Personnel Psych. 57(1) 95–118.

Weill, P., M. Vitale. 1999. Assessing the health of an information
systems applications portfolio: An example from process man-
ufacturing. MIS Quart. 23(4) 601–624.

Weiss, A. M., N. Kurland. 1997. Holding distribution channel rela-
tionships together: The role of transaction-speciﬁc assets and
length of prior relationships. Organ. Sci. 8(6) 612–623.

Williamson, O. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. The Free

Press, New York.

Williamson, O. E., S. Clegg, C. Hardy, W. Nord. 1996. Transaction
cost economics and organization theory. S. Clegg, C. Hardy,
W. Nord, eds. Handbook of Organization Studies. Sage, Newbury
Park, CA.

Yang, J., M. P. Papazoglou. 2000. Interoperation support for elec-

tronic business. Comm. ACM 43(6) 39–47.

Zaheer, A., N. Venkatraman. 1994. Determinants of electronic inte-
gration in the insurance industry: An empirical test. Manage-
ment Sci. 40(5) 549–566.

Downloaded from informs.org by [131.193.251.47] on 02 August 2017, at 11:39 . For personal use only, all rights reserved. 