The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

Structural and contextual correlates of charged behavior in product

development teams

Rajesh Sethia,*, Carolyn Y. Nicholsonb

aDepartment of Marketing, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5795

bDepartment of Marketing, Stetson University, Deland, FL 32720

Received 11 December 2000; accepted 18 December 2000

Abstract

Firms increasingly use cross-functional teams to develop new products, yet we know little about the processes that make teams excel.
Although studies have focused on within-team processes like cooperation between and integration of individuals from various functional
areas, some emerging literature suggests that the processes that make teams excel are richer and more complex than cooperation and
integration. In order to capture the processes that lead to excellent market performance of new products, we introduce the concept of charged
team behavior, the extent to which cross-functional product development teams are enthusiastically and jointly driven to develop superior
new products. Charged team behavior captures not only the drive, commitment, and joy of team members, but also their collaborative
behaviors to achieve an exceptional outcome.

We propose and test a series of hypotheses concerning how charged behavior affects new product market performance and how charged
behavior is, in turn, inﬂuenced by both team structural characteristics (physical proximity, team longevity, and outcome interdependence)
and contextual factors (senior management encouragement to take risk, quality orientation, exposure to customer input, extent of
competition, and interdepartmental connectedness). It is particularly important to examine the antecedents of charged behavior because there
are concerns that some of the team-related factors generally considered to be useful for teams may not necessarily lead to charged teams.
Data from new consumer product development teams is analyzed though structural equation modeling for hypothesis testing. We ﬁnd
evidence that highly charged teams are more likely to develop successful new products. Results also indicate that outcome interdependence,
exposure to customer input, extent of competition, and interdepartmental connectedness are positively related to charged behavior. Physical
proximity, team longevity, encouragement to take risk, and quality orientation do not improve teams’ charged behavior. Data suggests that
charged team behavior: 1) fully mediates the effects of outcome interdependence and interdepartmental connectedness on performance, 2)
partially mediates the inﬂuence of exposure to customer input and the extent of competition on performance, and 3) does not mediate the
effects of quality orientation and physical proximity on performance.

Our study highlights the importance of creating highly charged product development teams in order to achieve exceptional performance.
Further, our results indicate that some of the factors suggested by traditional social psychology research for enhancing team effectiveness
(e.g., physical proximity and team longevity) may not necessarily create charged teams. Instead, charged teams need a special arrangement,
in which members are accountable to the team and where their evaluations and rewards are also linked to the performance of the team. In
addition, although a strong emphasis on quality is considered to be beneﬁcial for new products, as our results indicate, such emphasis cannot
create a charged atmosphere. Moreover, our research suggests that if the organization structure does not permit frequent contact between
individuals across functional boundaries, the creation of a strongly charged team and development of a successful new product will be
hindered. © 2001 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

In hopes of developing new products that excel in the
market, a growing number of ﬁrms are entrusting new

* Corresponding author. Tel.: 11-315-268-6441.
E-mail addresses: sethir@clarkson.edu (R. Sethi), cynichol@stetson.

edu (C.Y. Nicholson).

product development to cross-functional teams composed
of individuals from a variety of functional areas [56,62].
Although the virtues of cross-functional product devel-
opment teams have been widely praised, few would argue
that the mere formation of such teams is sufﬁcient to
enhance the market performance of new products devel-
oped by the team. Still, despite the growing popularity of
cross-functional teams for product development, we do
not fully understand what team-related factors or pro-

0737-6782/01/$ – see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
PII: S0737-6782(01)00072-8


R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

155

cesses lead to the development of highly successful new
products.

There exists a large body of research on groups in social
psychology and on product development groups in the in-
novation area, but much less attention has been paid to
explicit processes within a team that make teams excel [12].
While studies have focused on within-team processes like
cooperation between and integration of individuals from
various functional areas [23,26,48,52], some emerging lit-
erature suggests that the processes that make teams excel
are richer and more complex than cooperation and integra-
tion [43,44]. Furthermore, even though attempts have been
made to understand how integration and cooperation can be
improved [23,26,48,52], it is not clear whether ﬁndings
from these studies will help create a combination of team
processes that lead to superior performing products.

To capture the processes that lead to excellent market
performance, we introduce the concept of charged team
behavior, which can be deﬁned as the extent to which new
product development teams are enthusiastically and jointly
driven to develop superior new products. Charged team
behavior captures not only the drive, commitment, and joy
of team members, but also their collaborative behaviors to
achieve an exceptional outcome. This conceptualization of
charged teams is based on previous research in high per-
forming teams, particularly the work by Leavitt [43] and
Leavitt and Lipman-Blumen [44]. According to these au-
thors, members of teams with exceptionally high perfor-
mance outcomes are intensely involved in their tasks,
strongly believe that they are working to achieve something
superior or signiﬁcant, openly exchange ideas as well as
forcefully debate and challenge these ideas, and feel a great
sense of joy and excitement. These teams are the stuff of
manager’s dreams.

Although Leavitt and Lipman-Blumen [44] suggest that
highly driven teams perform exceptionally, their contention
is supported only anecdotally. It is important to systemati-
cally demonstrate whether more charged behavior in prod-
uct development teams leads them to create new products
with superior market performance. If such charged teams
indeed show better performance, then the critical question
that needs to be addressed is how such charged behavior can
be promoted. Since there are concerns that some of the
team-related factors generally considered to be useful for
teams may not necessarily lead to charged teams, it is
particularly important
to examine the antecedents of
charged behavior. Here, we examine whether charged be-
havior in product development teams leads to new products
with superior market performance, and what factors likely
inﬂuence the emergence of charged behavior in teams.

Literatures in the areas of product innovation and group
psychology can help in the development of a framework for
examining the antecedents of charged behavior in product
development teams. Based on these literatures, we suggest
that the emergence of charged behavior can be affected by
both team structure and contextual factors surrounding the

team [12,19,43,44,52]. Accordingly, we consider variables
related to these two sets of factors.

Regarding team structural characteristics, we focus on
physical proximity, team longevity, and the degree of out-
come interdependence in the team (which refers to the
extent to which team members’ accountability, evaluation,
and rewards are linked to the overall project rather than
merely to their respective functional areas/tasks). These
three factors have emerged as important structural factors in
group research, and a ﬁrm’s senior management generally
has some degree of control over them. Physical proximity is
generally considered beneﬁcial for projects and facilitates
interaction among project members [36,52]. Similarly, team
longevity is known to help team members develop a shared
history and bond among themselves [39,59]. However, it is
not known if proximity and longevity are enough for cre-
ating charged behavior among individuals from diverse
backgrounds and with different agendas; instead members
may need a stronger bond with the team that can be facil-
itated by outcome interdependence [7,45].

Concerning contextual factors, we study the effects of
external inﬂuences on the team (customers’ inﬂuence and
the extent of competition in the market), the ﬁrm’s approach
(senior management’s encouragement of risk taking and
quality emphasis/orientation), and the openness of the ﬁrm
structure (connectedness between departments). Customer
input is deemed important for motivating product develop-
ment professionals [13,38], and external threat or competi-
tion is considered to be good for creating a sense of unity in
teams [45]. Regarding the ﬁrm’s emphasis, we examine
whether senior managers who seek bold initiatives and thus,
encourage teams to take the risk of pursuing new and
untried approaches [26], have a different effect on charged
team behavior than ﬁrms that have a strong quality orien-
tation, which suggests the pursuit of a more steady improve-
ment in products [11,30]. Finally, not much is known about
how the structure of a ﬁrm affects its product development
teams. Thus, here we examine how interdepartmental con-
nectedness (which captures the ease of communication and
contact between functional areas [31]) inﬂuences charged
behavior in teams.

In the next section, we discuss the conceptual underpin-
nings of the charged behavior concept. Thereafter, we ex-
amine how charged behavior inﬂuences the performance of
the new product, and how this behavior, in turn, is inﬂu-
enced by various structural characteristics of the team and
contextual factors (see Fig. 1).

2. Charged behavior

A great deal of attention has been devoted in social
psychology research to group performance (for example,
see two major reviews of group literature by Bettenhausen
[5] and Cohen and Bailey [12]). Researchers in the new
product development area have drawn on this stream of


156

R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

Fig. 1. Charged Behavior in Teams: Hypothesized Model

literature to develop their team related conceptual frame-
works. However, little has been done to understand behav-
iors that lead to highly successful teams and the factors that,
in turn, help or harm the creation of such behaviors. More-
over, very few studies have developed a framework related
to high performing teams that can be empirically tested and
expanded by future research. For instance, a study by Katz
[40] focused on how a group of highly motivated engineers
at Digital Equipment Corporation designed a cutting-edge
computer chip called the “Alpha” chip. Similarly, Kelley
and Caplan [42] have written about how Bell Labs creates
high performing individuals and groups. While these studies
are quite effective in narrating successful experiences in a
particular ﬁrm and in drawing some useful lessons from
them, they do not develop an empirically testable frame-
work for high performing teams that captures critical with-
in-team processes.

There do exist some team studies that are not limited to
a particular organization. For example, Thamhain and
Wilemon [58] examine certain drivers and barriers to effec-
tive team performance and to the emergence of people-
oriented behaviors in the team. Similarly, Wolff [64], based
on a discussion with 12 human resource directors, identiﬁed
certain prerequisites that help in the creation of high per-
forming teams. Still, even though these are useful studies,
they do not lay out within-team processes that make teams
excel. Moreover, they do not clearly examine what struc-
tural and contextual factors facilitate these processes and to

what extent these factors operate through such team pro-
cesses in inﬂuencing a product’s market performance.

Another stream of research in new product development
has focused on certain important interfunctional processes
such as integration [23,26,35,48] and cooperation [52]. In
these studies, integration essentially refers to joint working
(i.e., interaction and collaboration) between functional areas
at the ﬁrm-level [35]. While these studies are quite educa-
tive, integration and cooperation represent only two aspects
of within-team processes in high performing teams. Pro-
cesses that lead to high performance are likely to be much
richer. To be able to capture such richness, there is a need
to turn to other work on high performing teams.

Recently, Leavitt [43] and Leavitt and Lipman-Blumen
[44] have studied highly driven and exceptionally perform-
ing groups across a number of organizations. These authors
call such teams “hot” groups, with members who are in-
tensely involved in their tasks, strongly believe that they are
working to achieve something superior or signiﬁcant,
openly exchange ideas as well as forcefully debate and
challenge these ideas, and feel a great sense of joy and
excitement. Leavitt and Lipman-Blumen [44] cite several
examples of hot groups, including the highly motivated and
excited team at Apple Computer which designed the Macin-
tosh. The processes considered in these two studies are
indeed quite rich and go beyond interfunctional integration
and cooperation. While the authors do not test their conten-
tions empirically and visualize hot groups only at the high


R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

157

end of driven behavior and performance, their studies can
serve as a useful starting point for understanding product
development teams that exhibit superior performance. In
fact, the approach taken by Leavitt and Lipman-Blumen
[44] can be combined with some of the insights generated
by earlier studies on product development teams and group
psychology to develop a framework.

As researchers seem to suggest, while only a few groups
are so “hot,” product development teams generally show
varying degrees of driven behavior. Hence, from a more
practical perspective, rather than conceptualizing this con-
cept of “hot” groups at the high end of the scale, we treat it
as a construct that can cover the range of driven behavior.
Thus, for the purpose of this study, we label this variable
charged behavior. Conceptually, charged behavior can be
deﬁned as the extent to which new product development
teams are enthusiastically and jointly driven to develop
superior new products. This concept captures not only the
drive, commitment, and joy of team members, but also their
collaborative behaviors.

Research on high performing teams suggests a set of key
behaviors and attitudes related to the drive and collaborative
behaviors of a team that lead to exceptional success. These
teams exhibit loyalty to the task and team —they are com-
mitted to the project [12,40,44,58]. Members in such teams
enjoy their tasks and have fun [40,44]. Moreover, they
translate their drive and commitment into collaborative ac-
tion, that is, their teams have an environment of open
information sharing, free challenging of each other’s and the
team’s ideas, and demonstrating cooperative behavior [12,
44,52,58].

Charged behavior, in essence, is a higher order variable,
which means that it is comprised of a number of component
dimensions. Here the dimensions of charged behavior have
been identiﬁed as enjoyment, commitment, open informa-
tion sharing, challenging ideas, and cooperation. A number
of such higher order constructs are well-established in re-
search literature. For example, innovativeness is a construct
comprised of both novelty and meaningfulness of a program
or a product [2]. Similarly, product quality is regularly
conceptualized as having the components aesthetics, dura-
bility, reliability, workmanship, and safety [21,34]. Al-
though there are other team-related factors which could
contribute to the rise of high performing teams (e.g., the
presence of champions or leadership style 57,58), we aver
that many of these factors lead to charged behavior, but do
not reﬂect the fundamental drive and collaboration that
characterizes the charged team.

3. Theory and hypotheses

3.1. Relationship between charged behavior and market
performance of new products

When members in a charged team are highly cooperative
and freely challenge each other’s information and perspec-

tives and their underlying assumptions, they are more likely
to bring together both tacit and explicit functional knowl-
edge and expertise. When diverse knowledge is brought
together, it can help the team discover superior ways to
satisfy customer needs [50]. Relatedly, a team with high
degree of cooperation is expected to achieve a common
understanding among themselves and consistency across
various decisions made by the team. Developing a common
understanding about the product and achieving consistency
among decisions made throughout the product development
process are also likely to lead to the development of a
superior product [11,21,54]. Since individuals from various
functional areas often have different ideas about the product
[16,21], without such understanding, these individuals gen-
erally pull the project in different directions and, thereby
adversely affect the superiority of the new product and its
market performance.

Moreover, the high degree of commitment to a project
exhibited by members of charged teams motivates them to
do what is good for the overall project rather than merely for
their functional areas. In other words, a feeling of psycho-
logical ownership of the project arises among team mem-
bers [51]. Psychological ownership can increase the likeli-
hood of discovering meaningful linkages between product
technology and market needs. In addition, when team mem-
bers are having fun and enjoying their work on the project,
their motivation is more intrinsic in nature, which increases
the possibility of discovering newer and superior ideas for
new product development [1]. Thus, highly charged behav-
ior is expected to lead to the development of a superior
product, which is more likely to succeed in the marketplace
[8,11,14,56]. Hence:

H1: the extent of charged behavior in a cross-functional
product development team is positively related to the
market performance of the new product

3.2. The effect of team structure on charged team
behavior

Physical Proximity. It is generally regarded that physical
proximity increases communication and interaction among
individuals [19,36,46]. When they are physically proximate,
team members get more opportunity to know each other,
which can lead to the development of a positive response
toward each other and improve collaborative behaviors.
Such proximity also has the potential of creating a psycho-
logical bond among individuals [41] which can motivate
them to jointly strive for successful outcomes.

However, physical proximity by itself may not be able to
create either a strong commitment toward the development
of a superior product or a sense of joy/excitement about the
project. There is research that shows that mere physical
proximity may not help individuals go beyond their func-
tional cultures and develop really productive relationships
with individuals from other areas [22].

Thus, there are arguments for both sides. However, in


158

R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

view of the previous evidence about the beneﬁcial inﬂuence
of physical proximity [46,52] and the fact that the evidence
for no effect of physical proximity is based on a qualitative
study that was limited to one organization, we suggest a
positive effect of this variable on charged behavior in teams.
Hence:

H2: The degree of physical proximity among members
of a cross-functional product development team is pos-
itively related to the extent of charged behavior in the
team

Outcome Interdependence. When members are accountable
to the team and not merely to their functional areas and their
rewards are linked to the performance of the project rather
than only to their performance on functional tasks, cooper-
ative attitude is created among team members [63]. This
attitude helps reduce the adverse effect of interfunctional
biases and stereotypes, and promotes acceptance of mem-
bers from other areas [7]. Thus, high interdependence cre-
ates an atmosphere where members can freely challenge
each other’s perspectives and assumptions.

Additionally, making individuals accountable to the team
and linking their rewards to the team and not to their
functional areas is likely to give a sense of independence to
the team that can enhance members’ intrinsic involvement
in the project and make the project work more enjoyable
[26,45,55,61]. Also, when members’ rewards are linked to
the success of the project, it helps create a strong sense of
commitment to the development of a superior and success-
ful new product [61]. Hence, outcome interdependence is
expected to make the product development
team more
charged.

H3: The degree of outcome interdependence in a cross-
functional product development team is positively re-
lated to the extent of charged behavior in that team.

Team Longevity. Longevity refers to the duration for which
team members have worked together to complete the
project. It has been suggested that as the duration of the
project increases, members develop, through shared social-
ization and shared experiences, a common understanding
about the team and its environment, which can create a
strong bond among team members and increase collabora-
tive behaviors [39].

Group development research also highlights the impor-
tant role that time plays in group processes. After a cross-
functional product development
team has been formed,
members may ﬁrst spend some time getting to know each
other. During this phase, their relationship is marked by
guarded exchanges. However, since individuals from differ-
ent functional areas have several incompatibilities and dis-
parate perspectives, conﬂict can soon emerge between team
members. With the passage of time, members may develop
norms that regulate and stabilize the internal dynamics of

the team. It is at this stage that a strong identity and com-
mitment to the project is likely to emerge [19,59].

On the other hand, a good deal of research on the positive
effects of time is based on studies of individuals with a
common background, such as R&D scientists [39] or young
boys at a summer camp [55]. However, since interfunctional
biases and conﬂicts are very ﬁrmly-rooted, the passage of
time may not be powerful enough to overcome their adverse
effects and encourage collaborative behaviors.

Even though it could be argued that team longevity may
not be effective in overcoming the detrimental effects of
interfunctional biases and conﬂicts, given the previous ev-
idence about the positive inﬂuence of group longevity, we
hypothesize a beneﬁcial effect of this variable on charged
team behavior. Therefore:

H4: the degree of longevity of a cross-functional product
development team is positively related to the extent of
charged behavior in that team

3.3. The effect of contextual factors on charged team
behavior

to Take Risk. Even
Senior Management Encouragement
though the very involvement in new product development
activity should create a stimulating atmosphere, organiza-
tional systems and routines, in subtle ways, tend to dampen
risk taking and the pursuit of exciting new ideas and ap-
proaches [15,60]. Therefore, a senior management style that
actively encourages new product teams to take risk rather
than be conservative plays a crucial role in creating a cli-
mate where novel ideas are valued and actively sought. This
climate also minimizes the risk that is normally associated
with trying newer and novel approaches. Hence, encourage-
ment to take risk is expected to constantly invigorate and
motivate the team and make working in it exciting [26].
When team members are jointly searching for novel solu-
tions, they are also more likely to challenge and question
each other’s information and perspectives. In sum, when
risk taking is encouraged, a team is likely to simply feel
“freer” to try new ideas, an environment that will contribute
to excited, committed, driven teams — charged teams. This
leads us to suggest:

H5: The degree to which senior management encourages
a cross-functional product development team to take risk
is positively related to the extent of charged behavior in
that team.

Quality Orientation. In general, the total quality movement
has generated a great deal of excitement among product
development professionals. When properly implemented,
the total quality approach can act as a strong motivator for
employees in the ﬁrm in terms of motivating them toward
superior performance [6]. Another thrust of such an ap-
proach is collaborative working among members of differ-
ent functional areas [6,27]. Hence, individuals from differ-


R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

159

ent functional areas in a ﬁrm with strong quality orientation
are more likely to cooperate and work productively to
achieve their goals. As such, product development teams in
ﬁrms with high quality orientation are more likely to show
charged behavior.

On the other hand, a basic tenet of the total quality
management approach is continuous and incremental im-
provements in products and processes [31]. Such improve-
ments have at their foundation the removal of variation in
and high standardization of these processes [11,31]. Thus,
ﬁrms which place heavy emphasis on continuous quality
improvements are less likely to allow product development
teams to deviate from existing thinking and approaches to
developing new products. Discipline and controls are more
likely to be the norms in such ﬁrms. Hence, strong quality
orientation may not create an exciting and stimulating at-
mosphere in which members question and challenge exist-
ing thinking and approaches. However, the contention that
quality orientation can have a dampening effect on team
enthusiasm is still to be supported empirically.

While it is possible to argue for both the positive and no
effect of quality orientation on charged behavior, in view of
the widespread belief about the positive effects of quality
orientation on the motivation and morale of individuals in
the ﬁrm and a lack of empirical evidence about the damp-
ening inﬂuence of quality orientation, we lean toward a
positive effect of quality orientation on charged behavior.
Thus:

H6: The degree of quality orientation in a ﬁrm is posi-
tively related to the extent of charged behavior in a
cross-functional product development team.

Exposure to Customer Input. In this study, we focus on the
team’s reliance on customer input for decision making dur-
ing the early stages of the product development process.
Customers who are regular users of the same or similar
products are a good source of new product ideas. In fact, it
is important to directly expose members of the product
development team to customer needs and problems and the
consumption context because such exposure can enhance
members’ commitment to strive for superior outcomes that
can better satisfy customers needs [38]. A direct exposure
makes the abstract problems and issues faced by customers
real for the product development team. The more real prob-
lems seem to team members, the more the search for solu-
tions serves as a superordinate goal for the team that helps
members go beyond their functional differences and coop-
erate to solve those problems [51,63]. Moreover, customers
use different language, have different archetypes, and use
different examples than team members are likely to use.
This combination yields an idea-rich, exciting climate for
the team [50]. In addition to exposing team members to
customer input, teams can also go back to customers to seek
feedback about the team’s ideas and plans (e.g., the product
concept). This feedback serves as a reality check and sus-

tains team commitment, cooperation, and excitement, and at
the same time ensures that the superiority built into the
product is meaningful for customers. Hence:

H7: The degree to which a cross-functional product
development team is exposed to customer input is pos-
itively related to the extent of charged behavior in that
team.

Extent of Competition in the Market. An external threat is
known to be an important force in creating a sense of unity
among group members and motivating them to strive for
success in their venture [45,55]. Competition from other
ﬁrms can serve as such a threat for members of a product
development team [10]. When faced with a competitive
marketplace, members in a product development team are
likely to develop a strong sense of team identity and psy-
chological ownership of the project both of which are ex-
pected to enhance charged team behaviors [63].

However, in markets where there are a large number of
players who are active in launching new products, it is not
easy for teams to anticipate and track new product devel-
opment efforts of competitors. Even if a ﬁrm’s new product
development effort is quite aggressive, there are likely to be
situations when its product development teams need to
rapidly react to unexpected new products launched by com-
petitors. Such time pressure tends to push teams toward
more systematic and routine thinking as opposed to inno-
vative action. A quick product response is often just an
incremental improvement in existing products rather than a
very new outcome. Such an approach may not be able to
excite team members and create an atmosphere in which
members are energized to challenge each other and their
perspectives [44]. However, there is little empirical support
for the argument that competition is not effective in moti-
vating and exciting a team.

Although it is possible to contend that the extent of
competition might not be effective in creating a strong sense
of excitement and driven behavior in teams, given the pre-
vious evidence in group research about the positive inﬂu-
ence of external competition on groups, we hypothesize a
beneﬁcial effect overall on charged team behavior. There-
fore:

H8: The degree of competition among new products in
the market is positively related to the extent of charged
behavior exhibited by a cross-functional product devel-
opment team.

Interdepartmental Connectedness. As noted earlier, interde-
partmental connectedness refers to the extent to which for-
mal and informal communication and contact is possible
between individuals from different functional areas in the
ﬁrm [31]. Such connectedness is known to reduce conﬂict,
improve communication, and enhance esprit de corps be-
tween functional areas [47,49]. These behaviors, in turn, are
likely to reduce the level of interfunctional biases and ste-


160

R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

reotypes in the ﬁrm. Therefore, when individuals in a ﬁrm
with high connectedness are formed into a cross-functional
product development team, it should be easier for them to
cooperate and to comfortably challenge and question each
other’s information and perspectives.

Furthermore, organization structures which permit lateral
communication and contact between functional areas are
more receptive to cross-functional mechanisms like product
development teams than organization structures which em-
phasize strong vertical reporting and communication [18,
20]. Thus, atmosphere in ﬁrms with high lateral communi-
cation and contact
is generally more conducive and
encouraging for teams, and makes it easier for them to
achieve their goals without much external interference and
obstructions. As such, teams in such ﬁrms are more likely to
show a high degree involvement and commitment to the
project.

Moreover, a high degree of connectedness between func-
tional areas in the ﬁrm can make it easier for teams to access
resources and expertise from different parts of the organi-
zation [37]. These resources can enable the team to imple-
ment its ideas and plans for the development of new prod-
ucts, which can increase their enthusiasm and motivation
toward the project. On the other hand, since a new product
development team is dependent on the resources and facil-
ities of various functional areas, the absence of such re-
sources can frustrate the team and reduce its commitment.
Therefore:

H9: The degree of interdepartmental connectedness in a
ﬁrm is positively related to the extent of charged behav-
ior exhibited by a cross-functional product development
team.

3.4. The mediating role of charged behavior

So far the hypotheses developed here have considered
the effects of team structure and contextual factors on
charged behavior in teams. In turn, the charged behavior is
expected to inﬂuence new product performance. While this
approach is consistent with our contention that charged
behavior is essential for making teams excel, many of the
factors noted above also could be argued as having direct
effects on new product performance. The issue is whether
these structural and contextual factors inﬂuence product
performance because of the creation of charged behavior or
independent of charged behavior. To address this issue, we
examine the mediating effect of charged team behavior.

An important condition for the emergence of successful
new products is that team members should be able to inte-
grate diverse functional perspectives and ﬁnd new and
meaningful linkages between customer needs and technol-
ogies [38,60]. As noted before, members of a charged team
collaboratively work on different aspects of a project, freely
question and challenge each others’ perspectives, have a
high degree of commitment to the development of a supe-
rior product and thus, are expected to develop a meaning-

fully new and successful new product. Thus, unless team
structural and contextual factors facilitate the creation of
such charged conditions in teams, it is likely to be quite
difﬁcult to develop very successful new products. In other
words, to a large extent, structural and contextual factors
inﬂuence new product performance through the creation of
charged behavior. We expect team structure to operate on
product performance only through charged behavior (a case
of full mediation). However, research on organizational
innovation suggests that contextual factors also can have a
direct effect on new product outcomes in addition to exert-
ing an inﬂuence through charged behavior (a case of partial
mediation). For instance, taking customer input into account
during new product development can improve product per-
formance directly simply because such new products are
likely to satisfy customer needs better [11]. Similarly, qual-
ity orientation and interdepartmental connectedness have
been argued to be good for product outcomes [29,65].
Hence:

H10a: The effect of team structural variables on new
product performance is fully mediated by charged be-
havior

H10b: The effect of contextual factors on new product
performance is partially mediated by charged behavior.

4. Method

4.1. Data collection

Key informants from cross-functional new product de-
velopment teams provided the data to test our hypotheses.
Data were collected via mail survey. The sampling frame
was a list of large consumer product manufacturing ﬁrms
which had introduced new products within the previous two
years.

Following similar key informant research, we identiﬁed
the person on each team who would be highly knowledge-
able about team events and practices [9]. We discovered in
interviews with managers during pretesting that many new
consumer product development projects are coordinated by
marketing managers. We also discovered the difﬁculty of
identifying project managers from other functional areas
(e.g., due to the highly sensitive nature of R&D projects,
many ﬁrms were reluctant to provide us access to key
contacts in that area). Therefore, we focused on project
managers from the marketing area.

Our short-listed ﬁrms were contacted by telephone to
identify the project managers recently involved in new
product development projects. Next we contacted these
managers via telephone, screened them to ensure that they
had recently coordinated new product development initia-
tives and that such initiatives used a cross-functional team.
Project managers who met these criteria were asked to
complete questionnaires mailed to them immediately after
the screening.


R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

161

In completing the questionnaire, respondents were asked
to focus on their most recently completed new product
development project. Questionnaires were sent
to 240
project managers. A reminder with another copy of the
questionnaire was sent to managers who had not responded
after three weeks. We received 141 responses (58.8% re-
sponse rate). On average, focal projects had been completed
nine months prior to data collection, thus making them
recent enough to ensure reasonably accurate recall of the
team experience. The industries represented in the sample
were appliances, lawn-care equipment, ofﬁce supplies, toys,
processed food products, health and beauty aids, and house-
hold products.

We assessed response bias using the procedure recom-
mended by Armstrong and Overton [3]. We found no sig-
niﬁcant source of response bias, either demographically or
on a randomly selected subset of questionnaire items com-
pared.

4.2. Measures

Wherever possible, existing measures of the constructs
were used. All measures were pretested and reﬁned in two
phases using data from 37 managers who completed them
for cross-functional teams in which they had participated.
Detailed interviews were held with seven managers and,
based on their feedback, the questionnaire was further re-
vised and administered to the full sample. All multi-item
constructs were measured using seven-point Likert-type
scales (see Appendix for scale items).

New Product Market Performance was operationalized
as the degree to which the new product sales and market
share were above or below planned objectives. Given that
the focus of our research is on charged behavior and its
antecedents, a market performance (or customer-based suc-
cess) measure like ours is appropriate. The performance
measure is a two item, seven-point scale anchored with “far
below planned” and “far above planned”(a5 0.95) for both
sales and market share.

Charged Behavior, our key model variable, has been
deﬁned as the extent to which teams are enthusiastically and
jointly driven to develop superior new products. Consistent
with the component dimensions we have identiﬁed, we
operationalized charged behavior as the extent to which a
team exhibits commitment to superior performance, internal
cooperation in achieving the team’s goals, free challenging
of alternative perspectives, open information exchange that
stimulates new ideas, and a feeling of enjoyment among
team members. The ﬁve-item, seven-point Likert-type scale
anchored with “strongly agree” and “strongly disagree”
(a 5 0.90) taps speciﬁc team behaviors indicative of
charged teams. For example, a typical item in the scale is,
“Team members freely challenged the assumptions under-
lying each other’s perspectives.”

Three team structural variables were examined in this
research. Physical Proximity was measured as the extent to

which team members work in close proximity to each other.
Proximity is a single-item scale that indicates the percentage
of the team housed in the same location. Outcome Interde-
pendence is the degree to which members of a cross-func-
tional team are accountable to the team rather than only to
respective functional areas and the extent to which evalua-
tion and rewards are tied to project performance rather than
to individual functional performance. The scale is a three-
item, seven-point Likert-type scale anchored with “strongly
agree” and “strongly disagree” (a 5 0.73) based on the
work of Wageman [61] and Johnson, Johnson, and Stanne
[33]. A typical item from this scale is, “For the project work,
members’ rewards or gains depended on how well they
performed on their department-related tasks, and not on the
performance of the overall project” (reverse coded). Team
Longevity was operationalized as the number of months
team members worked together to ﬁnish the project. The
average duration of a project reported in this survey was
16.12 months.

We explored a variety of contextual variables that could
potentially affect charged behavior. Senior Management
Encouragement to Take Risk refers to the degree to which
top management actively encouraged team members to be
venturesome and to pursue unique and untried ideas. This
scale is comprised of three seven-point Likert-type items
anchored with “strongly agree” and “strongly disagree”
(a5 0.80). A typical item for this scale is, “It was expected
that the team would be venturesome while developing this
product.”

Firms also may choose to strongly emphasize a Quality
Orientation, which we operationally deﬁned as the extent to
which a ﬁrm emphasizes quality and practices total quality
management. The quality orientation scale is a two item,
seven-point Likert-type scale anchored with “strongly
agree” and “strongly disagree” (a 5 0.72) with a typical
item like, “The organization practices total quality manage-
ment.”

We also explored context variables related to teams’
assessment of market needs by using either direct customer
feedback or the extent of competition in the ﬁeld. We
explore Exposure to Customer Input, measured as the
extent to which input from end users was relied upon in the
development of the product concept and design. Exposure
to customer input is a three item, seven-point Likert-type
scale anchored with “strongly agree” and “strongly dis-
agree” (a 5 0.74) which tapped the team’s reliance on
customer feedback in concept development, idea screening,
and product design. Extent of Competition refers to the
self-reported number of competitors in the market for the
speciﬁc product being developed. The average number of
reported competitors was 15.

Finally, a context variable which could create a climate
conducive to charged teams is Interdepartmental Connect-
edness, which refers to the ease of communication and
contact, both formal and informal, across functional bound-
aries in the work environment. In the connected ﬁrm, tasks


162

R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

Table 1
Scale Reliabilities, Means, and Scale-Level Correlations (f, std.)

Scale

Outcome Interdependence (OI)
Physical Proximity (PP)
Team Longevity (TL)
Interdepartmental

Connectedness (IC)
Exposure to Customer

Input (CI)

Senior Management

Encouragement
to Take Risk (ER)

Quality Orientation (QO)
Extent of Competition (NP)
Charged Team Behavior (CB)
Product Performance (PF)

* p , .05

** p , .01

a

.73
.–
.–
.79

.74

.80

.72
.–
.90
.95

Mean

OI

PP

TL

IC

CI

ER

QO

NP

CB

PF

4.13
4.69
16.12
5.42

4.88

4.25

5.30
15.13
5.15
4.72

1.00
2.10
2.08
.29*

.06

.28*

1.00
.09
2.10

.11

.03

.21
2.09

.45**
.04

.33**
.11
2.02
2.06

1.00
.10

.15

.10

.17
.14
.14
.08

1.00

2.08

1.00

.10

.22*

1.00

.36**

2.12

.33**
.15

.03
.13
.24*
.11

.36**
.07
.22*
.10

1.00
2.01
.17
.23*

1.00
.13
2.14

1.00
.26**

1.00

and information can be shared easily across functional ar-
eas. This three-item, seven-point Likert-type scale anchored
with “strongly agree” and “strongly disagree” (a 5 0.79)
has items like, “In this organization, it is easy to talk with
virtually anyone you need to, regardless of their rank or
position” (Jaworski and Kohli [31]).

4.3. Analysis

Scales used in this research went through several itera-
tions of analysis prior to their use in model testing. During
pretesting, scales were pared, with only the best and most
appropriate items remaining in the instrument for primary
data collection. After main data collection, iterative explor-
atory and conﬁrmatory factor analyses led to the removal of
three items with insufﬁcient validity. Final exploratory fac-
tor analysis of all scale items together generated a clean
solution. Each scale demonstrated unidimensionality, with
only minimal cross-loading. No item cross-loaded signiﬁ-
cantly on an alternative scale. We performed conﬁrmatory
factor analysis (CFA) on all of the multi-item scales used in
this research. Descriptive statistics of the construct mea-
sures are found in Table 1.

For CFA, we broke the scales into two groups for anal-
ysis based on each construct’s focus. Team-level constructs
(outcome interdependence, charged behavior, performance)
were tested together, as were contextual variables (senior
management encouragement to take risk, exposure to cus-
tomer input, quality orientation, interdepartmental connect-
edness). Our CFA results indicate unidimensional scales for
all constructs and good discriminant validity: team-level
5 61.55, p 5 .002, GFI 5 0.92, NNFI 5
variables (x2
0.95, CFI 5 0.97); context variables (x2
5 62.56, p 5
.007, GFI 5 0.93, NNFI 5 0.88, CFI 5 0.95). All scales
demonstrate sufﬁcient reliability.

(33)

(38)

One of our key interests is the performance of the
charged behavior construct. CFA results support the use of
our scale. The scale was tested in conjunction with perfor-

mance and outcome interdependence as a team-level vari-
able. The results of this test indicate that each individual
component item of charged behavior meets or exceeds stan-
dards for inclusion. For example, each of the items loads
signiﬁcantly onto the factor and demonstrates sufﬁcient
variance extracted based on Bagozzi and Yi [4], that is, l2
. 0.50. In addition, measurement error (d) is acceptably
low. Scale reliability, accounting for item measurement
error, is high (r 5 0.90).

(219)

Model testing was performed using structural equations
modeling. Then, the measurement and our hypothesized
structural model, Mo, were tested simultaneously with in-
5 359.14, GFI 5 0.84,
dividual item indicators (x2
NNFI 50.88, CFI 5 0.90, RMSEA 5 0.068). These results
suggest a model that ﬁts the data adequately. To examine
the mediation hypotheses (H10a and H10b) further, we
tested a saturated model, M1, to determine the mediating
role of charged behavior and the direct links between the
antecedents and product market performance. The saturated
model M1 is an incremental better ﬁt to the data than the
5 342.37,
fully mediated hypothesized model (x2
GFI 5 0.84, NNFI 50.88, CFI 5 0.91, RMSEA 5 0.067).
A x2 difference test indicates that the difference is signiﬁ-
cant (D x2
5 16.77, p , .05). In other words, as expected,
our data suggest that some direct links exist between ante-
cedent variables and new product performance. There is
support for full, partial, and even no mediation. Since the
fully saturated model has a better ﬁt and is consistent with
hypotheses (H10a and H10b), we report and use this model
for accepting or rejecting the hypotheses.

(211)

(8)

5. Results

The tests we performed show support for many of our
hypotheses (see Table 2 and Fig. 2). Not only do we ﬁnd
that teams’ charged behavior is a signiﬁcant construct in its
own right, but we also uncover its impact on the market


R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

163

Table 2
Results of the Structural Model Test

Relationship

Hypothesized Structural Model
g11 PHYSICAL PROXIMITY 3 CHARGED BEHAVIOR
g12 TEAM LONGEVITY 3 CHARGED BEHAVIOR
g13 OUTCOME INTERDEPENDENCE 3 CHARGED BEHAVIOR
g14 INTERDEPARTMENTAL CONNECTEDNESS 3 CHARGED BEHAVIOR
g15 SR MGT ENCOURAGEMENT TO TAKE RISK 3 CHARGED BEHAVIOR
g16 EXPOSURE TO CUSTOMER INPUT 3 CHARGED BEHAVIOR
g17 EXTENT OF COMPETITION 3 CHARGED BEHAVIOR
g18 QUALITY ORIENTATION 3 CHARGED BEHAVIOR
b21 CHARGED BEHAVIOR 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET PERFORMANCE

Direct Effects of Antecedents on New Product Market Performance
g21 PHYSICAL PROXIMITY 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET PERFORMANCE
g22 TEAM LONGEVITY 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET PERFORMANCE
g23 OUTCOME INTERDEPENDENCE 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET PERFORMANCE
g24 INTERDEPARTMENTAL CONNECTEDNESS 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET PERFORMANCE
g25 SR MGT ENCOURAGEMENT TO TAKE RISK 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET
g26 EXPOSURE TO CUSTOMER INPUT 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET PERFORMANCE
g27 EXTENT OF COMPETITION 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET PERFORMANCE
g28 QUALITY ORIENTATION 3 NEW PRODUCT MARKET PERFORMANCE

PERFORMANCE

Error Terms

Est.

Std.

T

p

Mediation

2.01 2.01 2.10
.ns
1.23
.ns
3.67 ,.001
2.42 ,.01
.46
.ns
2.02 ,.05
1.96 ,.05
.ns

2.04 2.03 2.24

.01
.36
.27
.06
.17
.01

.10
.38
.25
.04
.19
.16

.20

.19

1.73 ,.05

.13

.17

1.90 ,.05 No Mediation

2.01 2.07 2.86
2.02 2.02 2.18
.29
2.01 2.01 2.06

.04

.03

.ns No Effects
.ns
.ns
.ns No Effects

Full Mediation
Full Mediation

.15
2.01
.47

.16
.15
.34

.059 Partial Mediation
Partial Mediation

1.59
1.84 ,.05
2.59 ,.01 No Mediation

z11 Dependent Variable CHARGED BEHAVIOR
z22 Dependent Variable NEW PRODUCT PERFORMANCE

1.30
1.69

.66
.79

performance of new products and a number of antecedents
that contribute to charged teams. Consistent with H1, we
found that teams’ charged behavior has a signiﬁcant impact
on market performance in new product development con-
texts (b21 5 0.20, T 5 1.73, p , .05). This suggests that
highly charged teams do produce more successful new
products than teams that are less charged.

Of the team structural variables, we ﬁnd that outcome
interdependence does have a signiﬁcant positive effect on
charged behavior (g13 5 0.36, T 53.67, p , .001), sup-
porting H3. Thus, when team members’ evaluations and
rewards are tied to group outcomes, charged behavior is
enhanced. Several contextual variables enhance charged
behavior. As we predicted in H7, use of customer input to
the team was positively related to the team’s charged be-
havior (g16 5 0.17, T 52.02, p , .05). Consistent with our
expectations in H8, extent of competition is related to
charged behavior (g17 5 0.01, T 51.96, p , .05). A
climate of openness between functional areas also facilitates
teams’ charged behavior. When interdepartmental connect-
edness increases, so does the likelihood of charged behavior
(g14 5 0.27, T 52.42, p , .01), which supports H9.

Contrary to H2, physical proximity has no effect on
charged behavior (g11 5 20.01, T 5 20.10, ns), suggest-
ing that teams can be energized even without being in the
same location. We also cannot conclude that team longevity

has a signiﬁcant impact on team’s charged behavior (g12 5
0.01, T 51.23, p 5 .11); thus there is no support for H4.
Regarding managerial imperatives placed on the team, we
ﬁnd that, contrary to H5, senior management encourage-
ment to take risk is not related to teams’ charged behavior
(g15 5 0.06, T 50.46, ns). Also unexpected (H6), quality
orientation also was not related to charged behavior (g18 5
20.04, T 5 20.24, ns).

Regarding mediation, we explored the saturated model
versus the fully-mediated model, with mixed support for
H10a and H10b. Charged behavior fully mediates the effect
of outcome interdependence and interdepartmental connect-
edness on products’ market performance. Outcome interde-
pendence does not have a signiﬁcant direct effect on product
performance (g23 5 20.02, T 0.18, ns); neither does inter-
departmental connectedness (g24 5 0.04, T 50.29, ns). In
addition to its signiﬁcant positive relationship to charged
behavior, use of customer input has a signiﬁcant direct
effect on market performance (g26 5 0.15, T 51.59, p 5
.056). The same is true for extent of competition (g27 5
20.01, T 1.84, p , .05). We conclude that, overall, there is
support that charged behavior in teams only partially me-
diates the effect of reliance on customer input. On the other
hand, while the extent of competition enhances charged
behavior, it has a negative direct effect on market perfor-
mance.


164

R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

Fig. 2. Hypothesized Model With Parameter Estimates

Neither the effect of senior management encouragement
to take risk on market performance nor the effect of team
longevity on performance is mediated through the product
development team’s charged behavior, that is, no signiﬁcant
direct effects on performance or on charged behavior, along
with no signiﬁcant indirect effects on market performance
through charged behavior. We must conclude that these two
variables have little effect in this data.

There is evidence, however, that the effects of two vari-
ables on product performance are not mediated by charged
behavior at all; instead they have direct effects on products’
market performance without the mediator charged behavior.
Quality orientation is positively, and directly related to
market performance (g28 5 0.47, T 52.59, p , .01).
Similarly, physical proximity is positively and directly re-
lated to product performance (g21 5 0.13, T 51.90, p ,
.05). Neither is signiﬁcantly directly related to charged
behavior.

6. Conclusion and discussion

In this research we have explored the complexity of
contextual and team factors that lead some cross-functional
new product development teams to be highly driven to show
superior market performance,
call
“charged.” We validate with our data the conclusion that

condition we

a

these charged teams are more likely to be associated with
successful new product introductions.

What conditions contribute to teams’ charged behavior?
In terms of team structure, having individual evaluations
and rewards tied to team performance and team members
who are accountable to the team rather than to their func-
tional areas seems to increase the likelihood of charged
behavior. Several contextual variables also engendered
charged behavior. We ﬁnd that both direct customer feed-
back and the extent of competition in the marketplace help
to charge teams. We conﬁrm that a climate of interdepart-
mental connectedness enhances the likelihood of charged
teams.

Our results suggest that outcome interdependence and
interdepartmental connectedness are related to new prod-
ucts’ market performance only through charged team be-
havior. This means that joint rewards and reduced func-
tional boundaries only help product outcomes to the extent
that they create a climate conducive to the development of
charged behavior in the team.

The effect of exposure to customer input is partially
mediated by charged behavior. In other words, in addition to
the positive effects on charged behavior in product devel-
opment
teams, a new product’s market performance is
helped by fostering avenues of direct customer feedback.
While extent of competition has the beneﬁt of being posi-
tively associated with charged behavior, it also has a neg-


R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

165

ative direct effect on product market performance. The
pattern of results suggests that the negative effects of the
substitute offerings in the marketplace may be offset by
creating a situation which charges teams. This offsetting of
adverse effects of quick market response is an interesting
area for future research on charged teams. We speculate that
one explanation for this could be that charged teams gen-
erate superior products rather than make quick incremental
changes in response to market requirements.

Our results suggest that several antecedents do not ap-
pear to facilitate charged behavior in cross-functional prod-
uct development teams. Physical proximity among team
members and quality orientation are not associated with
charged behavior. While we had some doubts about the
effects of physical proximity, quality orientation, and team
longevity, we had hypothesized positive effects based on
previous research. Regarding team longevity, we would like
to note that, unlike research in group development which
suggests that time plays an important role in forming strong
relationships in group [59], Rusbult, Farrell, Rogers and
Mainous [53] comment that many relationships develop, not
along preplanned trajectories but with their own unique
timelines. This may be what we discover here. Future re-
search can help us understand the processes through which
time has an impact on charged behavior.

Contrary to our expectations, senior management’s en-
couragement to take the risk of pursuing new approaches
was not related to teams’ charged behavior. We assumed
that when teams are given the green light to be risky and
innovative, they will choose to or be able to do so. But that
does not seem to be the case. It could also be true that team
members in some ﬁrms discount this kind of encouragement
because they know that failure or risk will not really be
tolerated. Thus, even though they are told to be risky, the
costs of those risks are, in actuality, considered too high. It
is also possible that if we had focused on encouragement to
take risk in general rather than encouragement to pursue
new approaches to the development of the product, we
would have found a different effect. Future research may
want to focus on the effect of general encouragement to take
risk construct on charged behavior and new product outcomes.
Although we did not expect it, we found a positive direct
effect of physical proximity on new product performance
(without any mediation by charged behavior). One of the
key advantages of physical proximity is the ability to more
easily share resources and meet face-to-face. As a result, con-
sistency across decisions and processes might be enhanced,
which can lead to superior new product market performance.

6.1. Limitations

Some potential limitations need to be recognized and
kept in view while interpreting the ﬁndings of this study.
Based on previous research using the industries sampled in
this research, we suspect that the sampled ﬁrms exist in
relatively stable and mature consumer industries for which

the product development process is likely to be fairly pre-
dictable and consists of well understood steps. In other
industries, especially those that are known to be volatile and
uncertain (e.g., high-tech electronics), experiential tactics
involving frequent iterations of design are more appropriate
and thus, the product development process is quite different
and more intricate [17]. Caution needs to be used while
applying the ﬁndings of our research to ﬁrms which operate
in an uncertain environment.

It is possible that projects which are coordinated by
marketing managers (as was the case with projects in our
study), rather than by managers from R&D or manufactur-
ing, may involve less product complexity and relatively less
collaboration among technical areas such as R&D and man-
ufacturing. Therefore, some caution need to be exercised in
applying the ﬁndings of this study to complex products
which involve intense collaboration among technical areas.
It should be noted, too, that our measures of physical
proximity and team longevity were single item measures.
Perhaps it would be possible to detect the effect of proxim-
ity and longevity on charged behavior if we were to use
multi-item measures that capture different aspects of prox-
imity and longevity [28]. Further, product development
team performance is a multifaceted concept [24,25]. Here,
we chose to focus on market performance of the new prod-
uct (a customer-based success measure). But other perfor-
mance measures such as technical and ﬁnancial success
measures are also relevant to our fuller understanding of
charged teams and should be examined in future research on
charged teams. Finally, we have data from single respon-
dents in these teams. Even though we took great care to
select the most appropriate respondent, data from multiple
respondents would give an additional measure of validity to
our ﬁndings.

6.2. Research implications

Our results have several implications for researchers.
First, while researchers have generally focused on the role
of cooperation, we explore richer and more complex behav-
iors in cross-functional teams. Cooperation is an important
ﬁrst step toward improving effectiveness of a set of indi-
viduals from different functional areas who generally have
deep-rooted biases and stereotypes toward each other, and it
is a dimension of charged behavior. However, charged
product development teams not only overcome the adverse
effect of interfunctional biases and stereotypes, they get
exceptional market performance. An important issue for
future research is the validation of the charged behavior
construct its discriminant validity.

Our study indicates that some of the factors suggested by
the traditional social psychology research for enhancing
team effectiveness (e.g., physical proximity and team lon-
gevity) may not necessarily create charged or excited teams.
Instead, charged teams need a special arrangement, in which
members are accountable to the team and their evaluation


166

R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

and rewards are also linked to the performance of the team.
Future research efforts may want to examine what other
structural factors create a charged atmosphere in product
development teams.

In recent years, many US ﬁrms have embraced total
quality management principles. The total quality approach
requires continuous improvement
in products and pro-
cesses. While TQM has its many advantages, as our results
indicate, it cannot create a charged atmosphere. From a
research perspective, considering that TQM is widely being
practiced by ﬁrms, it is crucial to understand what condi-
tions will create charged teams in a ﬁrm with a heavy
emphasis on quality.

Finally, while a good deal of attention has been given by
researchers to product development teams, we know little
about how the organizational context (e.g., the structure of
the ﬁrm) affects these teams and their performance. For
example, our research suggests that organization structure
that creates a high degree of connectedness among various
functional areas facilitates the development of a charged
atmosphere in teams. Thus, it is important for researchers to
examine how various other characteristics of organization
structure affect the working of cross-functional teams.

6.3. Managerial implications

From a managerial perspective, this study highlights the
importance of creating highly charged product development
teams in order to achieve exceptional performance. Our study
indicates to managers that their reliance on some of the factors
suggested by the traditional social psychology research for
enhancing team effectiveness (e.g., physical proximity and
team longevity) may not necessarily create charged teams.
Instead, teams will ﬂourish when they are given authority to
hold their members accountable for their performance and to
reward them for superior contribution to the team/project.

The popular literature on product development

teams
mainly focuses on team factors and pays less attention to the
role of organizational factors in the successful operation of
cross-functional teams. However, the present study shows that
to get the most out of cross-functional teams, it is important to
create the appropriate organizational context. Thus, senior
managers need to realize that if there are interfunctional com-
munication problems or the structure does not permit frequent
contact between individuals across functional boundaries, the
creation of a strongly charged team and development of a
successful new product will be hindered.

Furthermore, while reliance on customer input during
new product development is widely believed to help in the
development of higher quality products (Hauser and Claus-
ing 1988), our ﬁndings suggest that it can also motivate and
energize product development
teams. Considering that
product development teams often short cut the process of
getting information from customers (Cooper 1993), it is
particularly important for senior managers to ensure that
such teams remain in close touch with customers. In fact,

product development professionals can have richer and
more direct interaction with customers given that now there
are a variety of new media available for this purpose (e.g.,
interactive Web sites and chat rooms).

Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank the JPIM editor (Abbie
Grifﬁn) and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful
and helpful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript.

References

[1] Amabile TM. The Social Psychology of Creativity. New York:

Springer-Verlag, 1983.

[2] Andrews J, Smith DC. In search of marketing imagination: factors
affecting the creativity of marketing programs for mature products.
Journal of Marketing Research 1996;33:174 – 87.

[3] Armstrong JS, Overton TS. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys.

Journal of Marketing Research 1977;14:396–402.

[4] Bagozzi RP, Yi Y. On the evaluation of structural equation models.

Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 1988;16:74 –94.

[5] Battenhausen KL. Five years of groups research: What we have
learned and what needs to be addressed. Journal of Management
1991;17(2):345– 81.

[6] Bounds G, Yorks L, Adams M, Ranney G. Beyond Total Quality

Management. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.

[7] Brewer MB, Miller N. Beyond the contact hypothesis: theoretical
perspectives on desegregation. In:Groups in Contact: The Psychology
of Desegregation, Norman Miller and Marilynn Brewer, (eds.). Or-
lando: Academic Press, 1984:281–302.

[8] Buzzell RD, Gale BT. PIMS Principle. New York: Free Press, 1987.
[9] Cini MA, Moreland RL, Levine JM. Group stafﬁng levels and re-
sponse to prospective and new group members. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 1993;65:723–34.

[10] Clark BH, Montgomery DB. Managerial identiﬁcation of competi-

tors. Journal of Marketing 1999;63:67– 83.

[11] Clark KB, Fujimoto T. Product Development Performance. Boston:

Harvard Business School Press, 1991.

[12] Cohen SG, Bailey DE. What makes teams work: group effectiveness
research from the shop ﬂoor to the executive suite. Journal of Man-
agement 1997;23:239 –90.

[13] Cooper RG. Winning at New Products. New York: Addison-Wesley

Publishing Company, 1993.

[14] Cooper RG, Kleinschmidt EJ. Success factors in product innovation.

Industrial Marketing Management 1987;16:215–23.

[15] Cyert RM, March JG. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. New Jersey:

Prentice Hall, 1963.

[16] Dougherty D. Interpretive barriers to successful product innovation in

large organizations. Organization Science 1992;3:179 –202.

[17] Eisenhardt KM, Tabrizi BN. Accelerating adaptive processes: prod-
uct innovation in the global industry. Administrative Science Quar-
terly 1995;40:84 –110.

[18] Ford RC, Randolph WA. Cross-functional structures: a review, and
integration of matrix organization, and project management. Journal
of Management 18: 267–94, 1992.

[19] Forsyth DR. Group Dynamics. Paciﬁc Grove, California: Brooks/

Cole Publishing Company, 1990.

[20] Galbraith J. Designing Complex Organization. Reading: Addison-

Wesley Publishing, 1973.

[21] Garvin DA. Managing Quality. New York: The Free Press, 1988.
[22] Gregory K. Native-view paradigms: multiple cultures, and culture conﬂicts


R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

167

in organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly 28: 369–78, 1983.

[44] Leavitt HJ, Lipman-Blumen J. Hot groups. Harvard Business Review

[23] Grifﬁn A, Hauser J. Integration of R&D and marketing: a review and
analysis of the literature. Journal of Product Innovation Management
1996;13:191–215.

[24] Grifﬁn A, Page AL. An interim report on measuring product devel-
opment success and failure. Journal of Product Innovation Manage-
ment 1993;10:291–308.

[25] Grifﬁn A, Page AL. PDMA success measurement project: recommended
measures for product development success, and failure. Journal of Prod-
uct Innovation Management 13: 478–96, 1996.

[26] Gupta AK, Raj SP, Wilemon D. A model for studying R&D-market-
ing interface in the product development process. Journal of Market-
ing 50: 7–17, 1986.

[27] Hackman RJ, Wageman R. Total quality management: empirical, con-
ceptual, and practical issues. Administrative Science Quarterly 1995;40:
309–42.

73: 109 –16 (July-August 1995).

[45] Mackie DM, Goethals GR. Individual and group goals. In: Review of
Personality and Social Psychology, C. Hendrick (ed.). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage Publications, 1987:144 – 66.

[46] Maltz E, Kohli AK. Market intelligence dissemination across func-

tional boundaries. Journal of Marketing Research 1996;33:47– 61.

[47] Menon A, Jaworski BJ, Kohli AK. Product quality: impact of inter-
departmental interactions. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Sci-
ence 1997;25:187–200.

[48] Moenaert RK, Souder WE. An information transfer model for inte-
grating marketing and R&D personnel in NPD projects. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 1990;7:91–107.

[49] Morgan NA, Piercy NF. Interactions between marketing and quality
at the SBU level: inﬂuences and outcomes. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science 1998;26:190 –208.

[28] Hair JF, Anderson RE, Tatham RL, Black WC. Multivariate Data

[50] Nonaka I, Takeuchi H. Knowledge Creating Company. New York:

Analysis with Readings. New York: MacMillan, 1999.

Oxford University Press, 1995.

[29] Hauser JR, Clausing D. The house of quality. Harvard Business

Review, 66: 309 –19 (May/June 1988)

[30] Imai M. Kaizen: The Key to Japan’s Competitive Success. New York:

Random House Business Division, 1986.

[31] Jaworski BJ, Kohli AK. Market orientation: antecedents and conse-

quences. Journal of Marketing 1993;57:53–70.

[32] Johnson DW, Johnson RT, Maruyama G. Interdependence and interper-
sonal attraction among heterogenous and homogenous individuals: a
theoretical formulation and a meta-analysis of the research. Review of
Education and Research 1983;53:5–54.

[33] Johnson DW, Johnson RT, Stanne MB. Impact of goal and resource
interdependence on problem-solving success. The Journal of Social
Psychology 1989;129(5):621–29.

[34] Juran JM, Gyrna FM. Quality Planning, and Analysis from Product

[51] Pierce JL, Rubenfeld S, Morgan S. Employee ownership: a concep-
tual model of process and effects. Academy of Management Review
1992;16:121– 44.

[52] Pinto MB, Pinto JK, Prescott JE. Antecedents and consequences of
team cross-functional cooperation. Management Science

project
1993;39:1281–97.

[53] Rusbult CE, Farrell D, Rogers G, Mainous AG. Impact of exchange
variables on exit, voice, loyalty, and neglect: an integrative model of
responses to declining job satisfaction. Academy of Management
Journal 1988;31:599 – 627.

[54] Sethi R. New Product Quality and Product Development Teams.

Journal of Marketing 64: 1–14 (April 2000).

[55] Sherif M, Sherif CW. Social Psychology. New York: Harper, Row,

1969.

Development Through Use. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1989.

[56] Takeuchi H, Nonaka I, The new new product development game.

[35] Kahn K. Interdepartmental Integration: a deﬁnition with implications
for product development performance. Journal of Product Innovation
Management 13: 137–51, 1996.

[36] Kahn K, McDonough E III. An empirical study of the relationships
among co-location, integration, and performance, and satisfaction.
Journal of Product Innovation Management 1997;14:161–78.

[37] Kanter RM. Change Masters. New York: Simon, and Schuster, 1983.
[38] Kanter RM. When a thousand ﬂowers bloom: structural, collective,
and social conditions for innovation in organizations. In: Research in
Organizational Behavior, Vol 10, Barry M. Staw and L. Cummings
(eds.). Greenwich: JAI Press, 1988:169 –211.

Harvard Business Review 64: 137– 46 (January/February 1986).

[57] Thamhain HJ. Managing technologically innovative team efforts to-
ward new product success. Journal of Product Innovation Manage-
ment 1990;7:5–18.

[58] Thamhain HJ, Wilemon DL. Building high performance engineering
project teams. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 1987;
34:130 –37.

[59] Tuckman BW. Developmental sequences in small groups. Psycho-

logical Bulletin 1965;63:384 –99.

[60] Van de Ven A. Central problems in the management of innovation.

Management Science 1986;32:590 – 607.

[39] Katz R. The effects of group longevity on project communication and

[61] Wageman R. Interdependence and group effectiveness. Administra-

performance. Administrative Science Quarterly 1982;27:81–104.

tive Science Quarterly 1995;40:145– 80.

[40] Katz R. How a team at Digital Equipment designed the ‘Alpha’ chip.
In: The Human Side of Managing Technological Innovation, Ralph
Katz (ed.). New York: Oxford University Press, 1997:137–148.

[41] Keller RT. Predictors of the performance of project groups in R&D

organizations. Academy of Management Journal 1986;29:715–26.

[62] Wheelwright SC, Clark KB. Revolutionizing Product Development.

New York: The Free Press, 1992.

[63] Wilder DA. Social categorization: implications for creation and re-
duction of intergroup bias. Advances in Experimental Psychology
1986;19:291–355.

[42] Kelley R, Caplan J. How Bell Labs create star performers. Harvard

[64] Wolff MF. Creating high-performing teams. Research Technology

Business Review 71: 128 –139 (July/August 1993)

Management 36: 5–7 (November/December 1993).

[43] Leavitt HJ. The old days, hot groups, and managers’ lib. Adminis-

[65] Zaltman G, Duncan R, Holbek J. Innovations, and Organizations.

trative Science Quarterly 1996;41:288 –300.

New York: John Wiley, and Sons, 1973.


168

R. Sethi, C.Y. Nicholson / The Journal of Product Innovation Management 18 (2001) 154 –168

Appendix
Multiple-Item Scales

Market Performance

Sales
Market Share

“far below planned” to “far above planned”
“far below planned” to “far above planned”

Charged Behavior

Exposure to the information and perspectives of other departments helped members to think of new ideas

about the product.

Members were highly cooperative with each other during the development of this project.
Team members freely challenged the assumptions underlying each other’s ideas and perspectives.
Team members were very committed to developing a superior product.
Team members greatly enjoyed working on this project.

For this project, team members were accountable to their respective departments, and not to the team. (R)
For the project work, team members’ rewards depended on how well they performed on their department-

related tasks and not on the performance of the overall project. (R)

For the project work, members’ rewards or gains depended on how well they performed on their

department-related tasks, and not on the performance of the overall project. (R)

The team was encouraged to take the risk of pursuing very new product ideas.
It was expected that the team would be venturesome while developing this product.
It was expected that the team would make a major deviation from the existing thinking underlying the

product.

This organization places a great deal of emphasis on product quality.
The organization practices total quality management.

Development of product idea/concept (R)
Evaluation/Screening of product idea/concept (R)
Development of design (R)

“a great extent” to “not at all”
“a great extent” to “not at all”
“a great extent” to ”not at all”

In this organization, it is easy to talk with virtually anyone you need to, regardless of their rank or

position.

There is ample opportunity for informal “hall talk” among individuals from different departments in this

organization.

In this organization, employees from different departments feel comfortable contacting each other when

the need arises.

Outcome
Interdependence

Senior Management
Encouragement
to Take Risk

Quality Orientation

Exposture to

Customer Input

Interdepartmental

Connectedness

(R) — Reverse coded

Biographical Sketches of the Authors

Structural and Contextual Correlates of Charged
Behavior in Product Development Teams

About the authors:

Dr. Rajesh Sethi is Associate Professor of Marketing in the Clarkson
University School of Business, Potsdam, New York. Dr. Sethi re-
ceived his Ph.D. from The University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
His dissertation was selected as one of the top three dissertations and
received an Honorable Mention in the American Marketing Associ-
ation’s Doctoral Dissertation Competition in 1996. His research in-
terests are in the areas of new product development, cross-functional
teams, using the World-Wide-Web for new product development, and
electronic commerce. Dr. Sethi has published his research in Journal
of Marketing, Journal of Marketing Research, Journal of the Acad-
emy of Marketing Science, and Journal of Public Management and
Social Policy. He was given the Outstanding New Teacher Award at
Clarkson University. Prior to his academic career, Dr. Sethi had over

ten years of professional experience in industry. He has held various
managerial positions with a subsidiary of Toyota Motor Corporation
in the areas of new product development, marketing, vendor devel-
opment, and project management.

Dr. Carolyn Nicholson is Assistant Professor of Marketing at Stetson
University, Deland, FL. Dr. Nicholson received her Ph.D. in Mar-
keting from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA. Dr. Nicholson’s research has been published in
Journal of Retailing, and Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science. She also has numerous conference proceedings and is active
in a variety of national and regional professional organizations. Dr.
Nicholson’s research interests include the behavioral dynamics of
distribution channel relationships, distribution channel communica-
tion, cross-functional teams, and the use of the World-Wide-Web
for marketing communication. Prior to her academic career, Dr.
Nicholson held positions in marketing and production planning for
aftermarket products for a subsidiary of Federal-Mogul Corporation.

