Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

www.elsevier.com/locate/jom

Managing beyond the factory walls: Effects of four types of

strategic integration on manufacturing plant performance

Morgan Swink *, Ram Narasimhan, Cynthia Wang

Department of Marketing and Supply Chain Management, Eli Broad College of Business,

Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, United States

Received 7 September 2004; received in revised form 4 November 2005; accepted 17 November 2005

Available online 31 March 2006

Abstract

In this paper we focus on the integration of strategic objectives and process knowledge that a manufacturing factory collects from
its external interfaces. Using data from a variety of manufacturing industries, this study examines four different types of strategic
integration at the manufacturing plant level. We use a path analytic approach to simultaneously assess the contributions of the
various types of integration to manufacturing-based competitive capabilities and business level performance. In addition, we
examine the intervening roles that manufacturing-based competitive capabilities play in mediating the relationships between
strategic integration and business performance. We ﬁnd that each type of integration activity has unique beneﬁts and detriments.
These ﬁndings extend prior studies of manufacturing and supply chain integration by broadening the theory relating to strategic
integration. The results also provide implications for manufacturing managers who seek to design integration policies and
associated resource deployments.
# 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Manufacturing strategy; Integration; Empirical methods

1. Introduction

Various integration concepts have received attention
from operations management researchers in recent
years. In this paper we focus on manufacturing strategic
integration, the integration of strategic and technical
knowledge that a manufacturing factory collects
from external interfacing sources. We view strategic
integration as a process, rather than an outcome. An
integration process includes activities that acquire,
share, and consolidate strategic knowledge and

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 517 353 6381.

E-mail addresses: Swinkm@msu.edu (M. Swink),

Narasimh@msu.edu (R. Narasimhan), wangcynt@gmail.com
(C. Wang).

0272-6963/$ – see front matter # 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jom.2006.02.006

information with parties outside the immediate orga-
nization. We argue that factories which engage in such
activities will outperform their less-integrated peers,
because they achieve better alignment of objectives
and business processes, coordination, and ﬁt.

Our research takes the perspective that manufactur-
ing is part of an overall value chain of activities, which
include product supply and distribution, as well as
corporate strategy and technology development activ-
ities. Research studies of integration have tended to
focus on vertical supply chain activities, technology
related activities, or strategy formulation activities
(Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984; Hill, 1994; Frohlich
and Westbrook, 2001; Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Vickery
et al., 2003; Swink and Calantone, 2004). Our study
is one of the ﬁrst to simultaneously examine the rela-
tive inﬂuences of strategic integration in each of these


M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

149

areas on manufacturing-based competitive capabilities.
Evaluating and comparing a more complete set of
integration aspects than has been done in prior studies is
important given that manufacturing managers have
limited resources and must choose the most effective
deployment of these resources. Further, where other
researchers have focused on tactical or operational
integration of supply chain activities (Frohlich, 2002;
Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001; Sahin and Robinson,
2002), we investigate integration of strategic informa-
tion and knowledge. This focus places our research in
the realm of manufacturing strategy.

Like most

foregoing manufacturing

strategy
research, our unit of analysis is the manufacturing
plant. Plant level studies are important since optimal
deployment of resources must eventually be made at the
plant. The ﬁndings thus provide extensions to prior
manufacturing strategy studies in this stream. The
results also provide implications for manufacturing
managers who seek to design strategic integration
policies and associated resource deployments. For
researchers, the study extends existing supply chain
integration theories to develop a more comprehensive
strategic value chain integration theory.

studies

We use a path analytic approach to simultaneously
assess the relative contributions of various types of
strategic integration to manufacturing competitive
capabilities and business performance. In addition, we
examine the intervening roles
that manufacturing
competitive capabilities play in mediating the relation-
ships between integration and business performance.
Prior
indicate that mediation effects are
important, but they have not been tested comprehensively
or holistically (Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Vickery et al.,
2003). A multivariate approach is important given the
typically high correlations among integration activities
and among manufacturing competitive capabilities. The
multivariate analysis clariﬁes the unique inﬂuences of
each integration type on various dimensions of capability
and performance, controlling for spurious associations.
Furthermore, path analysis affords the ability to test
mediation hypotheses directly, rather than inferring them
from associations in methods such as regression.

rather

In addition, our study employs measures of practice
implementations as reﬂective indicators of types of
strategic integration,
than simply asking
informants ‘‘are you integrated?’’ This approach
reduces the threat of common method variance. More
importantly, the results suggest how strategic integra-
tion might be achieved, as well as what the relative
importance of various integration types might be. The
sample data for the study are drawn from multiple

manufacturing industries, providing an extension to
other studies that have focused on consumer, auto-
motive, or other industries.

The objectives of the study can be summarized in the

following research questions:

1. What are the speciﬁc effects on performance of
various types of strategic integration activities in
which manufacturing plants engage?

2. Do strategic integration activities foster manufactur-
ing-based competitive capabilities, or are they
mainly direct drivers of business performance?

These questions have been unaddressed in prior
research. However, there are substantial related studies
that provide a theoretical grounding and basis for
comparing our research ﬁndings. In the next section, we
review these studies and develop the theoretical
grounding for our hypotheses.

2. Literature review and theoretical model

In this paper we study the inﬂuences that integration
of strategic information and knowledge from outside
the walls of a manufacturing plant has on the
development of the plant’s competitive capabilities
and business performance. We ﬁrst describe the
theoretical constructs central
to our study. This
discussion is followed by the development of our
theoretical model and related hypotheses.

2.1. Types of value chain integration

linkages

Porter’s (1985) value chain framework provides a
useful theoretical foundation for integration concepts.
His discussion of
among value-adding
activities includes two primary dimensions. First,
Porter advocated making vertical
linkages across
supply chain activities including those executed by
suppliers and customers. A second dimension of
integration involves horizontal linkages within a ﬁrm,
that is, linkages of direct value chain activities (e.g.,
production) with supporting activities such as corporate
strategy and new product development. In the frame-
work illustrated in Fig. 1, we identify four types of
strategic integration which exist along these vertical and
horizontal dimensions: supplier integration, customer
integration, product–process technology integration,
and corporate strategy integration. Fig. 1 illustrates how
strategic integration activities create information and
knowledge ﬂows related to the manufacturing plant.
According to this framework, a manufacturing plant’s


150

M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

Fig. 1. Four types of strategic integration in the value chain.

It also includes

operations can be inﬂuenced by the acquisition of
technical knowledge and planning information from
external sources including suppliers, customers, pro-
duct–process technology developers, and corporate
strategy managers. Porter and others suggest
that
stronger linkages and higher degrees of integration
across these functional and organizational boundaries
lead to better performance for the focal organization.
A number of recent research studies conceptualize
vertical, supply chain integration as the combination of
efforts to integrate supplier and customer information
and inputs
into internal planning (Frohlich and
Westbrook, 2001; Vickery et al., 2003; Rosenzweig
et al., 2003). This conceptualization reﬂects external
integration expressed in an organization’s cross-busi-
ness relationships upstream with suppliers and down-
stream with customers.
internal
practices (such as cross-functional
teams) used to
internalize and share these external inputs within the
organization. The vertical, supply chain dimension
shown in Fig. 1 illustrates these aspects of integration.
A further distinction of supply chain integration
concepts, however, pertains to the level and primary
intent of integration activities. Some researchers have
addressed supply chain integration as a set of
operational activities, mostly concerned with better
coordination of daily or short-term ﬂows, including
transactions, material movements, and ordering pro-
cesses (see Sahin and Robinson, 2002 for a review of
this literature). Shah et al. (2002) refer to this level of
coordination as involving ‘‘arm’s length’’ and ‘‘Type 1’’
relationships. These types of relationships have a short-
term focus, involving only limited levels of information
exchange and some operational coordination. They lack
joint commitment and joint operation over a long term.
The installation of a transactional system such as a
coordinated ordering and payment system between a

supplier and a customer is an example of Type 1
relationship.
In contrast, supply chain integration
activities can also be of a more strategic nature
(Vickery et al., 2003; Narasimhan and Das, 1999).
Strategic integration activities (associated with Types 2
and 3 relationships in the vernacular of Shah et al.) are
more long-term and collaborative, including relation-
ship building, joint development activities, and sharing
of cost and capability information (Narasimhan and
Kim, 2002; Shah et al., 2002). Firms involved in
strategic integration relationships view their partners’
processes as extensions of their own. Our research
addresses these strategic processes. Accordingly we
refer to supply chain integration types as ‘‘strategic
supplier integration’’ and ‘‘strategic customer integra-
tion’’ in order to distinguish them from other, more
operationally oriented integration concepts.

internal

While supply chain research has focused on vertical
integration concepts, separate research literatures
address horizontal,
integration activities
linking manufacturing and product–process develop-
ment, and manufacturing and corporate strategic
planning, respectively. Concepts related to product–
process technology integration have been construed
rather narrowly in past research. For example, design-
manufacturing integration (DMI) has been conceptua-
lized as the degree to which manufacturing process
knowledge is integrated into new product design
concerns (Adler, 1995; Ettlie, 1995, 1997; Rusinko,
1999; Swink and Calantone, 2004). This conceptua-
lization focuses on NPD projects as the unit of analysis,
neglecting the broader effects of product–process
integration on the manufacturing plant.

Skinner (1969) was among the ﬁrst to forcefully
argue the need for greater corporate strategy integration
in manufacturing. Corporate strategy integration has
been discussed as the extent to which a manufacturing


M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

151

interactions with other

plant makes use of
intra-
organizational units to make its program objectives
and practices consistent with its internal and external
requirements. In the years since Skinner’s seminal
observations, researchers have responded by develop-
ing manufacturing strategy concepts and frameworks
that emphasize strategic focus; they have exhorted
operations managers to select primary competitive
priorities based on customers’ needs, production
capabilities, and technical
limitations (Hayes and
Wheelwright, 1984; Hill, 1994).

strategic

customer

As Fig. 1 suggests, our research examines strategic
integration activities in each of the four areas, carried out
at the manufacturing plant level. We focus on the plant’s
sharing of strategic information and knowledge with four
sources external to the plant, though not necessarily
external to the ﬁrm. These sources include customers,
suppliers, product–process technology developers, and
corporate strategy decision makers. We deﬁne strategic
integration in each of these areas as follows.
 Strategic customer integration is the process of
acquiring and assimilating customer requirements
information and related knowledge. Strategic custo-
mer integration is done in manufacturing plants in
order to gain and incorporate a better understanding
of customers’ preferences (what
is preferred and
why), and to build relationships (intimacy) with
customers. Activities commonly associated with
building greater
integration
include frequent customer contacts, communication
of satisfaction surveys, and both formal and informal
direct employee–customer interactions.
 Strategic supplier integration is the process of
acquiring and sharing operational,
technical and
ﬁnancial information and related knowledge with the
supplier and vice versa. Strategic supplier integration is
done in manufacturing plants in order to better meet
product and production requirements through devel-
oping and more effectively exploiting both the
supplier’s and plant’s capabilities and cost structures.
Activities commonly associated with strategic supplier
integration include partnerships,
co-development
activities, joint planning meetings, and shared infor-
mation systems.
 Product–process technology integration is the process
of co-developing products and processes and sharing
speciﬁcation information and related knowledge.
Product–process technology integration is pursued
in manufacturing plants
so that manufacturing
processes may incorporate a better understanding
of product requirements and so that product designers

may incorporate a better understanding of manufac-
turing process capabilities into product speciﬁcations.
Activities commonly associated with product–pro-
cess technology integration include design-for-man-
ufacture analyses, formal design approvals, design
and manufacturing job rotations, and published
design guidelines.
 Corporate strategy integration is the process of
acquiring and sharing objectives, plans, and related
knowledge pertaining to business and manufacturing
strategies. Corporate strategy integration is required
in order to improve the alignment between business
level and plant level decisions, including the setting of
performance
and the deployments of
resources. Activities associated with corporate strat-
egy integration include formal and informal commu-
nications among different levels of the organizational
hierarchy, frequent strategic planning meetings, and
clearly documented plans.

targets

Our conceptualizations of these different types of
strategic integration are consistent with the arguments
of Skinner (1969) and others, that a manufacturing
plant’s investments and practices should be in concert
with the demands placed upon it by the limits of its sup-
pliers and its own internal capabilities, by the objectives
of higher order business and functional strategies, by the
speciﬁcations of the products it produces, and by the
requirements of the markets and customers it serves.

In the following section we develop the logic for
hypotheses relating integration types to manufacturing-
based competitive capabilities and business perfor-
mance. Some confusion exists over the term, ‘‘cap-
ability,’’ as it has been used to describe both process
abilities and operational outcomes. We adopt
the
deﬁnition provided by Rosenzweig et al. (2003, p.
438), who state that a manufacturing-based competitive
capability represents ‘‘the manufacturer’s actual or
‘realized,’ competitive strength relative to primary
competitors in its target markets (Stalk et al., 1992;
Ward et al., 1994).’’ While a wide array of notions
regarding business performance exist, our conceptua-
lization focuses on performance aspects that can be
logically affected by manufacturing plant outcomes. We
focus on market response and customer satisfaction.

2.2. Linking strategic integration activities,
manufacturing competitive capabilities, and
business performance

Fig. 2 illustrates the relationships forming the
theoretical model that we sought to test in this study.


152

M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

Fig. 2. Summarized conceptual model of relationships among types of strategic integration, manufacturing competitive capabilities, and business
performance.

In our discussion of these hypothesized relationships we
draw upon several
including strategic ﬁt
theory, information processing theory, and the knowl-
edge-based view (KBV) of organizations.

theories,

Strategic ﬁt theory suggests that strategic integration
plays a strong role in the development of organizational
capabilities leading to competitive advantage (Lawr-
ence and Lorsch, 1967; Powell, 1992). Strategic
integration helps organizations to match resource
deployments with strategic demands, thus achieving a
ﬁt between manufacturing competitive capabilities and
the environment. Wheelwright (1984) suggested that
effective strategies are characterized by synergies
across key decision areas. He further deﬁned the notion
of strategic ﬁt, stating the need for consistency between
manufacturing strategy and business strategy, other
functional strategies, and the competitive environment,
respectively.

An information processing perspective (Galbraith,
1973) offers a deeper interpretation of the effects of
strategic integration activities. Rich communications
among manufacturing decision makers, workers, and
external sources of information and knowledge related
to requirements, capabilities, technologies, and strate-
gies affecting the manufacturing plant should collec-
tively lead to greater opportunities for waste reduction,
since value- and non-value-added activities are more
easily recognized (Rosenzweig et al., 2003). Similarly,
these communications enable the manufacturing plant
organization to anticipate and more fully respond to
changes in customers’ speciﬁc needs, new markets, and
technological opportunities. In the parlance of the
knowledge-based view (KBV) of the ﬁrm, strategic
integration involves knowledge dissemination and
sharing activities that create new knowledge, which
in turn improves organizational capabilities (Grant,
strategic ﬁt,
1996). Thus, all
information processing, and the KBV suggest
that

three perspectives,

integration activities should lead to superior manufac-
turing competitive capabilities.

supplier

integration,

cooperative relationships

Having laid the theoretical foundation for a general
relationship between strategic integration activities
and manufacturing competitive capabilities, we now
explain how this effect is manifested in the four focus
areas: customer
integration,
product–process technology integration, and corporate
strategy integration. The primary beneﬁts credited to
strategic supplier and strategic customer integration
activities are new knowledge creation, establishment
of
and practices, and
reduced complexity. Activities that promote integra-
tion of customers and suppliers into a manufacturing
plant’s planning and execution processes increase the
variety of functional expertise that is brought to bear
upon decisions,
thus improving them through the
creation of new knowledge (Grant, 1996; Kogut and
Zander, 1992). Strategic supply chain integration also
leads to better, more efﬁcient problem solving, as it
promotes cooperation, joint work, and the creation of
problem solving routines (Flynn and Flynn, 1999;
Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001; Narasimhan and
Jayaram, 1998). Finally, because integration activities
are not cost-free, they require focus on relationships
with key customers and suppliers. This focus serves to
reduce complexity and to clarify priorities regarding
which manufacturing competitive capabilities are
likely to be most important.

Nascent empirical evidence supports supply chain
integration–capability relationships. A recent survey
of 57 automotive suppliers (Vickery et al., 2003)
showed that overall supply chain integration was
associated with higher customer service (delivery was
a part of the service construct), which in turn was
associated with higher perceived ﬁnancial perfor-
mance. In a study of consumer products manufacturers,
Rosenzweig et al.
(2003) uncovered associations


M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

153

between overall supply chain integration and manu-
facturing-based competitive capabilities in terms of
quality, delivery reliability, process ﬂexibility, and cost
leadership. Trans-regional business level data analyzed
by Frohlich and Westbrook (2001) showed that units
with the highest levels of ‘‘outward-facing’’ integra-
tion activities had better reported improvements in
multiple dimensions of manufacturing capability.
Narasimhan and Kim (2002) provide evidence that
strategic supply chain integration expands a ﬁrm’s
abilities to exploit greater product and geographical
market diversiﬁcation strategies.

The emerging evidence suggests that supply chain
integration activities are powerful drivers of manufac-
turing competitive capabilities. However, past research
provides little information regarding the relative and
respective contributions of strategic customer integra-
tion and strategic supplier integration activities.

Hypothesis 1a. Strategic customer integration is posi-
tively associated with manufacturing competitive cap-
abilities.

Hypothesis 1b. Strategic
integration is
positively associated with manufacturing competitive
capabilities.

supplier

Empirical study of

technology integration and
corporate strategy integration links with manufacturing
competitive capabilities is somewhat more mature than
that in the supply chain area, yet research at the plant
level is scarce. Numerous researchers have examined
aspects of the integration of manufacturing with new
product development (NPD) (Adler, 1995; Ettlie, 1995,
1997; Rusinko, 1999; Swink and Calantone, 2004).
However, most of this research has concentrated on the
relationships of integration to NPD project outcomes
and new product success. Little attention has been given
to the impacts of integration on manufacturing plant
competitive capabilities.

Given the past research on new product develop-
ment, we expect
that product–process technology
integration activities will be associated with greater
capabilities in manufacturing plants to quickly and
efﬁciently bring new products to full scale production.
However, greater integration of product and production
process knowledge within the plant should also create
beneﬁts to product cost, quality, and delivery once
production ramp-up targets are reached. Improving the
ﬁt between product design speciﬁcations and initial
process capabilities leads to higher quality, more
producible products (Swink and Calantone, 2004). In
addition, a greater awareness and dissemination of

technological knowledge promotes problem solving
and continuous improvement activities (Leonard-Bar-
ton, 1992).

Hypothesis 1c. Product–process technology integra-
tion is positively associated with manufacturing com-
petitive capabilities.

Literature discusses the integration of manufacturing
strategy with higher order business or corporate strategy
(Skinner, 1969; Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984; Hill,
1994). Since the time of
these seminal works,
manufacturing strategy researchers have empirically
evaluated the business performance impacts of the ﬁt
between manufacturing strategy and competitive
strategy (Vickery et al., 1993; Miller and Roth, 1994;
Williams et al., 1995; Gupta and Lonial, 1998; Ward
and Duray, 2000).

capabilities

competitive

Based on the arguments and evidence from this
research, we expect that corporate strategy integration
in determining and deﬁning
activities are helpful
manufacturing
(Garvin,
1993). For example, greater corporate strategy integra-
tion provides market and strategic inputs that enable
managers to know which aspects are most important
and what levels of capability are required (Flynn et al.,
1994). Researchers have discussed the importance of
the integration of corporate strategy and manufacturing
concerns when cost efﬁciency and ﬂexibility are
pursued (Pine, 1993; Kotha, 1995). Others have
documented the problems associated with strategic
misalignment with regard to manufacturing competitive
capabilities (Schiller et al., 1992; McLaughlin and
Victor, 1995; Moran, 1996; Berry and Cooper, 1999).

Hypothesis 1d. Corporate strategy integration is
positively associated with manufacturing competitive
capabilities.

While aforementioned researchers have begun to
explore focal types of integration individually, no one
has analyzed all four-dimensions simultaneously. We
were particularly interested in the evidence our study
would provide regarding the unique contribution of
each type of strategic integration to each manufacturing
capability. It is believed that integration, in general, is
beneﬁcial, and more integration is assumed to be better
than less integration. Firms compete, however, on
speciﬁc manufacturing competitive capabilities. Given
the fact that strategic integration activities consume
resources, it is important to discern the impacts of
individual integration types so that manufacturing plant
managers might deploy resources optimally given their
strategic priorities.


154

M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

2.3. The mediating role of manufacturing-based
competitive capabilities

Many studies have empirically associated manufac-
turing-based competitive capabilities with business
performance (Cleveland et al., 1989; Ferdows and
DeMeyer, 1990; Flynn and Flynn, 1999; Kim and
Arnold, 1996; Miller and Roth, 1994; Swamidass and
Newell, 1987; Vickery et al., 1993, 1994; Ward et al.,
1994, 1995; White, 1996). However, the associations of
speciﬁc manufacturing capability types to business
performance in foregoing research studies have often
been non-signiﬁcant, or inconsistent (Wood, 1991;
Feigenbaum and Karnani, 1991; Narasimhan and
Jayaram, 1998; Vickery et al., 1997). For example,
Rosenzweig et al. (2003) found that process ﬂexibility
was associated with customer satisfaction, but not with
sales growth. Cost leadership was associated with sales
growth, but not with customer satisfaction. Thus, while
general
linkages between capabilities and business
performance are well acknowledged, inconsistencies
across previous research studies suggest the need for
further research and hypothesis testing.

Hypothesis 2. Manufacturing competitive capabilities
are positively associated with business performance.

Taken together, Hypotheses 1a–d and 2 imply that
manufacturing competitive capabilities mediate the
relationships between integration activities and busi-
ness performance. Prior studies of integration activities
have often neglected the capability link (Rosenzweig
et al., 2003 offer a notable exception). Thus, an inter-
esting test of our proposed model involves the direct
examination of a mediating effect. A full mediation
hypothesis would suggest
that strategic integration
activities drive better business performance only
because the deeper knowledge of organizational goals,
customer needs, and operating constraints emanating
from the practice of integration has positive inﬂuences
on the development of manufacturing competitive
capabilities. In this case, manufacturing competitive
capabilities would be seen to be the generative means
by which strategic integration practices affect business
performance.

Hypothesis 3a. A direct positive association of custo-
mer integration with business performance is mediated
by manufacturing competitive capabilities.

Hypothesis 3b. A direct positive association of sup-
plier integration with business performance is mediated
by manufacturing competitive capabilities.

Hypothesis 3c. A direct positive association of pro-
duct–process technology integration with business per-
formance is mediated by manufacturing competitive
capabilities.

Hypothesis 3d. A direct positive association of pro-
duct–process technology integration with business per-
formance is mediated by manufacturing competitive
capabilities.

3. Research method

3.1. Data collection

Data were collected from manufacturing plant
managers via a combination of e-mail- and Internet-
based survey methods. Seven manufacturing managers
and three academics reviewed the pre-questionnaire to
improve clarity and identify and resolve any unfamiliar
or unclear wording. The administration of
the
subsequent survey followed the method proposed by
Dillman (1978, 2000). An Internet-based form of the
questionnaire was developed. Manufacturing plant
managers were invited by mail to participate in the
survey; the mailing list was obtained from Harris
InfoSource, with selection criteria including manu-
facturing plants with at least 100 employees in discrete
and assembled product industries (SICs included 31
and 34–39). Invitation letters were sent to 2100 North
American plant managers. Approximately 200 letters
were returned due to inaccurate addresses. The
invitation letter directed respondents to the Internet
site address which hosted the survey. Following the
initial invitation, two reminder postcards were sent at 2-
week intervals. A total of 255 surveys were returned;
224 surveys were at least 90% complete, yielding a
usable response rate of 13.4% (224/1900). The
respondents were mainly plant managers or their direct
reports. Follow-up phone calls were made to 31
respondents of incomplete surveys. No serious biases
were indicated in their comments. The reasons they
cited for non-completion were mostly that they either
were reticent to share sensitive data or that they did not
have time to complete the survey. As a further check of
respondent bias, the responses of ﬁrst, second and third
wave respondents were compared. Later wave respon-
dents are considered equivalent to non-respondents
since responses are obtained with the use of consider-
able stimuli (Armstrong and Overton, 1977). There
were no signiﬁcant differences between early and late
responders in terms of plant size (workers or sales),
international vs. domestic sales, number of major


M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

155

products, or predominant production process type
(based on t-tests).

As a test of the representativeness of the data sample,
we compared general performance metrics between
respondents and a random sample from the SIC ranges
represented in the data. Respondents were asked to
provide ROA data as well as an estimate of the annual
percentage change in sales that they experienced from
the previous year to the current year. Comparisons
(t-tests) of the performance scores for the response
sample against the scores for a random sample for the
SIC populations indicated that the two groups did not
differ signiﬁcantly ( p > .05) on either of the perfor-
mance metrics. Therefore, we concluded that
the
response sample is not signiﬁcantly biased in terms of
performance. The sample spans a diversity of industries,
plant sizes, and process types. Table 1 provides descri-
ptive data for the sample.

3.2. Measures

The perceptual measures of strategic integration,
manufacturing competitive capabilities, and business
performance used in this study were mostly drawn from
existing scales found in previous research studies. New
items required for
the study were motivated by
published conceptual discussions of the constructs that
the items were intended to reﬂect. Appendix A provides
the measurement scales, along with their psychometric
properties. In the case of strategic integration practices,
respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
statements regarding practice implementation applied
to their plant, as compared to their industry average

Table 1
Sample descriptive data

No. of employees
Total sales (US$ 1,000,000)
No. of major products

Major product line delivery

ETO
MTO
ATO
MTS

Industry

Electronics
Machinery
Industrial
Basic
Consumer

Mean

558.5
164.2
34.5

S.D.

543.6
329.2
84.1

Percent of sample (%)

25.4
37.5
17.4
19.6

44.2
35.0
9.6
7.6
3.6

(1 = much less, 4 = about
the same, 7 = to a much
greater extent). Respondents were asked to rate their
plant’s manufacturing competitive capabilities as
indicated by performance relative to that of their
principal competition (1 = much worse, 4 = about the
same, 7 = much better). This approach has the beneﬁt of
standardizing industry effects.

in order

Some researchers have measured integration of
suppliers and customers using combined ‘‘metascales’’
such as supply chain integration, supply chain integra-
tion intensity, and outward-facing supply chain strategy
(Vickery et al., 2003; Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Frohlich
and Westbrook, 2001). However, we sided with others
who have kept the supplier and customer elements of
integration separate,
to ascertain their
potentially distinct relationships with manufacturing
competitive capabilities and business performance
(Narasimhan and Kim, 2002; Shah et al., 2002). Our
strategic supplier integration scale items (N = 6) address
information sharing and supplier involvement activities
(Flynn et al., 1994, 1995a,b; Dow et al., 1999; White
et al., 1999). The strategic customer integration scale
items (N = 4) address customer intimacy, as well as the
measurement of and communication of customer
satisfaction information (Flynn and Flynn, 1999; Flynn
et al., 1994, 1995a,b; Bolden et al., 1997; Dow et al.,
1999; Cua et al., 2001).

Our product–process technology integration scale
items (N = 6) address the use of mechanisms such as
DFMA and job rotation to promote product design and
manufacturing knowledge integration (Ettlie, 1995,
1997; Swink, 1999; Flynn et al., 1994, 1995b;
Sakakibara et al., 1997; Hayes and Wheelwright,
1984; Ahmed et al., 1996; Kim and Arnold, 1996;
Cua et al., 2001). The corporate strategy integration
scale items (N = 6) tap the degree to which manufactur-
ing strategy is well communicated and driven by
corporate strategy (Flynn et al., 1994, 1995a,b; Ahmed
et al., 1996; Sakakibara et al., 1997; Bolden et al., 1997;
Dow et al., 1999; Cua et al., 2001).

Our measures of manufacturing competitive cap-
abilities and business performance are grounded in
seminal manufacturing research works (Hayes and
Wheelwright, 1984; Wheelwright, 1984; Gifﬁ et al.,
1990), and are very close to those used in manufacturing
capability studies (Ferdows and DeMeyer, 1990; Miller
and Roth, 1994; White, 1996; Saﬁzadeh et al., 1996;
Boyer and McDermott, 1999; Boyer and Lewis, 2002;
Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Ward et al., 1998). We
included scales addressing ﬁve capability areas: cost,
quality, delivery, process ﬂexibility, and new product
ﬂexibility. We measured two aspects of business


156

M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

Table 2
Variable descriptive data

Mean

S.D.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Product–process integration
Strategic customer integration
Strategic supplier integration

1 Corporate strategy integration
2
3
4
5 Cost
6 Quality
7 Delivery
8
9 New product ﬂexibility

Process ﬂexibility

10 Market performance
11 Customer satisfaction
12

Size (no. of employees)

4.763
3.994
4.829
3.876
3.783
5.342
4.898
4.949
3.821
4.622
5.205

1.137
1.221
1.121
1.084
1.178
.928
1.180
.895
1.155
1.352
1.399

559.2

541.2

.531
.290
.534
.002
.202
.266
.254
.263
.314
.312
.090

.342
.694
.258
.040  .052
.337
.103
.193
.314
.155
.144
.400
.109
.223  .017
.319
.280
.038  .034

.063
.140
.132
.284
.043
.205  .220
.223  .114
.293  .068
.201
.005
.075
.083

.412
.284
.502
.163
.203
.292
.514
.473
.514
.079  .050

.258
.345
.213
.010

.291
.106
.046  .013  .012

.336

All bold numbers are signiﬁcant, p < .05.

share, and proﬁtability,

performance: market performance and customer satis-
faction. The market performance scale items assess plant
sales, market
relative to
competitors. We measured managers’ perceptions of
customer satisfaction with a single item. These measure-
ment items are similar to those used in prior studies of
manufacturing business level performance (Swamidass
and Newell, 1987; Vickery et al., 1993, 1997; Boyer,
1999; Rosenzweig et al., 2003). Finally, we included a
measure of plant size (number of employees) as a control
for differences in performance that may be explained
by scale effects (Roth and Miller, 1992).

For the multi-item scales we executed principle
components factor analysis in order to determine scale
unidimensionality. In each case all the items loaded
signiﬁcantly on only one factor with an eigenvalue
greater than 1. For each scale (except one) the item
scores explained more than 50% of the factor variance.
Coefﬁcient alpha exceeded .70 for each of the scales,
save one (see Appendix A). These results provide
evidence of unidimensionality and acceptable relia-
bility for the scales. The only problematic scale was
process ﬂexibility. The explained variance (45%) and
coefﬁcient alpha (.57) for this scale would have been
improved to levels above commonly accepted norms
had we dropped one of the four scale items, the ‘‘ability
to customize products.’’ However, because this item has
been included in process ﬂexibility scales by previous
researchers, we elected to keep the item to preserve
content validity and comparability with other studies.
Prior studies have demonstrated that perceptual
measures of manufacturing competitive capabilities and
performance can be considered reliable indicators of
actual values (Dess and Robinson, 1984; Vickery et al.,
1997; Ward et al., 1994; Ketokivi and Schroeder, 2004).
In order to assess the criterion validity of our perceptual

measures, we correlated them with less perceptual
measures also included in our survey. The perceptual
business performance measures are highly correlated
( p < .05) with managers’ estimates of market share,
ROA, ROI, change in market share, and change in
proﬁtability. Unfortunately, managers are often unwill-
ing to provide actual performance numbers; responses
for these data ranged from N = 62 to 177. Thus, missing
data prevented us from using these less perceptual
metrics in further analyses.

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics and the inter-
correlation matrix for the variables. Predictive validity
is indicated in the correlations, as each of the integration
variables is signiﬁcantly correlated with several of the
manufacturing capability variables and at least one of
the business performance variables.

4. Analysis and results

We employed a structural equation path modeling
approach to test the hypothesis and to gain interpreta-
tional clarity of the relationships among the constructs
(Anderson and Gerbing, 1988). We input the covariance
matrices derived for the variables into EQS v. 6.1 and
speciﬁed a model matching our hypothesized model
(Fig. 2). The four strategic integration variables were
allowed to co-vary in the path model in order to evaluate
the partial, unique relationship of each dimension of
integration with each of the manufacturing competitive
capabilities.

The overall ﬁt for the path model was very good
(x2 = 21.95; d.f. = 15; CFI = .990; RMSEA = .046).
Table 3 provides the values of the direct, indirect,
and total effects along with test statistics (parameter
estimates, t-values, and ﬁt indices). Fig. 3 also provides
the parameter values for signiﬁcant paths in the model.


M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

157

Table 3
Path analysis results for strategic integration types model

Cost

Quality

Delivery Process

ﬂexibility

New product
ﬂexibility

Market performance

Customer satisfaction

Direct

Indirect Total

Direct

Indirect Total

Corporate strategy

integration

Product–process

tech integration
Strategic customer

integration

Strategic supplier

integration

 .035
( .419)
.025
(.260)
 .072
( 1.003)
.082
(.857)

.084
(1.086)
.442**
(4.832)
 .018
( .276)
 .206*
( 2.295)

.105
(1.356)
.169+
(1.833)
.081
(1.208)
.089
(.986)

.201*
(2.525)
 .061
( .643)
.075
(1.089)
.120
(1.297)

.109
(1.442)
.453**
(5.080)
 .042
( .638)
 .139
( 1.582)

Cost

Quality

Delivery

Process ﬂexibility

New product
ﬂexibility

Size

(no. of employees)

.175*
(2.647)
 .205*
( 2.345)
 .174**
( 3.049)
.219*
(2.778)
 .095+
( 1.711)
.126*
(2.051)
.418**
(6.038)
.001
(.001)
.184**
(3.127)
 .033
( .627)

.078+
(1.848)
.208**
(3.313)
.031
(.861)
 .022
( .430)

.253**
(3.305)
.003
(.033)
 .143*
( 2.151)
.197*
(2.200)

.039
(.873)
.208**
(3.243)
.022
(.581)
 .054
( .999)

.207*
(2.725)
.134
(1.495)
.227**
(3.449)
.061
( .693)

.168*
(2.640)
 .073
( .875)
.205**
(3.747)
 .007
( .098)
 .080
( 1.505)
.337**
(5.711)
.399**
(6.284)
 .151*
( 2.375)
 .035
( .617)
 .013
( .254)

Standardized estimates (t-values); ﬁt indices: BBNFI = .971; BBNNFI = .956; CFI = .990; x2 = 21.95; d.f. = 15; p = .109; RMSEA = .046 (.000,
.084).

* p < .05.
** p < .01.
+ p < .10.

is not

is not

supported.

supported. None of

The results of the analyses provide mixed support for
the hypotheses. Hypothesis 1a (strategic customer
integration is associated with manufacturing competi-
tive capabilities)
the
parameters linking customer integration to the ﬁve
manufacturing competitive capabilities was signiﬁcant
at p < .10. Similarly, Hypothesis 1b (strategic supplier
integration is associated with manufacturing competi-
tive capabilities)
Interestingly,
strategic supplier integration is associated with poorer
quality capability, and potentially with poorer new
product ﬂexibility capability (though this negative
association falls
levels of
signiﬁcance). On the other hand, Hypothesis 1c
(product–process technology integration is associated
with manufacturing competitive capabilities) is sup-
ported. Product–process
technology integration is
signiﬁcantly associated with better quality, delivery,
and new product ﬂexibility. While the parameters
linking product–process integration to quality and new
product ﬂexibility are highly signiﬁcant, the link to
delivery capability is only marginally signiﬁcant. The
results support Hypothesis 1d (corporate strategy
integration is associated with manufacturing competi-

short of conventional

tive capabilities), as corporate strategy integration is
signiﬁcantly associated with better process ﬂexibility
capability.

Hypothesis 2 (manufacturing competitive capabil-
ities are associated with business performance) is
supported by the results, but only for certain manu-
facturing competitive capabilities. Quality, delivery,
and new product ﬂexibility are each signiﬁcantly
associated with better market performance. Quality
and delivery are also each signiﬁcantly associated with
increased customer
satisfaction. Contrary to the
hypothesis, cost capability is negatively associated
with both business performance measures (though one
of the associations is only marginally signiﬁcant).
Process ﬂexibility is also negatively associated with
customer satisfaction.

Hypothesis 3a is not supported by the results. The
absence of positive direct associations of strategic
customer with manufacturing competitive capabilities
negates the possibility of signiﬁcant mediation effects.
Regarding Hypothesis 3b, the results do indicate that a
mediation effect is present. However, the signiﬁcantly
negative association of supplier integration with quality
indicates that the indirect effect of supplier integration


158

M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

Fig. 3. Statistically signiﬁcant paths for individual strategic integration types model. Solid lines represent statistically signiﬁcant paths ( p < .05);
dotted line paths are marginally signiﬁcant ( p < .10).

on both market performance and customer satisfaction
is negative. Hypothesis 3c is supported. Most of the
positive effect of product–process technology integra-
tion on customer satisfaction and on market perfor-
mance is attributable to indirect effects through quality,
delivery, and new product ﬂexibility capabilities.
Hypothesis 3d is also supported. There is a signiﬁcant
indirect effect of corporate strategy integration on
market performance. The signiﬁcant coefﬁcients indi-
cate that corporate strategy integration leads to delivery
and ﬂexibility capabilities that in turn lead to greater
market performance.

5. Discussion

The results of the study have implications for the
interpretation of previous integration research,
for
managerial policy regarding integration activities, and
for future research opportunities.

Our ﬁndings

regarding strategic supply chain
integration are in some ways consistent and in some
ways in contrast with prior research studies. Like prior
studies, our ﬁndings suggest that customer and supplier
integration activities create beneﬁts
for business
performance. However, these beneﬁts do not appear
to be universal. Strategic supplier
integration is
signiﬁcantly linked to market performance, but not to
customer satisfaction. Strategic supplier integration
may prompt suppliers to offer useful market knowledge
that may result in better long term market and product

It may be,
planning for growth and proﬁtability.
however,
that actual customer satisfaction is more
closely associated with operational integration efforts.
Even more distinct are the total effects of customer
integration on business performance. Strategic custo-
mer integration is positively associated with customer
satisfaction as expected, yet it is negatively associated
with market performance. Kaplan and Norton’s (1996)
‘‘balanced scorecard’’ approach advocates considera-
tion of both ﬁnancial and customer perspectives when
assessing business performance. However, our ﬁndings
imply that managers considering investments
in
strategic customer integration activities may face a
trade-off between the two emphases. Perhaps too much
focus on a limited set of customer needs leads to poorer
proﬁts and declining overall market share. This is an
interesting ﬁnding that deserves future research.

A difference of our ﬁndings with those of prior
studies is the absence of signiﬁcant positive mediation
effects of manufacturing competitive capabilities on
supply chain integration–business performance rela-
tionships. Signiﬁcant positive associations of strategic
customer integration and strategic supplier integration
with manufacturing competitive capabilities are evident
in bivariate correlations (see Table 2). However, these
associations disappear in the path analysis. This result
indicates that the bivariate correlations may be spurious.
When other aspects of integration are accounted for,
there is little evidence suggesting that direct positive
associations between strategic customer integration or


M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

159

strategic supplier
integration and manufacturing
competitive capabilities exist. Thus, the signiﬁcant
effects of strategic customer integration and strategic
supplier
integration on business performance are
mainly direct; they are not explained by improved
manufacturing competitive capabilities at the plant
level.
It may be that manufacturing competitive
capabilities are primarily driven by more operational
supply chain integration efforts (Frohlich and West-
brook, 2001; Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Vickery et al.,
2003). Another interpretation of this ﬁnding is that
ﬁrms do not consistently gain manufacturing-based
competitive capabilities from information and knowl-
edge sharing interactions with their suppliers and
customers; instead, competitive capabilities are grown
more from internal knowledge sharing processes (e.g.,
product–process integration). A resource-based view
(RBV) argues that because real capabilities are unique
and difﬁcult to imitate, they are necessarily proprietary
and internal to the ﬁrm (Grant, 1996; Teece et al., 1997;
Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000). Knowledge assets
gained from interactions with suppliers and customers
can be replicated by competitors who also have access
to the same suppliers and customers. Thus, while
customer and supplier integration activities may lead to
operational performance improvements in absolute
terms, they are less likely to yield improvements which
create distinct competitive capabilities relative to
competitors’ abilities.

As a case in point, our results indicate that strategic
supplier integration is actually negatively associated
with a plant’s manufacturing quality capability relative
to its competitors. We posit two possible explanations of
this ﬁnding. First, an RBV-based interpretation would
argue that plants which place more emphasis on
strategic supplier integration may indeed see quality
improvements, but they will improve quality at a slower
rate than competitors who may invest in other, more
efﬁcacious company-internal types of integration. Our
results suggest,
that product–process
integration investments would yield greater returns to
competitive capabilities related to quality. A second
explanation is that supplier integration actually impedes
improvements in quality capability. This explanation is
consistent with recent arguments and empirical ﬁndings
indicating that too much supplier integration in can
foster negative effects. Das et al. (2006) show that
deviations from ‘‘optimal’’ levels of supplier integration
are negatively associated with manufacturing perfor-
mance. Agency theory suggests that ﬁrms who integrate
too closely with suppliers open themselves up to risks
including adverse selection, moral hazard, and oppor-

for example,

tunity costs (Eisenhardt, 1989; Rossetti and Choi,
2005). For example, suppliers may be less motivated to
provide high levels of performance if they feel that their
business interests are secured. Further, as a ﬁrm
integrates it may be less open to opportunities offered
by new or previously unknown suppliers, or it may incur
switching costs that make it difﬁcult to take advantage
of these opportunities. These considerations, along with
the emerging empirical ﬁndings, argue for more
research on the pros and cons of strategic supplier
integration. Future research needs to include ‘‘deep’’
studies which comprehend multiple dimensions of
supplier integration.

The hypothesis that manufacturing-based competi-
tive capabilities are signiﬁcant mediators of integra-
tion–performance relationships was supported, but not
for all capabilities. The results indicate that quality,
delivery, and new product ﬂexibility-based capabilities
do indeed serve as the generative means by which
certain types of strategic integration affect market
performance and customer satisfaction. On the other
hand, cost efﬁciency and process ﬂexibility are either
non-signiﬁcantly or negatively associated with these
aspects of performance. Thus, no positive mediation
effect is indicated. It may be that cost efﬁciency and
process ﬂexibility are important
for only certain,
narrowly deﬁned market and technology environments.
In general, a focus on cost efﬁciency may forfeit growth
opportunities and thus be associated with poorer market
performance. Other research studies have also shown
negligible associations between process ﬂexibility and
market performance (Vickery et al., 1997; Swink et al.,
2005). Generally, new product ﬂexibility appears to be a
more important competitive capability.

Three important research factors may account for
differences between our ﬁndings and those of prior
supply chain integration studies. First, we study
integration of strategic knowledge and information,
where others have focused on operational or tactical
integration, or coordination of supply activities (Froh-
lich and Westbrook, 2001; Sahin and Robinson, 2002).
Second, we examine the individual effects of strategic
customer integration and strategic supplier integration
efforts. Other
studies have treated supply chain
integration as a single construct involving both types
of integration (Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Vickery et al.,
2003). Third, we executed a multivariate analysis of
manufacturing competitive capabilities, where others
have examined links of supply chain integration to each
manufacturing competitive capability using separate
models (Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001; Rosenzweig
et al., 2003).


160

M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

the four

to be the stronger

Regarding relative beneﬁts of strategic integration
types, our study offers new ﬁndings not shown in prior
research. Of
integration types, corporate
strategy integration and product process integration
individual drivers of
appear
manufacturing capability development at
the plant.
The total effects of corporate strategy integration on
both market performance and customer satisfaction are
signiﬁcantly positive. Corporate strategy integration has
direct positive effects, suggesting that consideration of
manufacturing competitive capabilities and constraints
leads the ﬁrm in successful directions. However, there is
also a marginally signiﬁcant indirect effect of corporate
strategy integration on market performance, suggesting
that strategy integration leads to competitive capabil-
ities that are valued in the market place.

The data indicate that product–process technology
integration signiﬁcantly affects the largest number of
manufacturing competitive capabilities, and thus offers
the strongest case for the mediated relationships we
expected. Most of the positive effect of product–process
technology integration on customer satisfaction is
attributable to indirect effects through quality, delivery,
and new product ﬂexibility capabilities. Interestingly,
the total effect of product–process technology on
market performance is not signiﬁcant. A trade-off
appears
to be at work. While product–process
technology integration is positively associated with
the manufacturing competitive capabilities mentioned
above, its direct association with market performance is
negative. One explanation is that increased manufactur-
ing inﬂuences on product development may lead to
products that are less desirable in the market place.
Other researchers have discussed the possibility that
improved product manufacturability might come at the
expense of product
innovativeness (Gerwin, 1993;
Swink, 2005). The implication is that managers must
ﬁnd the proper balance in product–process integration
efforts, or they must develop integration approaches that
do not unnecessarily restrict product innovation or other
market-based initiatives.
the positive
impacts of product–process integration on customer
satisfaction through improved manufacturing competi-
tive capabilities should also be considered.

In addition,

In sum,

the results

indicate that

independent
integration activities in each of the four strategic
integration areas are likely to produce beneﬁts to
manufacturing competitive capabilities, market perfor-
mance, or customer satisfaction. However, three of the
four integration types also involve potential costs to
either market performance or product quality. Corporate
strategy integration appears to be the safest and most

types of

the individual

efﬁcacious of
integration.
Ceteris paribus, a plant manager faced with a choice
may want to invest in corporate strategy integration
activities ﬁrst. Managers developing product–process or
strategic customer
integration programs should be
careful not to let integration activities dominate other
decision processes that may be important
to the
marketability and proﬁtability of products. Individual
strategic customer or supplier integration efforts appear
to be of
little value to manufacturing capability
developments, though they do offer beneﬁts to market
performance and customer satisfaction. This ﬁnding
points up a challenge in the research of supply chain
integration, as operational and strategic integration
concepts are often confused. The supply chain
integration concept is not monolithic; different levels
of integration activities exist. Future research studies
need to examine the interplay of
strategic and
operational supply chain integration activities in order
to determine their respective roles in contributing to
manufacturing competitive capabilities as well as other
elements of business performance.

It has been proposed that implementing a wider
range of supply chain integration elements is better than
implementing only a few (Frohlich and Westbrook,
2001; Rosenzweig et al., 2003). However, a theory of
complementarities among strategic integration ele-
ments has not been put
tested. The
components of a system are complementary if doing
more of any one component increases (or at least does
not decrease) the marginal effectiveness of the other
components in the group (Milgrom and Roberts, 1992,
p. 108). Components may also be considered com-
plementary if the presence of a certain individual
component in the system mitigates or compensates for
the limitations of another component.

forward or

Strategic integration activities have inherent limita-
tions, and they may relate mutually to mitigate these
limitations in several different ways. First, integration
activities are not cost free. Personal time, communica-
tion media, and information systems are required to
collect and assimilate knowledge
from external
partners. If multiple strategic integration activities
share and more completely use required resources, then
the cost to beneﬁt ratios of each individual integration
activity might be improved. Second, myopic focus on a
single type of integration may lead to an oversimpliﬁed
view of the manufacturing task. The productivity and
proﬁtability of a manufacturing plant might suffer, for
example, if the plant is overly focused on customer
concerns. Simultaneous pursuit of multiple types of
strategic integration might provide balance among


M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

161

competing constraints and objectives represented by
each of the integration elements. Third, knowledge and
information gained from one type of strategic integra-
tion activity might increase the usefulness or improve
the application of knowledge gained from another type
of integration. For instance, the knowledge of corporate
plans and goals gained from better corporate strategy
integration is likely to enable better application of a
plant’s knowledge of its supplier’s capabilities and
constraints. An important extension of our study would
be to examine potential complementarities among
combined integration programs.

6. Limitations and conclusions

The limitations of this study should be considered
along with the results. As noted earlier, our study
focuses on strategic integration processes at the plant
level, as opposed to more operational activities enacted
at business unit levels. These differences should be
considered when our results are compared to prior
research. Another limitation stems from our reliance on
sole respondents as sources of data. The positions of the
respondents, as well as steps take in data collection and
analyses argue against serious effects of bias and
common method variance. However, the potential of
these threats to validity cannot be completely ruled out.
We also address a somewhat limited set of business
performance measures. While our measures of market
performance and customer satisfaction were correlated

with more ‘‘objective’’ measures including market
share, ROI, and ROA, the observations were insufﬁ-
cient to provide a more comprehensive set of measures
of business performance.

An important contribution of this study stems from
its emphasis on studying detailed dimensions of
strategic integration. Our ﬁndings point up the
limitations of research which views integration as a
monolithic concept. Aggregated measures of integra-
tion fail to surface the details and interactions of various
integration types.

Using data from a variety of manufacturing
industries, this study examines four different types of
strategic integration at the manufacturing plant level.
The results show that each type of integration activity
has differential and unique merits. Corporate strategy
and product–process integration have greater impacts
on manufacturing competitive capabilities at the plant
level than strategic supplier and customer integration
do. Nevertheless, each of the strategic integration types
appears to be associated with beneﬁts, and some types
may involve detriments as well. Overall, the results of
this study highlight the important competitive gains
that can be obtained when manufacturing managers
develop effective knowledge integration processes that
extend beyond the factory’s walls. Much of the past
manufacturing strategy research has
focused on
internal manufacturing processes and technologies.
Our study argues the need for additional study of
external strategic integration processes as well.

Appendix A. Construct reliability and validity analysis

Construct-item

Strategic customer integration

We maintain close contacts with our customers
Results of customer satisfaction surveys are shared with all employees
We actively create opportunities for employee–customer interaction
We have a formal ‘‘customer satisfaction’’ program in place

Strategic supplier integration

We share our cost information with our major suppliers
We require cost information sharing by our suppliers
We require major suppliers to contribute to cost/quality improvement
We share real time production schedule information with suppliers
We emphasize early supplier involvement in product design
We use buyer–supplier councils

Product–process technology integration

We have created new ways to coordinate design/manufacturing issues
We use design-for-manufacture/assembly (DFMA) methods
Manufacturing involvement and sign-off is required for new products
We practice job rotation between design and manufacturing engineering
Our product designers make use of manufacturability guidelines
Product designers and manufacturing staff have equal status in NPD projects

Factor loading Construct statistics

Eigenvalue = 2.350, % var. explained = 58.7,
coefﬁcient alpha = .76

Eigenvalue = 3.183, % var. explained = 53.1,
coefﬁcient alpha = .82

Eigenvalue = 3.318, % var. explained = 55.3,
coefﬁcient alpha = .84

.760
.821
.738
.744

.740
.789
.735
.740
.682
.679

.616
.780
.695
.741
.806
.806


162

M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

Appendix (Continued )
Construct-item

Corporate strategy integration

Manufacturing strategy is well aligned with corporate strategy
We have clearly deﬁned strategic manufacturing goals and objectives
Our ﬁrm’s strategy leverages existing capabilities
Corporate strategy at our ﬁrm drives manufacturing decisions
Manufacturing strategies and goals are communicated to all employees
Manufacturing strategy is frequently reviewed and revised

Cost

Initial purchase cost
Manufacturing overhead cost

Quality

Product overall quality performance
Product reliability
Product features
Product conformance
Product durability

Delivery

Delivery accuracy (correct items were delivered)
Delivery dependability (delivered on the agreed upon date)
Delivery availability (the probability that items

will be in stock at order time)

Delivery speed (short elapsed time)

Process ﬂexibility

Ability to adjust production volumes
Ability to respond to changes in delivery requirements
Ability to customize products
Ability to produce a range of products

New product ﬂexibility

Lead time to introduce new products
Number of new products introduced each year

Market performance

Growth rate in unit sales
Market share of major product line
Proﬁtability

References

Adler, P.S., 1995. Interdepartmental interdependence and coordina-
tion: the case of the design/manufacturing interface. Organization
Science 6 (2), 147–167.

Ahmed, N.U., Montagno, R.V., Firenze, R.J., 1996. Operations strat-
egy and organizational performance: an empirical study. Interna-
tional Journal of Operations and Production Management 16 (5),
41–53.

Anderson, J.C., Gerbing, D.W., 1988. Structural equation modeling in
practice: a review and recommended two-step approach. Psycho-
logical Bulletin 103 (3), 411–423.

Armstrong, J.S., Overton, T.S., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in

mail surveys. Journal of Marketing Research 4, 396–402.

Berry, W.L., Cooper, M.C., 1999. Manufacturing ﬂexibility: methods
for measuring the impact of product variety on performance in
process industries. Journal of Operations Management 17, 163–
178.

Bolden, R., Waterson, P., Warr, P., Clegg, C., Wall, T., 1997. A new
taxonomy of modern manufacturing practices. International Jour-

Factor loading Construct statistics

.863
.826
.795
.776
.794
.815

.862
.862

.719
.805
.883
.733
.756

.778
.828
.816

.845

.810
.834
.428
.518

.827
.827

.888
.854
.811

Eigenvalue = 3.955, % var. explained = 65.9,
coefﬁcient alpha = .90

Eigenvalue = 1.486, % var. explained = 74.3,
Pearson corr. = .486

Eigenvalue = 3.053, % var. explained = 61.1,
coefﬁcient alpha = .84

Eigenvalue = 2.672, % var. explained = 66.8,
coefﬁcient alpha = .83

Eigenvalue = 1.803, % var. explained = 45.1,
coefﬁcient alpha = .57

Eigenvalue = 1.367, % var. explained = 68.3,
Pearson corr. = .367

Eigenvalue = 2.176, % var. explained = 72.5,
coefﬁcient alpha = .81

nal of Operations and Production Management 17 (11), 1112–
1130.

Boyer, K.K., 1999. Evolutionary patterns of ﬂexible automation and
performance: a longitudinal study. Management Science 45 (6),
824–842.

Boyer, K.K., Lewis, M.W., 2002. Competitive priorities: Investigating
the need for trade-offs in operations strategy. Production and
Operations Management 11 (1), 9–20.

Boyer, K.K., McDermott, C., 1999. Strategic consensus in operations

strategy. Journal of Operations Management 17 (3), 289–305.

Cleveland, G., Schroeder, R.G., Anderson, J.C., 1989. A theory
of production competence. Decision Sciences 20 (4), 655–
668.

Cua, K.O., McKone, K.E., Schroeder, R.G., 2001. Relationships
between implementations of TQM, JIT, and TPM and manufactur-
ing performance. Journal of Operations Management 19 (6), 675–
694.

Das, A.J., Narasimhan, R., Talluri, S., 2006. Supplier integration—
ﬁnding an optimal conﬁguration. Journal of Operations Manage-
ment 24 (5), 563–582.


M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

163

Dess, G.S., Robinson, R.B., 1984. Measuring organizational perfor-
mance in the absence of objective measures. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 5 (3), 265–273.

Dillman, D., 1978. Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design

Method. Wiley, New York.

Dillman, D., 2000. Mail and Internet Surveys: The Tailored Design

Method. Wiley, New York.

Dow, D., Samson, D., Ford, S., 1999. Exploding the myth: do all quality
management practices contribute to superior quality performance?
Production and Operations Management 8 (1), 1–27.

Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Agency theory: an assessment and review.

Academy of Management Review 14 (1), 57–74.

Eisenhardt, K.M., Martin, J.A., 2000. Dynamic capabilities: what are

they? Strategic Management Journal 21 (10/11), 1105–1121.

Ettlie, J.E., 1995. Product–process development integration in man-

ufacturing. Management Science 41 (7), 1224–1237.

Ettlie, J.E., 1997. Integrated design and new product success. Journal

of Operations Management 15 (1), 33–55.

Feigenbaum, A., Karnani, A., 1991. Output ﬂexibility—a competitive
advantage for small ﬁrms. Strategic Management Journal 12, 101–
114.

Ferdows, K., DeMeyer, A., 1990. Lasting improvements in manufac-
turing performance in search of a new theory. Journal of Opera-
tions Management 9, 168–184.

Flynn, B., Flynn, J., 1999. Information-processing alternatives for
coping with manufacturing environment complexity. Decisions
Sciences 17 (3), 249–269.

Flynn, B.B., Schroeder, R.G., Sakakibara, S., 1994. A framework for
quality management research and an associated measurement
instrument. Journal of Operations Management 11, 339–366.

Flynn, B.B., Sakakibara, S., Schroeder, R.G., 1995a. Relationship
between JIT and TQM: practices and performance. Academy of
Management Journal 38 (5), 1325–1360.

Flynn, B.B., Schroeder, R.G., Sakakibara, S., 1995b. The impact of
quality management practices on performance and competitive
advantage. Decision Sciences 26 (5), 659–691.

Frohlich, M., Westbrook, R., 2001. Arcs of integration: an interna-
tional study of supply chain strategies. Journal of Operations
Management 19, 185–200.

Ketokivi, M.A., Schroeder, R.G., 2004. Perceptual measures of per-
formance: Fact or ﬁction? Journal of Operations Management 22
(3), 247–264.

Kim, J.S., Arnold, P., 1996. Operationalizing Manufacturing Strategy:
An Exploratory Study of Constructs and Linkage. International
Journal of Operations and Production Management 16 (12), 45–73.
Kogut, B., Zander, U., 1992. Knowledge of the ﬁrm, combinative
technology. Organization

capabilities and the replication of
Science 3 (3), 383–397.

Kotha, S., 1995. Mass customization: implementing the emerging
paradigm for competitive advantage. Strategic Management Jour-
nal 16, 21–42.

Lawrence, P.R., Lorsch, J.W., 1967. Organization and Environment:
Managing Differentiation and Integration. Harvard University,
Graduate School of Business Administration, Boston, MA.

Leonard-Barton, D., 1992. Core capabilities and core rigidities: a
paradox in managing new product development. Strategic Man-
agement Journal 13, 111–125 (Special issue).

McLaughlin, C.P., Victor, B., 1995. Getting to Mass Customization in
In: Proceedings of the National Decision Sciences

Services.
Institute National Meeting, Boston, MA, November.

Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1992. Economics, Organization and Manage-

ment. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Miller, J., Roth, A., 1994. A taxonomy of manufacturing strategies.

Management Science 40, 285–304.

Moran, D., 1996. Toyota’s effort to achieve manufacturing ﬂexibility

does have a downside. Japanese Automotive Digest.

Narasimhan, R., Das, A., 1999. An empirical investigation of the
contribution of strategic sourcing to manufacturing ﬂexibilities
and performance. Decision Sciences 30 (3), 683–718.

Narasimhan, R., Jayaram, J., 1998. Causal linkages in supply chain
management: an exploratory study of North American manufac-
turing ﬁrms. Decision Sciences 29 (3), 579–605.

Narasimhan, R., Kim, S., 2002. Effect of supply chain integration on
the relationship between diversiﬁcation and performance: evi-
dence from Japanese and Korean ﬁlms. Journal of Operations
Management 20, 303–323.

Pine, J.B., 1993. Mass Customization: The New Frontier in Business

Competition. Harvard Business School Press.

Frohlich, M., 2002. e-Integration in the supply chain: barriers and

Porter, M.E., 1985. Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining

performance. Decision Sciences 33 (4), 537–555.

Superior Performance. Free Press, New York.

Galbraith, J.R., 1973. Designing Complex Organizations. Addison-

Powell, T.C., 1992. Organizational alignment as competitive advan-

Wesley, Reading, Mass.

Garvin, D.A., 1993. Manufacturing strategic planning. California

Management Review 85–106.

Gerwin, D., 1993. Manufacturing ﬂexibility: a strategic perspective.

Management Science 39 (4), 395–410.

Gifﬁ, C., Roth, A., Seal, G.M., 1990. Competing in World Class
Manufacturing: America’s 21st Century Challenge. Business One
Irwin, Homewood, IL.

Grant, R.M., 1996. Prospering in dynamically-competitive environ-
ments: organizational knowledge as knowledge integration. Orga-
nization Science 7 (4), 375–387.

Gupta, Y.P., Lonial, S.C., 1998. Exploring linkages between manu-
facturing strategy, business strategy and organizational strategy.
Production and Operations Management 7 (3), 243–264.

Hayes, R.H., Wheelwright, S.C., 1984. Restoring Our Competitive

Edge: Competing Through Manufacturing. Wiley, New York.

Hill, T., 1994. Manufacturing Strategy: Text and Cases, 2nd ed. Irwin,

Burr Ridge.

Kaplan, R.S., Norton, D.P., 1996. The Balanced Scorecard: Translating
Strategy into Action. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

tage. Strategic Management Journal 13 (1), 119–134.

Rosenzweig, E.D., Roth, A.V., Dean, J.W., 2003. The inﬂuence of an
integration strategy on competitive capabilities and business
performance: an exploratory study of consumer product manu-
facturers. Journal of Operations Management 21, 437–456.

Rossetti, C., Choi, T.Y., 2005. On the dark side of strategic sourcing:
experiences from the aerospace industry. Academy of Manage-
ment Executive 19 (1), 46–60.

Roth, A.V., Miller, J.G., 1992. Success factors in manufacturing.

Business Horizons 35 (4), 73–81.

Rusinko, C.A., 1999. Exploring the use of design-manufacturing
integration (DMI) to facilitate product development: a test of
some practices. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
46 (1), 56–71.

Sahin, F., Robinson, E.P., 2002. Flow coordiation and information
sharing supply chairs: review, implications, and directions for
future research. Decision Sciences 33 (4), 505–536.

Saﬁzadeh, M.H., Ritzman, L.P., Sharma, D., Wood, C., 1996. An
empirical analysis of the product–process matrix. Management
Science 41 (11), 1576–1591.


164

M. Swink et al. / Journal of Operations Management 25 (2007) 148–164

Sakakibara, S., Flynn, B.B., Schroeder, R.G., Morris, W.T., 1997. The
impact of just-in-time manufacturing and its infrastructure on
manufacturing performance. Management Science 43 (9), 1246–
1257.

Schiller, Z., Zellner, W., Stodghill, R., 1992. Clout! more and more,

retail giants rule the marketplace. Business Week.

Shah, R., Goldstein, S., Ward, P., 2002. Aligning supply chain
management characteristics and interorganizational information
system types: an exploratory study.

Skinner, W., 1969. Manufacturing—missing link in corporate strategy.

Harvard Business Review 136–145.

Stalk, G., Evens, P., Shulman, L.E., 1992. Competing on capabilities:
the new rules of corporate strategy. Harvard Business Review 70
(2), 57–69.

Swamidass, P.M., Newell, W.T., 1987. Manufacturing strategy, envir-
onmental uncertainty and performance: a path analytic model.
Management Science 33 (4), 509–524.

Swink, M., 1999. Threats to new product manufacturability and the
effects of development team integration processes. Journal of
Operations Management 17 (6), 691–709.

Swink, M., 2005. Exploring new product innovation types and per-
formance: the roles of project leadership, functional inﬂuences,
and design integration. International Journal of Product Develop-
ment 1 (3/4), 241–260.

Swink, M., Calantone, R., 2004. Design-manufacturing integration as
a mediator of antecedents to new product design quality. IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management 51 (4), 472–482.

Swink, M., Narasimhan, R., Kim, S.W., 2005. Manufacturing practices
and strategy integration: effects on cost efﬁciency, ﬂexibility, and
market-based performance. Decision Sciences 36 (3), 427–457.

Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and
strategic management. Strategic Management Journal 18 (7), 509–
533.

Vickery, S., Droge, C., Markland, R.E., 1993. Production competence
and business strategy: do they affect business performance.
Decision Sciences 24 (2), 435–456.

Vickery, S., Droge, C., Markland, R.E., 1994. Strategic production
competence: convergent, discriminant and predictive validity.
Production and Operations Management 3 (4), 308–318.

Vickery, S., Droge, C., Markland, R.E., 1997. Dimensions of man-
ufacturing strength in the furniture industry. Journal of Operations
Management 15 (3), 317–330.

Vickery, S., Jayaram, J., Droge, C., Calantone, R., 2003. The effects of
an integrative supply chain strategy on customer service and
ﬁnancial performance: an analysis of direct versus indirect rela-
tionship. Journal of Operations Management 21, 523–539.

Ward, P.T., Duray, R., Leong, G.K., Sum, C.C., 1995. Business
environment, operation strategy and performance: an empirical
study of Singapore manufacturers. Journal of Operations Manage-
ment 13 (2), 99–115.

Ward, P.T., Leong, G.K., Boyer, K.K., 1994. Manufacturing proac-

tiveness and performance. Decision Sciences 25 (3), 337–358.

Ward, P.T., McCreery, J.T., Ritzman, L., Sharma, D., 1998. Compe-
titive priorities in operations management. Decision Sciences 29
(4), 1035–1046.

Ward, P.T., Duray, R., 2000. Manufacturing strategy in context:
environment, competitive strategy and manufacturing strategy.
Journal of Operations Management 18, 123–138.

Wheelwright, S.C., 1984. Manufacturing strategy: deﬁning the miss-

ing link. Strategic Management Journal 5, 77–91.

White, G., 1996. A meta-analysis model of manufacturing capabil-

ities. Journal of Operations Management 14 (4), 315–331.

White, R.E., Pearson, J.N., Wilson, J.R., 1999. JIT manufacturing: a
survey of implementations in small and large U.S. manufacturers.
Management Science 45 (1), 1–15.

Williams, F.P., D’Souza, D.E., Rosenfeldt, M.E., Kassaee, M., 1995.
Manufacturing strategy, business strategy, and ﬁrm performance
in a mature industry. Journal of Operations Management 13, 19–
33.

Wood, C.H., 1991. Operations strategy: decision patterns and mea-
surement, Unpublished PhD Dissertation. Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH.

