JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

1

MODELING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FIRM IT CAPABILITY, 

COLLABORATION, AND PERFORMANCE

by

Nada R. Sanders

Wright State University

and

Robert Premus

Wright State University

Advancements in the capability of information technology (IT) have rapidly changed the face
of industry over the past decade. Functions that have been particularly impacted, at least from a the-
oretical perspective, are supply chain management (SCM) and logistics. Supply chain manage-
ment, founded on collaboration between supply chain partners (Golicic, Foggin, and Mentzer 2003;
Narasimhan and Jayaram l998; Stank, Keller, and Daugherty 2001), is intended to bring performance
benefits to the organization. Consider the recent collaborative relationship between Sears and
Michelin which has resulted in a 25% reduction in inventories for both companies (Steerman 2003).
Similarly, General Motors’new collaborative relationship with its suppliers has reduced vehicle devel-
opment cycle times from four years to eighteen months (Gutman 2003). This type of collaboration
is only made possible through the sharing of large amounts of information along the supply chain,
including operations, logistics, and strategic planning data.

Information sharing provides firms with forward visibility, improving production planning, inven-
tory management, and distribution. This collaboration is facilitated by the existence of an efficient
and effective information technology (IT) system. Information technology (IT), which allows for
the transmission and processing of information necessary for synchronous decision making, can be
viewed as the backbone of the supply chain business structure (Grover and Malhotra l999; Kent and
Mentzer 2003). For this reason the literature often refers to IT as an essential enabler of SCM activ-
ities (Mabert and Venkataramanan l998).

Advancements in IT capabilities have significantly improved the extent of internal and exter-
nal organizational information sharing. IT capability has been positively linked to firm perfor-
mance (Bharadwaj 2000; Kearns and Lederer 2003) and shown to have the potential of providing
a significant competitive advantage to firms (Earl l993; Ives and Jarvenpaa l99l; Kathuria, Anan-
darajan, and Igbaria l999). Similarly, firm collaboration has been shown to have a positive impact
on performance (Stank, Keller, and Daugherty 2001). However, the collective relationship between


2

SANDERS AND PREMUS

IT capability, firm collaboration, and firm performance has not been fully documented. Given the
large expenditures IT efforts require and the prolific nature of information technology, calls have
been made for more empirically based research to provide a greater understanding of the role of IT
in organizations (Lewis and Talalayevsky l997; McAfee 2002).

The purpose of this research is to contribute to this knowledge by proposing and testing a
model of the relationship between firm IT capability, extent of internal and external organizational
collaboration, and firm performance. The model and constructs used are directly derived from the
literature. The findings of the study have important implications for managers as they evaluate
investment in information technologies.

PREVIOUS RESEARCH

The impact of IT on the firm as a whole has been studied at length (Brynjolfsson and Hitt
l996; Davenport l992). This research has ranged from studying the alignment of specific IT appli-
cations with the organizational competitive priorities (Kathuria, Anandarajan, and Igbaria l999) to
comparisons of the effectiveness of specific IT applications (Raghunathan l999). IT research relat-
ing to topics within the SCM domain has been primarily strategic in nature. Studies have suggested
that significant differences in SCM strategies and practices can be expected based on higher IT
usage and capability. Studies by Bowersox and Daugherty (l987; l995) identify information tech-
nology as one of the most common factors associated with advanced supply chain practice. Clin-
ton and Closs (l997) used the Bowersox and Daugherty (l995) typology to relate firm practice to
strategy specifications. Their findings confirm differences in the supply chain strategies of firms based
on information technology use.

The importance of IT in SCM is further documented through the extended enterprise model,
developed by Bowersox and Daugherty (l995), Bowersox, Closs, and Stank (l999), and modified
by Edwards, Peters, and Sharman (2001). The model identifies key attributes of firms moving
toward world-class logistics, with an integrated IT system identified as a key component of this frame-
work. The highest level firms within this framework are those that operate seamlessly across bound-
aries due to IT capability that enables information to flow freely in real time.

Although research supports the idea of IT as an enabler of SCM activities and documents its
role in supply chain strategy, studies have not directly associated higher IT usage with greater
involvement in specific SCM practices. SCM practices encompass a spectrum of activities, some
internal and some external to the firm, all with the primary goal of creating value to the end-customer
(Copaciano l997; Kahn and Mentzer 1996). This is accomplished through coordination of activities
between linked firms, and should result in reduced costs due to the elimination of operational dupli-
cation and resource waste (Andraski l998; Stank, Keller, and Daugherty 2001). This requires engag-
ing in collaboration that is both internal and external to the organization (Stank, Keller, and Daugherty
2001).


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

3

Internal organizational collaboration requires cross-functional planning, coordination, and
sharing of integrated data bases. External organizational collaboration requires sharing of information
across the full range of supply chain participants, as well as sharing of internal cross-functional
processes (Schrage l990). Higher levels of both internal and external organizational collaboration
are expected to increase coordination of operations and logistics processes between organizations.
Further, higher levels of coordination are expected to contribute to improved organizational per-
formance (Bowersox and Daugherty 1995; Sheombar l992).

In a London School of Economics survey, CEOs rated IT as the firm’s top strategic tool (Com-
pass Group l998). However, the CEOs asserted that the source of competitive advantage was not tech-
nology per se, but superior information sharing that these systems offer. Although research supports
the idea of information technology as an enabler of SCM activities and documents its role in sup-
ply chain strategy, studies have not documented the relationship between IT capability, collabora-
tion, and firm performance.

CONCEPTUAL MODEL AND RESEARCH HYPOTHESES

We propose a conceptual model, shown in Figure 1, of the relationship between firm IT capa-
bility, internal and external collaboration, and firm performance. We define IT capability as tech-
nological capability used to acquire, process, and transmit information for more effective decision
making, relative to competitive standards (Grover and Malhotra l999). Our model shows IT capa-
bility as a factor influencing the organization’s internal and external collaboration, two distinct
collaboration constructs. Internal collaboration is a construct defined as an affective, mutually
shared process where two or more departments work together, have mutual understanding, have a
common vision, share resources, and achieve collective goals (Schrage, l990). External collabora-
tion is defined similarly to internal collaboration, with the exception that the focus of collaboration
is between two or more firms, rather than departments.


4

SANDERS AND PREMUS

FIGURE 1

PROPOSED CONCEPTUAL MODEL

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

   
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
  
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
      

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The relationship between IT and internal and external collaboration has been assumed by past
studies (Raghunathan l999), though it has not been directly tested. Studies have, however, tested the
relationship between IT and other constructs related to collaboration, such as relationship com-
mitment (Kent and Mentzer 2003). For example, a study by Kent and Mentzer (2003) found a
strong and positive relationship between investment in information technologies and relationship
commitment between channel partners. Other researchers have demonstrated that IT can decrease
coordination costs (Clemons, Reddi, and Row 1993; Clemons and Row l992), and is expected to bring
about increased coordination (Vickery et al. 2003). These studies collectively support the development
of our first two hypotheses that assume a positive impact of IT on both internal and external col-
laboration:

H1: Firm IT capability (IT) has a direct and positive impact on internal collaboration (IC).
H2: Firm IT capability (IT) has a direct and positive impact on external collaboration (EC).
A review of the IT literature reveals mixed results with respect to the impact of IT on firm 
financial performance (Hu and Plant 2001). A study by Hitt and Brynjolfsson (l996) finds that the
inconsistencies observed among various studies can be attributed to variations in methods and
measures used in the analyses. Most recent studies, however, have found support for the direct
impact of IT on firm financial performance (Bharadwaj 2000; Kearns and Lederer 2003; San-


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

5

thanam and Hartono 2003). Based on these studies, we can expect IT capability to be significantly
and positively related to firm performance, defined as success relative to specifically set business
goals (Kearns and Lederer 2003). This leads to the third hypothesis:

H3: Firm IT capability (IT) has a direct and positive impact on firm performance (FP).
The proposed model further posits that external collaboration directly impacts internal col-
laboration, which in turn directly impacts firm performance. The relationship between internal and
external collaboration in the current model is consistent with the latest studies. Subramani (2004)
argues that the collaboration and association suppliers develop with buyers are in fact directly con-
strained by communication within the supplier firm. In effect, internal communication serves to medi-
ate buyer-supplier collaboration. Stank, Keller, and Daugherty (2001) also found external collaboration
to directly influence internal collaboration. Similarly, a recent study of the impact of IT on supply
chain collaboration (Vickery et al. 2003) assumes that collaboration within the firm and between firms
are equally subsumed under the construct of supply chain integration. The authors argue that the var-
ious internal functions comprising a company are essentially a part of the supply chain. The proposed
model tests this relationship and leads to our next hypothesis:

H4: External collaboration (EC) has a direct and positive impact on internal collabora-

tion (IC).

Finally, higher levels of coordination are expected to contribute to improved organizational 
performance (Bowersox and Daugherty 1995). Stank, Daugherty, and Ellinger (l999) provide
empirical support for a link between internal integration and customer service performance. Their
study found significant differences in the elements of customer service performance for firms with
higher levels of integration. Similarly, Stank, Keller, and Daugherty (2001) found internal collab-
oration to impact firm performance. This leads us to the final hypothesis:

H5:  Internal collaboration (IC) has a direct and positive impact on firm performance (FP).

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

The Sampling Procedure

Data for this study were obtained from a survey of U.S. manufacturing firms. The survey
instrument was initially pre-tested by six executives and five academics. The individuals were
asked to review the questionnaire for readability and ambiguity (Dillman 2000). Based on results
of the pre-test, minor changes were made to select questionnaire items. The instrument was then mailed
to 2,000 U.S. industrial companies. As the information targeted was strategic in nature, the survey
instrument was sent to the highest ranking officer of primarily large manufacturing companies with
annual sales in excess of $4.5 billion. This is supported by a study by Phillips (l981) that indicates
high ranking informants tend to be more reliable sources of information than low ranking. The
database was purchased with these criteria specified from American Business Lists. The current study


6

SANDERS AND PREMUS

focused on large firms typically seen as leaders in innovative practices, such as IT and SCM. We also
hoped to prevent firm size from having a confounding effect on the findings.

A variation of Dillman’s total design method was used (Dillman 2000) in order to ensure 
adequacy of response. The initial mailing included a cover letter and the survey instrument, with the
latter designed to be merely folded and returned, with postage pre-paid. Reminder postcards were
sent approximately ten days following the initial mailing, followed by a second survey mailing
approximately 30 days later. Those that had already responded were told to ignore the mailing.
Twenty incomplete responses were discarded. The mailings yielded 245 usable responses, for a
response rate of 12.3%.

Although the response rate is low, the rate is similar to other surveys sampling senior officers
(Wisner 2003). The typical respondent to the survey held the title of President, CEO, Vice President,
or Director of Procurement and Purchasing, as shown in Table 1. Even with a low response rate, 245
responses from senior officers can provide valuable insight, provided that non-response bias is not
an issue. Accordingly, the analysis that follows and all reported statistics are based on a sample of
245 manufacturing firms. Specific demographic information of the sample is shown in Table 2.

TABLE 1

PROFILE OF SURVEY RESPONDENTS

Respondent Title
1. President
2. CEO
3. Vice President
4. Director
5. Senior Manager
6. Other

Frequency
19
29
76
93
11
17
245

Percentage

8
12
31
38
5
6

100%


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

7

TABLE 2

SAMPLE DEMOGRAPHIC

Industry Sub-Sector
1. Miscellaneous Manufacturing
2. Electrical/Electronic Equipment
3.Chemical
4. Fabricated Metal
5. Rubber and Plastic
6. Computer/Electronic Equipment Manufacturing
7. Machinery Manufacturing
8. Transport Equipment Manufacturing
9. Apparel Manufacturing
10. Food Manufacturing
11. Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
12. Beverage Manufacturing
13. Wood Product Manufacturing
14. Paper Manufacturing
15. Other

Frequency
61
44
37
27
27
13
7
6
3
2
2
2
2
2
10
245

Percentage
25
18
15
11
11
5
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
4

100%

Test for Non-Response Bias

A concern with any survey methodology is the adequacy of the response sample. One method
to assess non-response bias is to test for significant differences between early and late respondents
(Armstrong and Overton l977). In order to ensure adequacy of our data, the first and second wave
of respondents were compared. T-tests were performed on all fifteen questionnaire items used in this
study, with no significant differences found between the two samples. Further, chi-square differences
were calculated between respondents and non-respondents for annual sales revenues (␹2 = 4.54, 
p > 0.05), number of employees (␹2 = 6.23, p > 0.05), and industry (␹2 = 6.82, p > 0.05), and found
to be insignificant. These results collectively suggest that non-response bias is not present in the data
(Sabherwal l999; Teo and King l997).


8

SANDERS AND PREMUS

Measure Development and Purification

Measures for the factors were derived from the literature and are shown in Table 3. These
measures were developed based on procedures outlined by Churchill (l979) and DeVellis (l99l). 
In this section we describe the procedure used to purify the measurement scales and ensure scale 
adequacy.

TABLE 3

VARIABLE AND FACTOR LISTING

Factors and Scale Items1

Standardized
coefficient

Standard
error

t-Value

F1: Firm IT capability (IT); ␣ = .874
Please indicate your firm’s…
IT1: IT capability relative to industry standard 
IT2: IT capability relative to key competitors
IT3: IT capability relative to key customers
IT4: use of information networks with key suppliers
F2: Internal Collaboration (IC); ␣ = .738
Please indicate the extent to which your firm …
IC1: uses cross-functional collaboration in strategic planning
IC2: utilizes integrated database for information sharing
IC3: shares operations information among departments
F3: External Collaboration (EC): ␣ = .842
Please indicate the extent to which your firm …
EC1: shares operations information with suppliers
EC2: shares cross-functional processes with suppliers
EC3: engages in collaborative planning with suppliers
EC4: shares cost information with suppliers 
F4: Firm Performance (FP): ␣ = .762
Please indicate your firm’s…
MP1: cost improvement relative to performance goals
MP2: product quality improvement relative to performance goals
MP3: new product introduction time relative to performance goals
MP4: delivery speed improvement relative to performance goals 

0.712
0.732
0.719
0.722

0.429
0.528
0.531

0.632
0.741
0.716
0.676

0.734
0.628
0.612
0.548

0.021
0.029
0.023
0.022

0.029
0.023
0.027

0.031
0.035
0.041
0.032

0.027
0.028
0.036
0.031

11.32*
11.21*
10.43*
12.12*

16.23*
16.19*
16.01*

14.56*
15.71*
14.23*
15.65*

12.36*
13.45*
11.51*
11.38*

1All developed using 5-point Likert scale; where 1 = strongly agree, 5 = strongly disagree; exception are
IT1-IT4 where 1 = significantly above standard; 3 = comparable to standard; 5 = significantly below standard;
*Significance at the p ≤ 0.01 level


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

9

An important measure of scale adequacy is scale reliability. Scale reliability is the percent of
variance in an observed variable that is accounted for by the true score of the latent factor or under-
lying construct (DeVellis l99l). When scale reliability is high, then all variables that measure a sin-
gle factor share a high degree of common variance. Scale reliability can be measured in different
ways. However, a commonly employed statistic is Cronbach’s coefficient alpha, which measures
the degree of inter-item correlation in each set of items and indicates the proportion of the variance
in the scale scores that is attributable to the true score. Alpha levels below 0.7 are considered unac-
ceptable (DeVellis, l99l).

Prior to purification of scales, the alpha levels in this study indicated that some values were below
the acceptability level. Purification of scales was then performed through the use of confirmatory
factor analysis. Scale items exhibiting insignificant factor loadings or high residuals were then
identified and eliminated from the factor measurement (DeVellis, l99l). Following the purification
process alpha levels ranged from 0.738 to 0.874.

Construct Measures

Table 3 shows the four model factors and the multiple variables used to measure each factor.
The scale items used to measure these factors are derived from past studies and are described in this
section.

Factor 1 measures firm IT capability. The development of scale items for this factor needed to
take into account the definition of IT, as it can have different meanings to different constituency groups.
We defined information technology as technology used to acquire, process, and transmit informa-
tion for more effective decision making (Grover and Malhotra l999). Four scale items were used to
evaluate firm IT capability: IT capability relative to industry standards, relative to key competitors,
relative to key customers, and the level of information networks used with key suppliers. The scale
items are comparable to those used in a study by Kent and Mentzer (2003). While the scale items
in the Kent and Mentzer (2003) study asked respondents whether the company is a “leader” or “on
the leading edge” of information technology, our study asks how the company compares relative to
industry standards and competition in the use of information technology.

Factor 2 measures internal organizational collaboration. Three scale items measure this factor:
cross-functional collaboration in strategic planning, utilization of an integrated database for infor-
mation sharing, and sharing of operations information among departments. These variables measure
the existence of collaboration and support for information sharing. The first variable, in particular,
focuses on collaboration at the strategic level. The importance of aligning functional strategies
with those of the firm and making them part of the overall strategy has been well documented in the
literature (Hayes and Wheelwright l984; Hill 2000; Skinner l969). True strategy formulation requires
active participation of functional strategies in order to ensure that the functional strategies are
aligned with the overall business strategy (Hill 2000). The scale items used here are comparable to
those used to measure internal collaboration in past studies (Stank, Keller, and Daugherty 2001).


10

SANDERS AND PREMUS

A fourth scale item was initially introduced for Factor 2, but eliminated during the scale purifi-
cation process. This item measured the direct role of SCM in the strategic planning process of the
firm. Direct SCM involvement in strategic planning is considered a necessary component of mean-
ingful SCM implementation. Internal collaboration is largely driven by SCM, which relies on the
close integration of internal functions within the firm, such as procurement, logistics/distribution,
product design/development, manufacturing, and marketing (Vickery, Calantone, and Dröge l999).
Therefore, it was surprising that this variable was eliminated.

Factor 3 measures the degree of external collaboration with suppliers, a key element of SCM
(Choi and Hartley l996; Lambert, Emmelhainz, and Gardner l999; Tan, Kannan, and Handfield
l998; Zaheer, McEvily and Perrone l998). SCM enhances competitive performance through inter-
nal cross-functional collaboration that is linked with the functions of suppliers and channel mem-
bers (Monczka et al. l998; Vickery, Calantone, and Dröge l999). Differences in collaboration exist
depending on the type of information being shared and the nature of the collaboration process. The
current study considered four variables to measure external collaboration: sharing of operations and
planning information; sharing of cross-functional processes; participation in collaborative net-
works with multiple suppliers; and sharing of cost information. Again, the scale items are compa-
rable to those used to measure external collaboration in past research (Stank, Keller, and Daugherty
2001).

The last factor considered, F4, measures firm performance. Firm performance has been mea-
sured in numerous ways in the past literature (Handfield and Nichols l999; Narasimhan and Das l999;
Wisner 2003). These measures typically include the four basic competitive priorities of cost, qual-
ity, dependability, and flexibility (Buffa l984). More recently innovation has become an added
dimension (Ward, Leong, and Snyder l990). However, some researchers have suggested that world-
class manufacturers tend to simultaneously pursue multiple performance objectives, rather than
merely focusing on one measure. Following the approach of multiple performance objectives,
taken in previous studies (Narasimhan and Das 2001), we treat firm performance as a composite con-
struct composed of multiple measures. These measures include cost, quality, delivery, and new
product introduction time. These scale items are not new and have been used in past studies
(Narasimhan and Das 2001; Scannell, Vickery, and Dröge 2000).

RESULTS

Evaluation of the proposed model was made using structuring equation modeling, following
the two step approach recommended by Anderson and Gerbing (l988). The first step involved the
development of an acceptable measurement model through the use of confirmatory factory analy-
sis. At this first stage the latent factors of interest are identified, and the relationship between the
observed variables and their respective latent factors is tested. The relationships between the
observed variables and latent factors are specified by the researcher and all factors are allowed to
intercorrelate.


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

11

All SEM analyses were conducted using EQS (Bentler l997). Table 4 presents results of the mea-
surement model. As recommended, multiple fit criteria are considered in order to rule out measurement
biases (Hu and Bentler l999). The fit indices considered are those most commonly recommended
for this type of analysis (Bagozzi and Yi l988; Byrne l994). All the indices were within the recom-
mended range, including ratio of chi-square to degrees of freedom (␹2/df = 1.92), root mean square
error of approximation (RMSEA = 0.05), root mean square residual (RMR = 0.04), goodness of fit
index (GFI = 0.96), normed fit index (NFI = 0.95), comparative fit index (CFI = 0.96), and incre-
mental fit index (IFI = 0.96). Collectively these statistics lead us to judge the overall measurement
model fit as satisfactory (Byrne l994).

TABLE 4

FIT STATISTICS FOR MEASUREMENT MODEL

Overall Fit Measures

Fit Statistic
Chi-Square to Degrees of Freedom
Root Mean Square Error of Approximation
Root Mean Square Residual
Goodness of Fit Index 
Normed Fit Index
Comparative Fit Index
Incremental Fit Index

Notation
␹2/df
RMSEA
RMR
GFI
NFI
CFI
IFI

Model 
Value
1.92
0.05
0.04
0.96
0.95
0.96
0.96

Acceptable 
Value
≤ 2.0
≤ 0.06
≤ 0.05
≥ 0.95
≥ 0.95
≥ 0.95
≥ 0.95

Standardized coefficients, standard errors, and t-values for variable items are shown in 
Table 4. All the coefficients are found to be significant at the p < 0.01 level. The table also shows
coefficient alpha values for each factor following the purification process. The coefficient alphas
ranged from 0.738 to 0.874, all in the acceptable range (DeVellis l99l).

Convergent validity

In order to perform meaningful analysis of the causal model, measures used need to display 
certain empirical properties. The first of these is convergent validity, which is the degree to which
individual questionnaire items measure the same underlying construct. One way to test for convergent
validity is to evaluate whether the individual item’s standardized coefficient from the measure-
ment model is significant, namely greater than twice its standard error (Anderson and Gerbing
l988). An analysis of Table 3 reveals that coefficients for all items greatly exceed twice their 


12

SANDERS AND PREMUS

standard error. Also considering that coefficients for all variables are large and significant provides
evidence of convergent validity for the tested items.

Discriminant Validity

In addition to convergent validity, to ensure adequacy of the measurement model it is impor-
tant to measure that groups of variables intended to measure different latent constructs display dis-
criminant validity. Discriminant validity addresses the extent to which individual items intended to
measure one latent construct do not at the same time measure a different latent construct (DeVellis
l99l). We test for discriminant validity in two ways. First, inter-factor correlations are computed for
all factors and shown in Table 5. Very high inter-factor correlations, say approaching 1.00, indicate
that the items are measuring the same construct, although significant inter-factor correlations may
be observed between theoretically related constructs. An analysis of Table 5 reveals the inter-
factor correlations to be quite low.

TABLE 5

CORRELATION RESULTS

Firm IT Capability
Internal Collaboration
External Collaboration
Firm Performance

Firm IT
Capability
1.00
.294
.258
.320

Internal
Collaboration

External
Collaboration

Firm
Performance

1.00
.362
.241

1.00
.372

1.00

In addition to the simple inter-factor correlation analysis, discriminant validity was further eval-
uated through a confidence interval test. A confidence interval of plus or minus 2 standard errors was
computed around the correlation estimates between the factors and determined whether this inter-
val includes 1.0. In our test, none of the confidence intervals contained 1.0, demonstrating dis-
criminant validity (Anderson and Gerbing l988)

Structural Model Test Results
Figure 2 presents the results of the structural model tested. Overall model fit indices are as 
follows: ratio of chi-square to degrees of freedom (␹2/df = 164.05/85 = 1.93), root mean square 
error of approximation (RMSEA = 0.05), root mean square residual (RMR = 0.04), goodness of 
fit index (GFI = 0.98), normed fit index (NFI = 0.96), comparative fit index (CFI = 0.97), and 
incremental fit index (IFI = 0.97). A comparison of these values against those recommended in 
the literature suggests that the model is satisfactory (Hu and Bentler l999). All paths are statistically
significant at the 0.05 level.


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

13

FIGURE 2

STRUCTURAL MODEL

IC1 

IC2 

IC3 

F2: 

        H1: ␥ = .42 * 
 
 
 
 

 
       + 

Internal  

Collaboration 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

H5: 
 
+ 

 = .46 * 
␥ 

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

        

H3: ␥ = .36 * 
 
+      

 

      

 

   H4:   

 = .35 * 
␥ 

H2: ␥  = .34* 

            + 

F4: 
Firm 

Performance 

MP1 

MP2 

MP3 

MP4 

 

 

 
F3: 

External 

Collaboration 

+ 

      

 

 

 

 

 
 

EC1 

EC2 

EC3 

EC4 

IT1 

IT2 

IT3 

IT4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
F1: 

IT Capability 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

*All coefficients are significant at p ≤ 0.05


14

SANDERS AND PREMUS

TABLE 6

THE GOODNESS OF FIT OF THE STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODEL

Overall Fit Measures

Fit Statistic
Chi-Square to Degrees of Freedom
Root Mean Square Error of Approximation
Root Mean Square Residual
Goodness of Fit Index 
Normed Fit Index
Comparative Fit Index
Incremental Fit Index

Notation
␹2/df
RMSEA
RMR
GFI
NFI
CFI
IFI

Model 
Value
1.93
0.05
0.04
0.98
0.96
0.97
0.97

Acceptable 
Value
≤ 2.0
≤ 0.06
≤ 0.05
≥ 0.95
≥ 0.95
≥ 0.95
≥ 0.95

This serves as the basis of evaluation of the hypotheses:
H1: Firm IT capability (IT) has a direct and positive impact on internal collaboration (IC). This
hypothesis is supported, as the parameter estimate (.42) is significant and substantial.
H2: Firm IT capability (IT) has a direct and positive impact on external collaboration (EC).

This hypothesis is supported, as the parameter estimate (.34) is significant.

H3: Firm IT capability (IT) has a direct and positive impact on firm performance (FP). This

hypothesis is supported, as the parameter estimate (.36) is significant.

H4: External collaboration (EC) has a direct and positive impact on internal collaboration

(IC). This hypothesis is supported, as the parameter estimate (.35) is significant.

H5: Internal collaboration (IC) has a direct and positive impact on firm performance (FP). This

hypothesis is supported, as the parameter estimate (.46) is significant.

We note that in addition to the proposed model, alternative structural models were presented
and tested during the analysis. However, the presented model proved to have the best fit based on
the discussed measures. Our study documents that IT has both a direct and indirect impact on firm
performance, with the indirect effect of IT on performance being significant (.25) at the p ≤ 0.05 level.
Note that we did not hypothesize a direct relationship from external collaboration to firm 
performance based on the literature review. The Lagrange Multiplier (LM) test for omitted paths 
did not indicate that such a relationship would be significant. Therefore, the relationship between
external collaboration and firm performance is found in our study to be indirect, through internal
collaboration. This is further supported by the computed indirect effect of external collaboration on
firm performance, which was significant (.16) at the p ≤ 0.05. This finding is important as it supports


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

15

the argument of Subramani (2004) that internal collaboration constrains the benefits of external 
collaboration.

DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS

The purpose of this paper was to propose and test a model of the relationship between firm IT
capability, internal and external collaboration, and firm performance. A number of important find-
ings emerge that have both theoretical and managerial implications. First, a significant contribution
of this study is the empirical test of theoretical assumptions in the extant literature of IT influence
on collaboration and firm performance. IT is shown to have a significant direct impact on perfor-
mance and a significant impact on both internal and external collaboration. This finding under-
scores the important role IT plays in the organization.

This research also suggests that collaboration is not synonymous with information technology.
Rather, information technology is a separate construct that promotes both internal and external
collaborative relationships. This is noted as occasionally companies presume that having informa-
tion technology in place automatically assumes that collaboration exists. Collaboration is a result
of human interactions which can only be supported by IT, but not replaced. This is an important point
for managers as they consider funding for various IT initiatives. Based upon the findings of this study,
IT efforts that particularly promote collaboration should be given greater consideration.

Another important finding relates to the significant impact of internal collaboration on per-
formance. Although this finding is not new, it does validate and further confirm the important role
internal collaboration serves. The significant impact of internal collaboration on performance sug-
gests that companies should invest in strategies that promote cooperation and integration across the
functions of the organization. As IT is shown to promote internal collaboration, companies should
also consider investing in these types of information technologies.

Last, the research model supports the finding that external collaboration influences internal 
collaboration, which in turn impacts performance. This supports previous findings. This finding, how-
ever, should not be surprising. By engaging in external collaboration, companies automatically
force higher levels of internal collaboration. Benefits of collaboration appear to be synergistic in nature.
They help members of the organization access information in a timely manner, process relevant infor-
mation efficiently, and make informed decisions both internally and across enterprises.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH

A number of limitations of the current study need to be noted, as well as directions for future
research. Our study did not compare the impact of specific information technologies, an area that
should be a consideration in future research. For example, one functional classification of IT is
provided by Barki, Rivard, and Talbot (l993), where IT is aggregated into six categories: transac-
tion processing systems, decision support systems, interorganizational systems, communication
systems, storage and retrieval systems, and collaborative work systems. A simpler classification of


16

SANDERS AND PREMUS

IT is provided by Kendall (l997), where IT is divided into two categories: production-oriented
information technologies and coordination-oriented information technologies. Regardless of clas-
sification, it can be assumed that some of these technologies have a more direct impact on collab-
oration than others. Future research should elaborate on our initial findings to consider the impact
of specific information technologies on collaboration and firm performance.

Some studies suggest that there is a recommended sequence in using information technology
in order to achieve supply chain integration (Narasimhan and Kim 2001). These studies suggest that
in order for information technology to be implemented successfully there needs to be coordination
and a functional relationship between the stage of supply chain integration and the utilization of IT.
As collaboration is an integral part of supply chain integration it seems that this would have an impact
on collaboration as well. It also suggests the complexity of this issue. The model tested in our cur-
rent study is somewhat simplistic. Future studies should consider expanding this relationship to include
the stage of supply chain integration.

Our research considers collaboration to be comprised of two constructs, one for internal and
one for external collaboration. In fact, collaboration can be viewed in stages, from simple information
sharing to true collaboration (Sabath and Fontanella 2002). Future research should consider the rela-
tionship between specific types of information technologies and their linkage to specific collabo-
ration needs. This type of work could potentially provide interesting findings for use of information
technology in business.

Our study also has limitations due to the nature of empirical data that it is based on. First, the
random errors inherent in this type of data may cause differences in the scale results using confir-
matory factor analysis, with differing data sets. Scale development, purification, and validation, is
an ongoing process that needs to be developed longitudinally and across multiple data sets. Con-
sequently, future research will need to reexamine the measures used in this study.

A second limitation of our study relates to characteristics of the sample upon which the hypothe-
ses are tested. Larger studies on broader samples would evaluate whether these results are truly gen-
eralizable. Also, IT capability is pervasive throughout all types of industries. Our study was limited
to primarily large manufacturing firms, increasing the validity of the measures. Similar measures
need to be developed for a broader range of firms, as well as firms in the service environment.
Despite the discussed limitations, our research provides support for the positive influence of
IT on capabilities on collaboration and firm performance. Some authors have questioned the tan-
gible benefits associated with the large and rapidly growing expenditures toward IT, and have
encouraged empirical research to shed light on this issue (McAfee 2002). Our study attempts to pro-
vide such empirical evidence by elucidating the role of IT in organizations.


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

17

CONCLUSION

The capability of information technology (IT) and it use have dramatically increased over the
recent past. Investments in IT are important decisions for companies as they involve large capital
expenditures. The literature has viewed IT as an enabler of internal and external firm collaboration,
which is the foundation of supply chain management. Firm collaboration and information sharing,
in turn, are expected to improve firm performance. Our study tested a model of the relationship
between firm IT capability, internal and external collaboration, and firm performance, using 
empirical data. Our findings show that firm IT capability impacts performance both directly and by
having a positive impact on internal and external collaboration. Internal collaboration is shown to
have a strong direct impact on performance and, in turn, is impacted by external collaboration.
These findings underscore the importance for companies to promote internal collaboration and
invest in information technologies that facilitate it.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This study was funded by a research grant from the Department of Defense, Defense Acqui-

sition University, the Naval Post Graduate School, Monterey, California.

Anderson, James C. and David W. Gerbing (l988), “Structural Equation Modeling in Practice: 
A Review and Recommended Two-Step Approach,” Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 103, No. 3, 
pp. 411-423.

NOTES

Andraski, Joseph C. (l998), “Leadership and the Realization of Supply Chain Collaboration,” 
Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 9-11.

Armstrong, J. Scott and Terry S. Overton (l977), “Estimating Non-Response Bias in Mail 
Surveys,” Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 396-402.

Bagozzi, Richard P. and Youjae Yi (l988), “On the Evaluation of Structural Equation Models,”
Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 74-93.

Barki, Henri, Suzanne Rivard, and Jean Talbot (l993), “A Keyword Classification Scheme for IS
Research Literature: An Update,” MIS Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 209-226.

Bentler, Peter M. (l997), EQS: Structural Equation Program Manual, Multivariate Software, Inc.,
Encino, CA.


18

SANDERS AND PREMUS

Bharadwaj, Anandhi S. (2000), “A Resource-Based Perspective on Information Technology 
Capability and Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation,” MIS Quarterly, Vol. 24, No. 1, 
pp. 169-196.

Bowersox, Donald J., David J. Closs, and Theodore P. Stank (l999), 21st Century Logistics: Mak-
ing Supply Chain Integration a Reality, Oak Brook, IL: The Council of Logistics Management.

Bowersox, Donald J. and Patricia J. Daugherty (l995), “Logistics Paradigms: The Impact of Infor-
mation Technology,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 65-80.

Bowersox, Donald J. and Patricia J. Daugherty (l987), “Emerging Patterns of Logistical Organi-
zations,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 46-60.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin Hitt (l996), “Paradox Lost? Firm-Level Evidence on the Returns to Infor-
mation Systems Spending,” Management Science, Vol. 42, No. 4, pp. 541-558.

Buffa, Elwood (l984), Meeting the Competitive Challenge, Homewood, IL: Irwin Publishing.

Byrne, Barbara M. (l994), Structural Equation Models with EQS and EQS/Windows: Basic Con-
cepts, Applications, and Programming, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Choi, Thomas and Janet Hartley (l996), “An Exploration of Supplier Selection Practices Across the
Supply Chain,” Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 333-43.

Churchill, Gary A. Jr. (l979), “A Paradigm for Developing Better Measures of Marketing Con-
structs,” Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 73-74.

Clemons, Eric and Michael C. Row (l992), “Information Technology and Industrial Cooperation:
the Changing Economics of Coordination and Ownership,” Journal of Management Information
Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 9-28.

Clemons, Eric, Sashidhar Reddi, and Michael Row (l993), “The Impact of Information Technology
on the Organization of Economic Activity: the ‘Move to the Middle’ Hypothesis,” Journal of
Management Information Systems, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 9-35.

Clinton, Steven R. and David J. Closs (l997), “Logistics Strategy: Does it Exist?” Journal of Busi-
ness Logistics, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 19-44.

Copaciano, William C. (l997), Supply Chain Management: The Basics and Beyond, Boca Raton, FL:
St. Lucie Press/APICS Series on Resource Management.


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

19

Compass Group (1998), The Compass world IT strategy census 1998-2000, Rotterdam: Compass
Publishing.

Davenport, Thomas H. (l992), Process Innovation: Reengineering Work through Information Tech-
nology, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

DeVellis, Robert F. (l99l), Scale Development: Theory and Applications, Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications.

Dillman, Donald R. (2000), Mail and Internet Surveys: The Tailored Design Method, New York: John
Wiley & Sons.

Earl, Michael J. (l993), “Experiences in Strategic Information Systems Planning: Editor’s Comments,”
MIS Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 5.

Edwards, Peter, Melvyn Peters, and Graham Sharman (2001), “The Effectiveness of Information
Systems in Supporting the Extended Supply Chain,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 22, No. 1,
pp. 1-27.

Golicic, Susan L., James H. Foggin, and John T. Mentzer (2003), “Relationship Magnitude and its
Role in Interorganizational Relationship Structure,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 24, No. 1,
pp. 57-76.

Grover, Varun and Manoj Malhotra (l999), “A Framework for Examining the Interface between 
Operations and Information Systems: Implications for Research in the New Millennium,” Decision
Sciences, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 901-920.

Gutman, Kirk (2003), “How GM is Accelerating Vehicle Deployment,” Supply Chain Manage-
ment Review, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 34-39.

Handfield, Robert B. and Ernest L. Nichols, Jr. (l999), Introduction to Supply Chain Management,
Upper Saddle, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Hayes, Robert H. and Steven C. Wheelwright (l984), Restoring our Competitive Edge: Competing
through Manufacturing, New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Hill, Terry (2000), Manufacturing Strategy: Text and Cases, 3rd Ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill.


20

SANDERS AND PREMUS

Hitt, Lorin M. and Erik Brynjolfsson (l996), “Productivity, Business Profitability, and Consumer Sur-
plus: Three Different Measures of Information Technology Value,” MIS Quarterly, Vol. 20, No. 2,
pp. 121-141.

Hu, Li-tze and Peter M. Bentler (l999), “Cutoff Criteria for Fit Indexes in Covariance Structure Analy-
sis: Conventional Criteria Versus New Alternatives,” Structural Equation Modeling, Vol. 6, No. 1,
pp. 1-55.

Hu, Qing and Robert T. Plant (2001), “An Empirical Study of the Causal Relationship between IT
Investment and Firm Performance,” Information Resources Management Journal, Vol. 14, No. 3,
pp. 15-26.

Ives, Blake and Sizkka L. Jarvenpaa (l99l), “Applications of Global Information Technology: Key
Issues for Management,” MIS Quarterly, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 33-49.

Kahn, Ken B. and John T. Mentzer (l996), “Logistics and Interdepartmental Integration,” Interna-
tional Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, Vol. 26, No. 8, pp. 6-14.

Kathuria, Ravi, Murugan Anandarajan, and Magid Igbaria (l999), “Linking ITApplications with Man-
ufacturing Strategy: An Intelligent Decision Support System Approach,” Decision Sciences, Vol. 30,
No. 4, pp. 959-992.

Kearns, Grover S. and Albert L. Lederer (2003), “A Resource-Based View of Strategic IT Alignment:
How Knowledge Sharing Creates Competitive Advantage,” Decision Sciences, Vol. 34, No. 1, 
pp. 1-29.

Kendall, Kenneth E. (1997), “The Significance of Information Systems Research on Emerging
Technologies: Seven Information Technologies that Promise to Improve Managerial Effective-
ness,” Decision Sciences, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 775-792.

Kent, John L. and John T. Mentzer (2003), “The Effect of Investment in Interorganizational 
Information Technology in a Retail Supply Chain,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 24, No. 2,
pp. 155-176.

Lambert, Douglas, Margaret A. Emmelhainz, and John T. Gardner (l999), “Building Successful 
Logistics Partnerships,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 165-81.

Lewis, Ira and Alexander Talalayevsky (l997), “Logistics and Information Technology: A
Coordination Perspective,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 141-157.


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

21

Mabert, Vincent A. and M.A. Venkataramanan (l998), “Special Research Focus on Supply Chain
Linkages: Challenges for Design and Management in the 21st Century,” Decision Sciences, Vol. 29,
No. 3, pp. 537-552.

McAfee, Andrew (2002), “The Impact of Enterprise Information Technology Adoption on Opera-
tional Performance: An Empirical Investigation,” Production and Operations Management, Vol. 11,
No. 1, pp. 33-53.

Monczka, Robert, Kenneth Petersen, Robert Handfield, and Gary Ragatz (l998), “Success Factors
in Strategic Supplier Alliances: The Buying Company Perspective,” Decision Sciences, Vol. 29, 
No. 3, pp. 553-578.

Narasimhan, Ram and Ajay Das (2001), “The Impact of Purchasing Integration and Practices on 
Manufacturing Performance,” Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 19, No. 5, pp. 593-609.

Narasimhan, Ram and Ajay Das (l999), “An Empirical Investigation of the Impact of Strategic
Sourcing on Manufacturing Flexibility and Performance,” Decision Sciences, Vol. 30, No. 3, 
pp. 683-713.

Narasimhan, Ram and Jayanth Jayaram (l998), “Casual Linkages in Supply Chain Management: 
An Exploratory Study of North American Manufacturing Firms,” Decision Sciences, Vol. 29, No. 3,
pp. 579-606.

Narasimhan, Ram and Soo Wook Kim (2001), “Information System Utilization Strategy for 
Supply Chain Integration,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 51-75.

Phillips, Lynn W. (l98l), “Assessing Measurement Error in Key Informant Reports: A Method-
ological Note on Organizational Analysis in Marketing,” Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18,
No. 4, pp. 395-415.

Raghunathan, Srinivasan (l999), “Interorganizational Collaborative Forecasting and Replenish-
ment Systems and Supply Chain Implications,” Decision Science, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 1053-1072.

Sabath, Robert E. and John Fontanella (2002), “The Unfulfilled Promise of Supply Chain Collab-
oration,” Supply Chain Management Review, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 24-29.

Sabherwal, Rajiv (l999), “The Relationship Between Information System Planning Sophistication
and Information System Success: An Empirical Assessment,” Decision Sciences, Vol. 30, No. 1, 
pp. 137-167.


22

SANDERS AND PREMUS

Santhanam, Radhika and Edward Hartono (2003), “Issues in Linking Information Technology
Capability to Firm Performance,” MIS Quarterly, Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 125-153.

Scannell, Thomas, Shawnee Vickery, and Cornelia Dröge (2000), “Upstream Supply Chain 
Management and Competitive Performance in the Automotive Supply Industry,” Journal of Busi-
ness Logistics, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 23-48.

Schrage, Michael (l990), Shared Minds: The New Technologies of Collaboration, New York: 
Random House.

Sheombar, Haydee S. (l992), “EDI-Induced Redesign of Coordination in Logistics,” International
Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, Vol. 22, No. 8, pp. 4-14.

Skinner, Wickam (l969), “Manufacturing – missing link in corporate strategy,” Harvard Business
Review, Vol. 47, No. 3, pp. 136-145.

Stank, Theodore P., Patricia J. Daugherty, and Alexander E. Ellinger (l999), “Marketing/Logistics
Integration and Firm Performance,” The International Journal of Logistics Management, Vol. 10,
No. 1, pp. 11-24.

Stank, Theodore P., Scott B. Keller, and Patricia J. Daugherty (2001), “Supply Chain Collaboration
and Logistical Service Performance,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 29-47.

Steerman, Hank (2003), “A Practical Look at CPFR: The Sears-Michelin Experience,” Supply
Chain Management Review, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 46-53.

Subramani, Mani (2004), “How Do Suppliers Benefit from Information Technology Use in Supply
Chain Relationships?” MIS Quarterly, Vol. 28, No.1, pp. 45-73.

Tan, Keah-Choon, Vijay Kannan, and Robert Handfield (l998), “Supply Chain Management Sup-
plier Performance and Firm Performance,” International Journal of Purchasing and Materials
Management, Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 2-9.

Teo, Thompson S. H. and William R. King (1997), “Integration between Business Planning and Infor-
mation Systems Planning: An Evolutionary-Contingency Perspective,” Journal of Management
Information Systems, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 185-214.

Vickery, Shawnee K, Roger Calantone, and Cornelia Dröge (1999), “Supply Chain Flexibility: An
Empirical Study,” The Journal of Supply Chain Management, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 16-24.


JOURNAL OF BUSINESS LOGISTICS, Vol. 26, No. 1, 2005

23

Vickery, Shawnee K., Jayanth Jayaram, Cornelia Droge, and Roger Calantone (2003), “The Effects
of an Integrative Supply Chain Strategy on Customer Service and Financial Performance: An
Analysis of Direct Versus Indirect Relationships,” Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 21, 
No. 5, pp. 523-539.

Ward, Peter, Keong G. Leong, and Dave L. Snyder (l990), “Manufacturing Strategy: An Overview
of Current Process and Content Models,” in J.E. Ettlie, M.C. Burnstein, and A. Fiegenbaum eds.,
Manufacturing strategy: The research agenda for the next decade: Proceedings of the Joint Indus-
try University Conference on Manufacturing Strategy, pp. 189-199.

Wisner, Joel D. (2003), “A Structural Equation Model of Supply Chain Management Strategies
and Firm Performance,” Journal of Business Logistics, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 1-26.

Zaheer, Akbar, Bill McEvily, and Vincenzo Perrone (1998), “The Strategic Value of Buyer-Supplier
Relationships,” International Journal of Purchasing and Materials Management, Vol. 3, No. 3,
pp. 20-26.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Nada R. Sanders is Professor of Operations Management and Logistics at the Raj Soin 
College of Business at Wright State University. She received her Ph.D. and MBA from The Ohio
State University. Dr. Sanders is author of numerous articles that have appeared in journals such as
Journal of Business Logistics, Decision Sciences, Sloan Management Review, Omega, Interfaces,
International Journal of Production and Operations Management, and Journal of Behavioral Deci-
sion Making. She has written chapters for books and encyclopedias, and is co-author of the book Oper-
ations Management. Her research interests include supply chain management, outsourcing, business
forecasting, and the role of information technology on supply chain organizations.

Robert Premus is Professor of Economics at Wright State University. He earned his doctor-
ate in economics and industrial organization from Lehigh University and has authored numerous schol-
arly papers and reports on the economics of innovation and economic growth. His primary teaching
fields are in macroeconomics, economic growth, and monetary economics. Dr. Premus has fre-
quently served as a speaker and consultant to companies and government agencies on issues of
technology, innovation, and economic growth.

