 
 
Employee and Customer Perceptions of Service in Banks
Author(s): Benjamin Schneider, John J. Parkington and  Virginia M. Buxton
Source: Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 2 (Jun., 1980), pp. 252-267
Published by: Sage Publications, Inc. on behalf of the Johnson Graduate School of
Management, Cornell University
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2392454
Accessed: 02-08-2017 20:18 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2392454?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Sage Publications, Inc., Johnson Graduate School of Management, Cornell University
are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Administrative
Science Quarterly

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Employee and Cus-
 tomer Perceptions of
 Service in Banks

 Benjamin Schneider,
 John J. Parkington,
 and Virginia M. Buxton

 ? 1980 by Cornell University.
 0001 -8392/80/2502-0252$00.75

 A representative design for diagnosing effectiveness in
 retail service organizations is presented and operation-
 alized in a study of the employees and customers from
 twenty-three bank branches. The design builds on some
 boundary-spanning theory and on some practical
 realities which suggest that data should be collected
 from both employees and customers when diagnosing
 and evaluating service organizations. Assumptions un-
 derlying the use of perception-based diagnoses are also
 explained. Results revealed some strong relationships
 between employee perceptions of branch practices and
 procedures in relation to service and customer percep-
 tions of service practices and quality. Results are dis-
 cussed with reference to organizational diagnosis and the
 potential integration of organizational and consumer be-
 havior."

 This study enacts a research strategy for evaluating the
 practices and procedures of retail service organizations. The
 research process assumes that the providers of service, be-
 cause of their boundary position, are sensitive to customer
 requirements and organizational practices in relation to the
 provision of service.

 Recent conceptualizations of the evaluation of organizational
 effectiveness have focused on the characteristics of organi-
 zational constituencies. For example, Pennings and Goodman
 (1977) present a structuralist view of constituencies, in
 which constituencies are conceptualized as though they are
 clearly identifiable structured entities, either subunits of an
 organization or another competing organization. Following
 earlier works by Thompson (1 967) on dominant coalitions
 and Blau and Scott (1962) on primary beneficiaries, they
 conceptualize both internal and external units to the organi-
 zation as constituencies that may differentially contribute to
 goal definition, goal constraints, and the frames of reference
 used when evaluating effectiveness.

 Pennings and Goodman are not unique in concentrating on
 structured entities as the relevant others in evaluating or-
 ganizational effectiveness. Cummings (1977), for example,
 presents an instrumental view of organizational effective-
 ness, noting (1977: 60):

 Within this [instrumental] framework, organizational efficiency,
 profitability, and productivity become necessary minimal conditions
 for organizational survival. They are not, however, the goals of an
 effective organization. In order for an organization to be effective in
 this instrumental sense, a subsystem must be concerned with
 showing that performance meets the standards that external con-
 stituencies (for example, resource suppliers) monitor.
 Here again is an emphasis on a structured constituency, the
 resource supplier.

 This research was partially supported by
 the organizations in which the study was
 accomplished; we thank them for their
 financial and psychological assistance.
 Bruce Katcher and Hannah Hirsh helped
 with some of the analyses reported
 herein. Our colleagues Phil Bobko, Pete
 Dachler, Irv Goldstein, Nancy Jagmin,
 Janina Latack, and John Slocum helped
 us with their valuable comments on an
 earlier version of this article.

 Although Cummings' point about the necessity to evaluate
 effectiveness by the standards of structured external con-
 stituencies is important, most retail service organizations
 have at least one major constituency that is not structured:
 its daily customers. Research on the daily customers of re-
 tail service organizations is essentially missing in the litera-
 ture (Schneider, 1973), and little published information exists
 about the ways in which organizational functioning may be

 June 1980, volume 25

 252/Administrative Science Quarterly

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Employee and Customer Perceptions

 reflected in consumer behavior. The present study details a
 strategy for evaluating the effectiveness of retail service or-
 ganizations in relation to the customers of the organization.
 The research design requires that the perceptions of the
 customers and the employees of an organization be ob-
 tained. Specifically, the present research concerns branch
 customers' perceptions of service at branch banks and the
 relationship of the customer perceptions to employee views
 of the practices and procedures that characterize branch
 service.

 Our general hypothesis, based on the boundary-spanning lit-
 erature (Thompson, 1967; Bennis, 1970; Aldrich and Herker,
 1977; Katz and Kahn, 1978), is that employee and customer
 perceptions of the quality of service provided to customers
 are strongly related. We reasoned that the necessity to bal-
 ance the established rules and routines of the bank against
 the demands of customers places branch employees in the
 position of having to be aware of, and responsive to, organi-
 zational and client goals. This awareness should not only
 sensitize employees to the perceptions customers have of
 the branch but it should also sensitize employees to the
 practices and procedures of the bank as employees attempt
 to meet customer demands.

 Support will be found for the assumption that employees
 are sensitive to customer perceptions of service quality and
 branch practices and procedures in relation to quality if (1)
 customer and employee perceptions of the quality of service
 given customers are positively related and (2) employee per-
 ceptions of the service-related practices and procedures of
 the branch are related to customer perceptions of service
 quality.

 From a theoretical standpoint, these relationships would
 support the generally held view that more effective organi-
 zations engage in practices and procedures that are respon-
 sive to environmental pressures, in the present case, the
 pressure for good service. Also of relevance from a theoret-
 ical perspective is the direct link that these relationships
 would show between the studies of organizational and con-
 sumer behavior. Thus, in a time when more people are em-
 ployed in service organizations than in manufacturing, the
 consumption of services requires a broadly based research
 perspective which includes those delivering the service as
 well as those consuming it.

 This latter point is related to a practical outcome of this kind
 of evaluation design, namely, the specification of organiza-
 tional practices and procedures that, if changed, might be
 reflected in changed customer perceptions. If relationships
 between customer and employee perceptions are found,
 then the employee perceptions can be viewed as organiza-
 tional diagnoses which specify the practices and procedures
 requiring change.

 Perception and Organizational Behavior

 The perceived environment has a stormy history in the
 study of organizational behavior, which may be attributed to
 Costello and Zalkind's (Zalkind and Costello, 1962; Costello
 and Zalkind, 1963) early summary of the role of perception

 253/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 in administration. Their survey of the "new look" (Bruner,
 1958) in the psychology of perception emphasized percep-
 tual bias. Subsequent attempts to use perceptual measures
 in diagnosing organizations have thus been criticized be-
 cause of assumed subjectivity. Especially in research on or-
 ganizational climate, a number of scholars, such as Guion
 (1973), Johanneson (1973), and Payne and Pugh (1976),
 have been critical of perception-based diagnoses because of
 the potential subjectivity of the resultant data. More re-
 cently, in an especially critical piece, Woodman and King
 (1978) claimed that climate research belongs more to
 folklore than to science.

 We shall not take the space to present our review of the
 theoretical and empirical literature on organizational climate
 here (see Jones and James, 1979, or Joyce and Slocum,
 1979, for a recent review). Based on this review, the pres-
 ent research proceeded under the following assumptions
 about the role of perception and organizational climate in the
 study of organizational behavior:

 1. Member perceptions of organizational practices and pro-
 cedures are the critical data in understanding organizational
 behavior. No behavior in, or of, organizations occurs in the
 absence of perceptions. To conceptualize an organization re-
 quires a consideration of human behavior, and human behav-
 ior does not exist without perception (Heider, 1958; Miller,
 Galanter, and Pribram, 1960; Bowers, 1973).

 2. Although one may observe bias in perceptions when rela-
 tively extreme emotional conditions exist, people in a work
 setting will tend to agree in their descriptions of the prac-
 tices and procedures that characterize the setting. People in
 a work setting tend to agree with each other because they
 are more like each other than they are like people in other
 settings (Holland, 1976). This assumption of agreement in
 perceptions has been demonstrated empirically and allows
 for the aggregation of data within settings, facilitating
 studies across settings (Drexler, 1977).

 3. The climates of organizations emerge out of the naturally
 occurring interactions of people in pursuit of various personal
 and organizational goals. Climates, in turn, affect the way
 people and organizations proceed in their pursuit of goals.
 Climates are then, at various times, independent, mediating,
 and dependent variables. In the present research, service
 climate is never directly assessed; the practices and proce-
 dures identified as components of service climate are the
 foci of measurement.

 Practices and procedures are measured for two reasons: (1)
 because they are changeable and, it is further assumed,
 changes in practices and procedures can alter climates (Lit-
 win and Stringer, 1968; Seashore and Bowers, 1970); and
 (2) because the relationships established between employee
 perceptions of practices and procedures and customer per-
 ceptions of service quality were of considerable interest to us.

 4. Organizations may have many climates, including a cli-
 mate for creativity, for leadership, for safety, for achieve-
 ment, and/or for service. Any one research effort probably

 254/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Employee and Customer Perceptions

 can not focus on all of these, but the effort should be clear
 about its focus (Schneider, 1975). In the present study, ser-
 vice climate in branch banks is the focus.

 METHOD
 The bank branches studied represent a subset of the
 branches of a large, Atlantic Coast, commercial, full-service
 bank. The branch customers studied were individual, not
 corporate, account holders. More details on samples are
 provided, as appropriate, below.

 The data collection strategy had three distinct phases: (1)
 branch entry and preparation of the organization for the
 data-collection process; (2) conduct of interviews with (a) a
 sample of employees, to establish the practices and proce-
 dures thought to reflect a positive service climate and (b) a
 sample of customers, conceptually to map the "quality of
 service" domain, and (3) development of survey measures
 for assessing customers' and employees' views, so that the
 relationships of interest could be established.

 Organizational Entry and Preparation

 Entry. Because both the researchers and the client organiza-
 tion wanted the study conducted, organizational entry (as
 contrasted with branch entry) was not a problem. The
 branch managers to be involved in the study were asked to
 attend a meeting, at which the general research plan was
 presented, questions about the project were answered, and
 their participation was encouraged by senior management.
 At the meeting, branch managers were told that their
 branch data would remain anonymous in any report, because
 the focus of the study was on diagnosing relationships be-
 tween employee and customer views across bank branches.
 They were also told that each of them would be asked to
 participate in an interview, so that their personal input into
 the diagnostic instrument was ensured. Further, they were
 to designate the other employees from their branch to be
 interviewed. The philosophy of this meeting, then, was to
 offer branch managers an opportunity to participate, with
 the underlying understanding that they, in fact, controlled
 the study process and, thus, the success or failure of the
 study. All twenty-five managers who were asked to partici-
 pate agreed to do so. Upon the managers' agreement, all of
 the employees in the twenty-five branches were sent a let-
 ter describing the study and their potential role in it, with a
 request to participate. At the same time, a news release
 was prepared for the bank newspaper informing the total
 branch system about the project.

 Liaison team. Because every organization has its own cul-
 ture, it is critical to have such a team when a goal of the
 research instrument, as in the present case, is that it be
 relevant to the system (Alderfer and Brown, 1972). The
 liaison team was composed of the researchers, members of
 the bank marketing department, people with major respon-
 sibilities for drawing samples, printing and mailing surveys,
 arranging interview schedules, etc., and branch-related
 people who were asked to criticize proposed questionnaire
 scales, items, timing, etc. for a total of nine people.

 255/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Interviews

 The interviews that were conducted served to orient the
 researchers to the general class of issues salient to the
 employees and customers and to the language of the re-
 spondent population, facilitating the wording of questions for
 the survey. All interviews were tape recorded with permis-
 sion of the interviewee(s).

 Three employees from each branch were interviewed: the
 branch manager, a teller, and a nonteller/nonmanager. Thirty
 of these interviews (from ten branches) were conducted in-
 dividually. The rest of the interviews of branch employees
 were conducted in groups of three to five persons each.
 The groups were always composed of similar types, that is,
 all managers, all tellers, or all nontellers/nonmanagers, in an
 attempt to encourage their freedom in responding, to pre-
 vent interviewees from feeling dominated or constrained by
 the presence of branch employees with higher status.

 The interviews were open-ended. The sessions began with
 a description of the project, which emphasized that the pur-
 pose of the study was to discover ways of improving cus-
 tomer service. Employees were asked to describe the prac-
 tices and procedures of their branch in providing service to
 customers.

 The goal of the interviews with employees was to gain a
 broad understanding of the range of practices and proce-
 dures that define service. In addition, data were obtained on
 the way respondents felt about their work and their work
 world, specifically, on their feelings of job involvement, or-
 ganizational identification, job/organizational satisfaction (Bux-
 ton, 1977), and role conflict and role ambiguity (Parkington
 and Schneider, 1979). (These latter kinds of data will, for the
 most part, not be presented in this report.) Ten "good"
 interviews were transcribed and used as a basis for writing
 questionnaire items in terminology appropriate to the re-
 spondents. The determination of whether an interview was
 "good" was made by the interviewer immediately following
 the interview and was based on the presence of a great
 deal of explicit material about branch practices and proce-
 dures.

 The customers to be interviewed from each branch were
 randomly selected from customer mailing lists, contacted by
 telephone, and asked to participate in an interview, for which
 they would be paid fifteen dollars. Interviews were held in
 the branch bank nearest the customer's home. All customer
 interviews were conducted individually. As with the em-
 ployee interviews, behavorial specificity about branch service
 was a goal in the interview. The authors listened to the
 tapes of all customer interviews and wrote the survey items
 from notes made while listening to the interviews.

 Survey Development

 An informal content analysis of the two sets of interviews
 served as the major input into the a priori definition of the
 issues requiring questionnaire items. The survey items used
 were, for the most part, taken from the employee and cus-
 tomer interview typescripts or notes.

 256/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Employee and Customer Perceptions

 Employee Perceptions of Branch Service

 It is important to preface presentation of the service issues
 suggested in the employee interviews by emphasizing that
 the focus of interest in this study was to diagnose the
 branch practices and procedures relating to service to cus-
 tomers, not those relating to employee needs for rewards,
 pay, promotion, supervision, and so forth. The results refer,
 then, only to the effectiveness of branch practices and pro-
 cedures in meeting customer needs.

 The interviews with employees suggested a complex set of
 issues involved in the service orientation of branches. At a
 general level of abstraction, employees spoke about an en-
 thusiastic versus a bureaucratic orientation to service. The
 kinds of issues mentioned for the enthusiastic orientation
 (italicized labels appear in subsequent tables) had reference
 to the philosophy of the branch regarding a flexible and
 interpersonally open form of involvement with the custom-
 ers of the branch and the community in the delivery of
 service. The kinds of items assessing the enthusiastic orien-
 tation referred to, for example, keeping a sense of "family"
 among branch employees, involving the branch in commu-
 nity affairs, and giving customer service in new and creative
 ways. In contrast, the bureaucratic orientation was viewed
 in terms similar to those used by Bennis (1970) and Blau
 (1974): stress on rules, procedures, and system mainte-
 nance, which often divert energy away from providing ser-
 vices to clients in order to maintain the status quo. These
 items tapped into such issues as strictly following rules and
 procedures, doing one's job in a routine fashion, and using
 only established methods for solving customers' problems.

 The enthusiastic (10 items) and bureaucratic (6 items) ser-
 vice orientation questionnaire scales required employees to
 indicate how essential they felt bank management thought
 the issue in the item was to giving good customer service
 (very, somewhat, not very essential to bank management).
 These two kinds of general customer orientation items ap-
 peared randomly in the same section of the employee ques-
 tionnaire.

 Table 1

 Items Comprising the Managerial Function Scale from the Employee
 Survey

 Item number Item

 4 My branch manager supports employees when they come up

 with new ideas on customer service.

 7 My branch manager sets definite quality standards of good

 customer service.

 9 My branch manager meets regularly with employees to

 discuss work performance goals.

 13 My branch manageraccepts the responsibilities of his/her job.

 20 My branch manager gets the people in different jobs to work

 together in serving branch customers.

 21 My branch managerworks at keeping an orderly routine going

 in the branch.

 29 My branch manager takes time to help new employees learn

 about the branch and its customers.

 257/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 At a more specific level, employees spoke about the degree
 to which the branch manager assumed the traditional man-
 agerial functions with respect to giving good service (plan-
 ning, coordinating, goal setting, establishing routine), the
 extent to which extra effort in serving customers was
 rewarded and appreciated (effort rewarded), and the degree
 to which there was an active attempt to retain customers in
 the branch. Employees indicated the extent to which the
 situation portrayed by each item was true of what happens
 in their respective branch office (very true, somewhat true,
 not true). As an example, the items comprising the manage-
 rial function scale are presented in Table 1.

 The above specific and more abstract customer service
 orientation issues were seen as intrabranch climate
 phenomena affecting customer service. At the extrabranch
 level, employees spoke of the necessity for support sys-
 tems controlled by the larger bank system to support the
 branch. Four apparently independent and identifiable support
 systems were noted:
 1. Personnel support ("The employees sent to us by personnel are
 able to do their jobs well.")
 2. Central processing support ("Having all customer records in a
 central location makes it easier on the branch.")
 3. Marketing support ("We are well-prepared by Marketing for the
 introduction of new products and services.")
 4. Equipment/supply support ("Equipment and machinery in the
 branch are well serviced and rarely break down.")

 Questionnaire items assessed branch employees' percep-
 tions of the attributes of these support systems. The rating
 scale used for these items was very true, somewhat true,
 not true. The employee survey items used to assess both
 the more specific customer service dimensions (managerial
 functions, effort rewarded, and retain customers) and the
 support system facets were included, randomly, in the same
 section of the survey.

 Employees were also asked to describe the overall quality of
 service in their branch: "Indicate with a check mark (/)
 how you think the customers of your branch view the gen-
 eral quality of the service they receive in your branch." Six
 alternatives were provided: outstanding, excellent, good, not
 so good, terrible.

 Scale scores for the various scales were created for each
 employee using unit weights for items. Branch scores for
 employees were subsequently obtained by averaging em-
 ployee scale scores on a particular scale within each branch.
 Similarly, a branch score was computed for the quality-of-
 service item.

 Customer Quality-of-Service Dimensions
 On an a priori basis, customers appeared to distinguish ten
 separable facets of service:
 1. Teller courtesy ("Tellers care about customers as people in my
 branch.")
 2. Officer courtesy ("Some officers in the branch know me by
 name.")
 3. Teller competence ("Tellers in the branch seem to be well
 trained and knowledgeable.")
 4. Adequate staff ("My branch seems to have enough employees
 to handle its customers.")

 258/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Employee and Customer Perceptions

 5. Branch administration ("It sometimes seems to me that tellers
 have to walk all over the place to get things done.")
 6. Handling services ("Deposits are promptly credited to my ac-
 count(s).")
 7. Convenience ("I like the fact that a large number of branches
 exist.")
 8. Employee turnover ("There seems to be a high turnover of em-
 ployees in my branch.")
 9. Selling ("Officers of the bank have tried to get me to open new
 accounts.")
 10. Employee attitudes ("My impression is that the branch em-
 ployees really try to give the customers good service.")

 These ten issues were assessed with a total of 41 randomly
 ordered items. Respondents indicated with an S, N, or ?
 (Schneider, 1 973) the extent to which the banking situation
 portrayed by each item was similar (S), not similar (N), or
 neither (?) to the customer's experiences and feelings. A
 single item about overall quality of service was asked:
 "Check the box F that best describes the general quality
 of the service you receive in your bank branch." The same
 six-point scale used in the employee survey was used for
 this item. As an example of the customer items, Table 2
 reports the items comprising the branch administration
 scale.

 Scale scores for each customer were created using unit
 weights for items. Branch scores for each dimension were
 obtained by averaging customer scale scores within each
 branch. Branch scores were also developed for the quality-
 of-service item for customers.

 It should be noted that customer-usage data were also ob-
 tained from the survey: tenure as an account holder, day of
 week usually visiting branch, number of branches used on a
 regular basis, frequency of branch visits, hour of the day
 usually doing banking, and whether banking activity occurs
 near residence or work or both. In addition, customers were
 cautioned to respond to the survey with respect to the
 branch at which they do most of their banking and to indi-

 Table 2

 Items Comprising the Branch Administration Scale from the Customer
 Survey

 Item number Item

 3 An officer (or someone else) takes charge of things when the

 bank becomes overcrowded.

 -4 It sometimes seems to me that tellers have to walk all over the

 place to get things done.

 -12 When I've opened new accounts or had to change old ones,

 something usually got messed up.

 34 My branch has an adequate supply of deposit or withdrawal

 tickets.

 -36 I sometimes feel lost in the branch, not knowing where to go

 for a certain transaction.

 -39 It is difficultto knowwhoto call orwheretowrite when I need

 specific kinds of bank-related information.

 Note: A minus sign before the item number indicates that the item was

 reverse-scored .

 2591ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Gate the name of that branch if it was different from the
 branch name on the front page of the survey.

 Samples for Statistical Analysis

 Employee sample. In a first mailing, all employees from 24
 branches (one branch was dropped from the study because
 of its involvement in another project) were mailed a survey
 with a return envelope to the researcher. Due to an over-
 sight in the mailing process, branch identification codes
 were not placed on the survey forms, so the survey had to
 be mailed again to all potential respondents. The response
 rate to the second mailing was 56 percent (42 percent of
 the first mailing was received by the time the second mail-
 ing was made) for a total employee sample size of N = 263.
 From one very small branch no employee responses were
 received, so that the final branch sample size was N = 23.

 Customer sample. Approximately 600 customer surveys
 were mailed to a random sample of customers from each
 branch stratified by account type and account balance. The
 account type (savings, checking, or loan) from which the
 name was drawn was coded by using three differently col-
 ored surveys, and the account balance (high, medium, or
 low) was coded by having the surveys returned to three
 different mail boxes. Branch identification was coded by
 making the first page of the customer survey a letter signed
 by the branch manager of the branch from which the cus-
 tomer's name came.

 Approximately 15 percent (2,060) of the 13,800 customer
 surveys were returned, but the usable sample size was only
 1,657 (or 11.5 percent) because of a lost bus shipment of
 about 400 completed questionnaires somewhere between
 the bank and the researchers. Even with the missing sur-
 veys, there was an average of about 70 customer responses
 per branch available for analysis.

 Customer returns were quite representative of account type
 and account balance. In addition, no significant relationships
 were found between the bank usage data and the various
 customer scale responses. There was a slight but significant
 tendency, however, for more negative responses about qual-
 ity of service to be associated with branches from which a
 larger percentage of returns came.

 RESULTS
 The items comprising the two surveys were tentatively
 submitted to principal components analyses as a way of re-
 ducing the number of dimensions to be studied. We say
 tentatively, because the issue of whether factorial analyses
 accomplished on individual responses will adequately repre-
 sent between-unit (group, branch, etc.) differences is not all
 clear (Schneider, 1975; Katerberg, Herman, and Hulin, 1977).
 This is an important issue in this paper, because all data are
 presented at the branch level. For information purposes it
 can be noted that a principal components factor analysis,
 with orthogonal rotation, accomplished on the 1,657 cus-
 tomer surveys yielded five factors. Briefly, the items on the
 a priori scales numbered 1, 2, 3, and 10 collapsed into a
 Competence/Courtesy factor, whereas a priori scales 4, 5, 7,
 and 8 retained their independence. Items on scales 6 and 9

 26OlASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Employee and Customer Perceptions

 Outstanding 6.00 -

 5.00 -

 LL

 0 4.00 _

 U S

 3.00

 Terrible 1.00

 1.00 2.00 3 00 4.00 5.00 6.00

 Terrible Outstanding

 EMPLOYEE

 Figure. Scattergram of correlation coefficient between customer and
 employee perceptions of overall quality of service provided to
 customers.

 loaded on various factors, making a clear interpretation dif-
 ficult. A similar analysis of the employee survey (with N =
 263 employees) was difficult to interpret, probably due to
 the relatively large number of items submitted to the
 analysis and the relatively small sample. However, the inter-
 nal consistency reliability estimates of the a priori scales
 were thought to be acceptable.

 Relationships between Customer and Employee Views

 Table 3 presents the correlation coefficients representing
 the relationships between customer and employee percep-
 tions of branch service across the 23 branches. Labels in
 the table correspond to italicized variable names in the text.

 Table 3

 Correlations between Employee and Customer Variables

 Employee variables >

 Cu C C >

 _3 _

 Cu4- C C u C _ 0 h00 -

 X ' P CD D - i-

 Customervariables o v ~ ? z4 wo Xo X- cn C o z' X'X

 Overalliquality 67T 26 41 71 A 22 54T 36 63T 46 08 40 50 -
 Teller courtesy 50T 27 28 63T 15 56T 11 52 35 -03 20 36 71
 Officer courtesy 46 29 16 44 -28 31 11 31 11 20 07 17 25
 Teller competence 36 17 35 54T 16 44T 09 45 42 12 22 35 64
 Adequate staff 64T 25 25 66T 22 57T 23 64F 35 15 31 42 73
 Branch administration 50 14 38 72T 30 58T 23 56T 30 -05 36 51A 52
 Handling services 42 05 33 55 41 48 38 46 30 12 37 42 33
 Convenience -08 -04 18 -11 -01 -27 22 -22 -12 20 -12 -24 41
 Employee turnover 46 26 33 37 19 52 34 43 47 23 39 47 71
 Selling 27 29 32 36 -11 09 34 17 24 13 09 07 40
 Employee attitudes 56> 30 25 56U 18 47 28 47 35 04 22 34 72
 KR-14 internal

 consistency 70 53 85 40 65 64 65 65 55

 Note Decimals omitted, N = 23 branches
 *p <.05; eep< .01

 261 lASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 At the end of each column or row, KR-14 internal consist-
 ency reliability estimates are presented for multiple item
 scales.

 The correlation between employee views of the general
 level of quality of service offered and customer views of
 service received is quite high (r = .67, p < .01). A scatter-
 gram plot of this relationship, shown in the Figure, revealed
 no nonlinearity.

 Table 3 also shows the relationships between employee
 perceptions on the dimensions of branch service orientation
 and customer perceptions of overall service quality. These
 data reveal strong positive relationships between customer
 perceptions of good overall quality and employee views that
 (1) the branch emphasizes an enthusiastic orientation to ser-
 vice (r = .71, p < .01), (2) the manager takes on the tradi-
 tional managerial functions of planning, goal-setting, etc.,
 with respect to service (r = .54, p < .01), and (3) the branch
 attempts to actively retain customers (r = .63, p < .01). In
 addition, perceptions by employees of two support systems
 are significantly and positively related to customer percep-
 tions of good overall quality of service: personnel support
 (r = .46, p < .05) and equipment/supply support (r = .50,
 p < .05). Clearly, the ways in which branch employees de-
 scribe some facets of the service orientation of their branch
 and the support received from some systems outside the
 branch are related to what customers say about the quality
 of the service they receive in the branch.

 Indeed, further examination of Table 3 reveals that not only
 are customers' perceptions of general quality of service sig-
 nificantly related to employee perceptions, but that many of
 the service issues described by customers are also related to
 various facets of branch service as perceived by employees.
 Thus, employee perceptions of an enthusiastic orientation, a
 manager who performs the traditional managerial functions,
 and an attempt to retain customers are all consistently and
 significantly related to customer perceptions of teller cour-
 tesy and competence, adequate staff, branch administration,
 handling services, employee turnover, and employee at-
 titudes.

 It should be noted here that none of these significant rela-
 tionships would be observed if the data for each branch
 were unreliable. Thus, these significant correlations between
 employee and customer perceptions indicate that within
 branches there was sufficient agreement about branch prac-
 tices and procedures to produce reliable branch averages. It
 should also be noted that the range of branch averages was
 generally significant; that is, the high and low scores pro-
 duced a significant range of responses across branches.
 Some feel for this range of scores is obtained by examining
 the means, standard deviations, and high and low scores for
 selected employee and customer perceptions: employee
 view of quality: M=2.97, s.d.=.32, Hi=3.35, Lo=2.23; cus-
 tomer view of quality: M=3.40, s.d.=.61, Hi=4.75,
 Lo=2.00; branch administration: M=1.73, s.d.=.14,
 Hi= 1.97, Lo= 1.37; managerial functions: M=2.29, s.d.=.27,
 Hi=2.81, Lo=1.57.

 262/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Employee and Customer Perceptions

 DISCUSSION

 The present design for diagnosing organizational effective-
 ness in relation to customers yielded some interesting data.
 As hypothesized, employees were sensitive to customer
 perceptions of branch service quality. This sensitivity to cus-
 tomers was primarily revealed in the correlation of .67 be-
 tween customer perceptions of branch service and em-
 ployee perceptions of how customers feel about branch
 service. In addition, however, it was shown that employee
 perceptions of service-oriented practices and procedures
 were consistently related to customer perceptions of overall
 service quality, as well as to customer perceptions of spe-
 cific facets of service. Thus, the focus on dual perspectives
 for diagnosing organizational effectiveness yielded data use-
 ful not only for making global evaluations of branches but
 also for specifying some facets of branch practices and pro-
 cedures that, if attended to, might yield more positive cus-
 tomer perceptions of service quality.

 From a methodological standpoint, the most important bene-
 fit of this dual perspective on organizational diagnosis is that
 response-response contamination is effectively eliminated.
 In most approaches to diagnosis, a persistent problem has
 been that data invariably come from a single source, result-
 ing in information that may be admirably reliable but of un-
 known validity. The present diagnostic procedure eliminates
 the potential contamination associated with data coming
 from a single source by permitting the examination of rela-
 tionships between the process evaluation of branch prac-
 tices and procedures by employees and the outcome evalua-
 tion by customers (Campbell, 1974; Goldstein, 1978).

 The relatively strong relationships revealed in this manner
 serve to focus attention on the role of boundary personnel in
 retail service organizations like the branch banks studied
 here. Most conceptualizations and writings about employees
 at the boundary of organizations seem to concentrate on
 issues such as control over and processing of information or
 the function of the boundary employee as an external repre-
 sentative of the organization. In addition, the emphasis is
 usually on interorganizational relationships (Aldrich, 1979). As
 noted in the introduction, branch employees are forced to
 deal with a relatively unorganized (structurally ill-defined)
 constituency. Perhaps more importantly, this study shows
 that some people at the boundary of organizations have rela-
 tively little control over information, are neither required nor
 expected to process information from external constituen-
 cies, and who really are not external representatives in the
 classical sense. Yet branch employees seem to possess in-
 formation that may be of considerable value to the organiza-
 tion. They have a good sense of the ways in which the
 organization's customers view the organization and can ap-
 parently accurately identify some of the practices and pro-
 cedures associated with customer evaluations of effective-
 ness. It is in this sensitivity to customers and to the prac-
 tices and procedures carried out in service to customers that
 these data may be particularly helpful, for, theoretically, this
 kind of sensitivity can be expected in occupants of similar
 kinds of roles in other organizations.

 263/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Aldrich and Herker (1977) noted that employees who deal
 with the public may develop attitudes about the organization
 similar to those of customers and that, if this occurs, it may
 yield the negative organizational consequences of overiden-
 tification with the consumer and underidentification with the
 organization. Although their explanation of sensitivity and its
 outcomes is of value, an alternative theoretical position, that
 of occupational/organizational choice, yields a more positive
 view of the outcomes of identification with customers.

 The literature on occupational choice suggests that people
 tend to choose jobs that permit manifestation (Holland,
 1976) or implementation (Super, 1953) of their personality.
 Holland's position, in particular, specifies the attraction of
 people to occupations that are a good fit for their personality
 type. His theory, combined with the literature on organiza-
 tional choice (cf. Hall, 1976) and personnel turnover (Porter
 and Steers, 1973; Mobley et al., 1979) suggests that people
 are attracted to, and remain with, organizations that fulfill
 their expectations and are instrumental for them in attaining
 the kinds of outcomes they desire.

 If we hypothesize that bank employees who occupy branch
 boundary roles are, generally, of a social and enterprising
 personality type (Holland, 1976), we can expect them to
 want to give good service. This desire to give good service
 might be precisely what sensitizes them to the views cus-
 tomers have of service and to what their branch is doing to
 give good service. Although no direct evidence for this
 hypothesis was obtained in this study, a study by Parkington
 and Schneider (1979) provides some supportive data, which
 suggest that bank branch employees see themselves as
 more enthusiastic and less bureaucratic about service than
 management. Their data also suggest that the greater the
 discrepancy between views of self and views of manage-
 ment, the stronger were employee turnover intentions. We
 believe that the question of role occupants' sensitivity to
 customers should undergo further research, and our
 hypothesis is that such sensitivity (1) should be expected
 and (2) if utilized as a diagnostic input, will not at all neces-
 sarily have a negative outcome for the organization.

 A Note on Perception and Organizational Behavior.

 Some usually implicit assumptions about the role of percep-
 tions in organizational behavior were made explicit in the
 introduction, because, collectively, they served as a frame of
 reference for the research strategy. The results of this
 study only suggest the utility of perception-based diagnoses,
 because an evaluation of the effects of any changes based
 on the perceptions was not carried out. However, two kinds
 of data support the validity of the employee perceptions.
 First, the employee descriptions of branch practices and
 procedures were related to customer perceptions of service.
 Second, some data in Table 3 not previously discussed also
 suggest support for the validity of employee perceptions;
 the scales for job satisfaction and organizational satisfaction
 reveal only one significant relationship with customer per-
 ception of service (between organizational satisfaction and
 customer views of quality). (Job and Organizational satisfac-
 tion were assessed with 6-point Faces [Kunin, 1955] scales.)

 264/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Employee and Customer Perceptions

 The lack of significant correlations between employee feel-
 ings of satisfaction and customer perceptions of service
 suggests that employees were able to distinguish meaning-
 fully their descriptions of branch practices and procedures
 from their feelings of satisfaction. Internal analyses of the
 employee scale intercorrelations revealed this separation for
 job satisfaction, clearly showing its general independence
 from the more descriptive perceptions. This was less true
 for organizational satisfaction, however, supporting the gen-
 erally higher correlations between employee satisfaction
 with the organization and customers' views of service re-
 vealed in Table 3.

 Obviously, some affective measures will correlate with more
 descriptive perceptions. The point here is that this is not
 necessarily true (Johanneson, 1973), that perceptions and
 satisfaction are not necessarily isomorphic (Guion, 1973),
 and that useful diagnostic data may be obtained using per-
 ceptions of organizational processes as the data of interest
 (Schneider, 1975).

 On this last point, it may be instructive to identify some
 additional nonsignificant correlations in Table 3. That is, if
 one accepts the importance of significant relationships
 based on perceptions, nonsignificant data should also be in-
 formative. Three employee scales (marketing support, pro-
 cessing support, and effort rewarded) revealed no significant
 relationships with customer perceptions. Although percep-
 tions of these issues tended to be relatively the same
 across branches (variability was somewhat low), this fact
 alone fails to account for the lack of observed relationships.
 Internal analyses of the correlation matrix for employee
 scales revealed that effort rewarded was more strongly re-
 lated to the two satisfaction measures than to the branch
 practices indices, that processing support was unrelated to
 essentially everything else, and that marketing support was
 strongly and consistently related to the other significant cor-
 relates of customer perceptions. In the latter case, it can be
 seen in Table 3 that the correlation coefficients are moder-
 ately strong, frequently failing to meet traditional levels of
 significance by only a few points.

 The findings forprocessing support may be accounted for
 by the fact that the entire branch system in this bank was
 undergoing a transition from decentralized to centralized data
 processing, yielding differences between branches as far as
 employees were concerned. However, these differences
 were unrelated to what was generally happening to custom-
 ers in a branch. In other words, effects of the larger system
 on the branch may have been accurately perceived by em-
 ployees, but other features of the service offered customers
 by each branch were more important for the delivery of
 customer services; system effects unrelated to the typical
 service style of a branch were not reflected in customer
 perceptions.

 Selling and convenience were the two weakest customer
 scales from the standpoint of relationships with employee
 perceptions. Internal analyses of the correlation matrix for
 customers failed to illuminate these findings. Both scales,
 however, were two-item scales with low internal consist-

 2651ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 ency reliability estimates, and this might account for their
 lack of relationships with employee perceptions. An alterna-
 tive explanation for convenience is that an externally con-
 trolled decision determines a branch location, and, because
 employee perceptions tend to reveal branch attributes con-
 trolled or controllable within the branch, a significant rela-
 tionship between customer and employee perceptions
 should not be expected.

 Integrating Consumer and Organizational Behavior

 In 1973, Schneider noted that a review of the consumer
 behavior literature revealed little, if any, cognizance of the
 purchaser and user of services. From an organizational be-
 havior perspective, it is important to note that in many retail
 service organizations the job of front-line employees is serv-
 ing customers. The importance of this seemingly obvious
 statement is that a central component in the tasks of the
 occupants of boundary roles, the customer, is relatively out-
 side the range of control and manipulation of the organiza-
 tion. The potential for ambiguity and stress associated with
 such jobs (Adams, 1976) suggests the need for a particular
 kind of organization to deal with this situation, one oriented
 toward the customer through flexibility and support of those
 employees in face-to-face boundary-spanning roles.

 Gartner and Riessman (1974) argue forcefully for the idea
 that, as more workers function in service roles, the bound-
 ary between employee and customer will become continu-
 ally blurred; more consumers will be service workers
 themselves, and consumers will be intimately involved in the
 production of services. Thus, service activity may frequently
 require active consumer participation, as in filling out deposit
 tickets at the bank, "dipping" a bank credit card to obtain
 cash, etc. It becomes clear that such considerations about
 consumers move them closer to the traditional view of labor
 and vice versa, laborers now being more in the role of
 facilitators rather than producers. Gartner and Riessman dis-
 cuss these issues, and others, in their look into the future, a
 future that many of the administrative sciences, with their
 emphasis on the world of manufacturing, have failed to
 begin to understand.

 REFERENCES

 Adams, J. Stacy
 1976 "The structure and dynamics
 of behavior in organizational
 boundary roles." In Marvin D.
 Dunnette (ed.), Handbook of
 Industrial and Organizational
 Psychology: 1175-1200.
 Chicago: Rand McNally.

 Alderfer, Clayton P., and L. David
 Brown
 1972 "Designing an 'empathetic
 questionnaire' for organiza-
 tional research." Journal of
 Applied Psychology, 56:
 456-460.

 Aldrich, Howard E.
 1979 Organizations and Environ-

 ments. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
 Prentice-Hall.

 Aldrich, Howard E., and Diane
 Herker
 1977 "Boundary-spanning roles and

 organizational structure."
 Academy of Management Re-
 view, 2: 217-230.

 Bennis, Warren G.
 1970 "Beyond bureaucracy." In

 Warren G. Bennis (ed.), Amer-
 ican Bureaucracy: 3-16.
 Chicago: Aldine.

 266/ASQ

 Blau, Peter M.
 1974 On the Nature of Organiza-

 tions. New York: Wiley.

 Blau, Peter M., and W. Richard
 Scott
 1962 Formal Organizations: A

 Comparative Approach. San
 Francisco: Chandler.

 Bowers, Kenneth S.
 1973 "Situationism in psychology:

 An analysis and critique."
 Psychological Bulletin, 80:
 307-336.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Bruner, Jerome
 1958 "Social psychology and per-

 ception." In Eleanor Maccoby,
 Theodore Newcomb, and E.
 Hartley (eds.), Readings in So-
 cial Psychology, 3rd ed.:
 85-93. New York: Holt,
 Rinehart, and Winston.

 Buxton, Virginia M.
 1977 Relationships Between Indi-

 ces of Work Involvement and
 Work Satisfaction. Unpub-
 lished M.A. Thesis, Depart-
 ment of Psychology, Univer-
 sity of Maryland.

 Campbell, Donald T.
 1974 Qualitative Knowing in Action
 Research. American Psycho-
 logical Association Annual
 Convention, New Orleans.

 Costello, Timothy W., and Shel-
 don S. Zalkind, eds.
 1963 Psychology in Administration:

 A Research Orientation. En-
 glewood Cliffs, NJ:
 Prentice-Hall.

 Cummings, Larry L.
 1977 "Emergence of the instru-

 mental organization." In Paul
 S. Goodman and Johannes M.
 Pennings (eds.), New Per-
 spectives on Organizational
 Effectiveness: 56-62. San
 Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Drexler, John A.
 1977 "Organizational climate: Its

 homogeneity within organiza-
 tions." Journal of Applied
 Psychology, 62: 38-42.

 Gartner, Alan, and Frank
 Riessman
 1974 The Service Society and the

 Consumer Vanguard. New
 York: Harper & Row.

 Goldstein, Irwin L.
 1978 "The pursuit of validity in the

 evaluation of training pro-
 grams." Human Factors, 20:
 131 -144.

 Guion, Robert M.
 1973 "A note on organizational cli-
 mate." Organizational Behav-
 ior and Human Performance,
 9: 120-125.

 Hall, Douglas T.
 1976 Careers in Organizations.

 Pacific Palisades, CA:
 Goodyear.

 Heider, Fritz
 1958 "On perception and event

 structure, and the psychologi-
 cal environment." Psychologi-
 cal Issues, 1: whole No. 3.

 Employee and Customer Perceptions

 Holland, John L.
 1976 "Vocational preferences." In

 Marvin D. Dunnette (ed.),
 Handbook of Industrial and
 Organizational Psychology:
 521-570. Chicago: Rand Mc-
 Nally.

 Parkington, John P., and Benjamin
 Schneider
 1979 "Some correlates of experi-

 enced job stress: A boundary
 role study." Academy of
 Management Journal, 22:
 270-281.

 Johanneson, Russel E.
 1973 "Some problems in the mea-

 Payne, Roy L., and Derek S. Pugh
 1976 "Organizational structure and

 surement of organizational
 climate." Organizational Be-
 havior and Human Perform-
 ance, 10: 118-144.

 Jones, Allan P., and Lawrence R.
 James
 1979 "Psychological climate: Di-

 mensions and relationships of
 individual and aggregated
 work environment percep-
 tions." Organizational Behav-
 ior and Human Performance,
 23: 201-250.

 Joyce, William F., and John W.
 Slocum
 1979 "Climates in organizations." In

 Steven Kerr (ed.), Organiza-
 tional Behavior: 317-336. Co-
 lumbus, OH: Grid.

 Katerburg, Ralph, Jr., Jeanne B.
 Herman, and Charles L. Hulin
 1977 Organizational and individual

 characteristics, organizational
 climate, and job attitudes: A
 multivariate investigation of
 responses at individual and
 group levels of analysis. Un-
 published manuscript, De-
 partment of Psychology, Uni-
 versity of Illinois.

 Katz, Daniel, and Robert L. Kahn
 1978 The Social Psychology of Or-
 ganizations, 2d ed. New York:
 Wiley.

 Kunin, Theodore
 1955 "The construction of a new

 type of attitude measure."
 Personnel Psychology, 8:
 65-78.

 Litwin, George H., and Robert A.
 Stringer
 1968 Motivation and Organizational

 Climate. Boston: Harvard
 Business School, Division of
 Research.

 Miller, George A., E. Galanter, and
 Karl H. Pribram
 1960 Plans and the Structure of
 Behavior. New York: Holt,
 Rinehart, and Winston.

 Mobley, William H., R. W. Griffeth,
 H. H. Hand, and B. M. Meglino.
 1979 "Review and conceptual
 analysis of the employee
 turnover process." Psycholog-
 ical Bulletin, 86: 493-522.

 climate." In M. D. Dunnette
 (ed.), Handbook of Industrial
 and Organizational Psychol-
 ogy: 1125-1174. Chicago:
 Rand McNally.

 Pennings, Johannes M., and Paul
 S. Goodman
 1977 "Toward a workable

 framework." In Paul S.
 Goodman and Johannes M.
 Pennings (eds.), New Per-
 spectives on Organizational
 Effectiveness: 146-184. San
 Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Porter, Lyman W., and Richard M.
 Steers
 1973 "Work and personal factors in
 employee turnover and absen-
 teeism." Psychological Bulle-
 tin, 80: 151 -176.

 Schneider, Benjamin
 1973 "The perception of organiza-

 tional climate: The customer's
 view." Journal of Applied
 Psychology, 57: 248-256.

 1975 "Organizational climates: An
 essay." Personnel Psychol-
 ogy, 28: 447-479.

 Seashore, Stanley C., and David
 G. Bowers
 1970 "Durability of organization

 change." American Psycholo-
 gist, 54: 227-233.

 Super, Donald E.
 1953 "A theory of vocational devel-
 opment." American Psycholo-
 gist, 8: 185-190.

 Thompson, James D.
 1967 Organizations in Action. New

 York: McGraw-Hill.

 Woodman, Richard W., and
 Donald C. King
 1978 "Organizational climate: Sci-

 ence or folklore." Academy of
 Management Review, 3:
 816-826.

 Zalkind, Sheldon S., and Timothy
 W. Costello
 1962 "Perception: Implications for
 administration." Administra-
 tive Science Quarterly, 1:
 2 18-235.

 267/ASQ

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 20:18:20 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

