 
 
Cross-Functional Product Development Teams, Creativity, and the Innovativeness of New
Consumer Products
Author(s): Rajesh Sethi, Daniel C. Smith and  C. Whan Park
Source: Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Feb., 2001), pp. 73-85
Published by: American Marketing Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1558572
Accessed: 02-08-2017 21:42 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Journal of Marketing Research

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 RAJESH SETHI, DANIEL C. SMITH, and C. WHAN PARK*

 Multiple studies have found that the primary determinant of new prod-
 uct failure is an absence of innovativeness--the extent to which a new
 product provides meaningfully unique benefits. Given the persistence of
 this finding and the growing use of cross-functional teams in new product
 development projects, the authors examine how innovativeness is
 affected by various characteristics of cross-functional teams and contex-
 tual influences on the team. On the basis of a study of 141 cross-func-
 tional product development teams, the authors find that innovativeness is
 positively related to the strength of superordinate identity in the team,
 encouragement to take risk, customers' influence, and active monitoring
 of the project by senior management. Beyond a moderate level, social
 cohesion among team members has a negative effect on innovativeness.
 The effect of superordinate identity on innovativeness is strengthened by
 encouragement to take risk and weakened by social cohesion. Functional
 diversity has no effect on innovativeness. The authors discuss managerial

 and research implications of the findings.

 Cross-Functional Product Development

 Teams, Creativity, and the Innovativeness
 of New Consumer Products

 Considerable effort has been dedicated to understanding
 the determinants of new product success and failure. In a
 comprehensive review of this work, Crawford (1977) and,
 more recently, Cooper (1993, 1996) find that an absence of
 innovativeness (i.e., product benefits that are unique to a
 given product and are perceived as meaningful by cus-
 tomers) is an important underlying explanation for new
 product failure. However, despite all the attention devoted to
 improving new product development practice, in many
 firms, the development of innovative products tends to be
 the exception rather than the rule (Cooper 1996).

 minants of organization-level innovation (e.g., Deshpand6,
 Farley, and Webster 1993; Kanter 1988; Zaltman, Duncan,
 and Holbeck 1973; Zangwill 1993). This work focuses on
 the determinants of the volume or the rate of new product
 development, an organization's ability to implement major
 new product initiatives, a company's tendency to be a late or
 an early entrant to markets, the rate at which firms adopt
 new technologies, and so forth. Understanding factors
 affecting innovativeness at the product development project
 level will provide a valuable complement to this body of
 work (Brown and Eisenhardt 1995).

 Given the history of evidence and the current state of

 practice, it is somewhat surprising to find an absence of
 research examining factors that affect new product innova-
 tiveness. There exists a large body of research on the deter-

 *Rajesh Sethi is Assistant Professor of Marketing, School of Business,
 Clarkson University (e-mail: sethir@clarkson.edu). Daniel C. Smith is
 Clare W. Barker Chair in Marketing and MBA Program Chair, School of
 Business, Indiana University (e-mail: dansmith@gsob I.bus.indiana.edu).
 C. Whan Park is Joseph A. DeBell Distinguished Professor of Marketing,
 School of Business, University of Southern California (e-mail:
 choong@bus.usc.edu). The authors thank Jonlee Andrews, Larry Compeau,
 Carolyn Nicholson, Anju Sethi, and the four anonymous JMR reviewers for
 their insightful and helpful comments on previous versions of this article.

 Furthermore, this innovation research mainly studies the
 effects of various macro, firm-level independent variables
 (e.g., structural and cultural factors). However, as firms are
 becoming more conscious about product development cycle
 time, they are seeking ways to improve the effectiveness of
 new product development projects (Clark and Fujimoto
 1991; Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995; Takeuchi and Nonaka
 1986). The knowledge generated by research on the effects
 of macro, firm-level variables provides limited explanation
 of variations in project-level outcomes. Indeed, within a
 given firm (i.e., within a given structure and culture), there
 is often considerable variation in outcomes of the new prod-
 uct development projects. To enable managers to improve
 critical project outcomes such as product innovativeness, it

 73

 Journal of Marketing Research
 Vol. XXXVIII (February 2001), 73-85

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 74 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001

 is important to understand how project-level factors affect
 these outcomes.

 One important project-level factor is the way firms

 organize new product development projects. Specifically,
 firms are increasingly entrusting product development to
 cross-functional teams, which consist of members from
 several functional areas such as marketing, engineering,
 manufacturing, and purchasing (Olson, Walker, and
 Ruekert 1995). Therefore, the focus of our research is the
 effects of various aspects of cross-functional teams on new
 product innovativeness.

 Innovativeness presumes a degree of creativity in the new
 product ideation and design processes. Research in the areas
 of social psychology of creativity and group psychology
 suggests that internal dynamics in a team and the resulting
 creative outcome can be affected by the characteristics of the
 team and its immediate context (Amabile 1988; King and
 Andersen 1990). Accordingly, we consider variables related
 to each of these factors. Regarding team factors, we focus on
 the physical composition of the team (functional diversity)
 and psychological bonds (superordinate identity and social
 cohesion). For contextual influences on the team, we study
 the effect of monitoring of the project by senior manage-
 ment, encouragement given to the team to be venturesome,
 and customers' influence on decisions made during new
 product development.

 It is worth noting that certain organizational factors (such
 as structure, process, and culture) and market factors (e.g.,
 competitive pressure) also can influence the outcome of a
 product development team. However, because ours is one of
 the first attempts at examining how cross-functional teams
 affect new product innovativeness, we limit the focus of this
 research to studying the effects of factors related to the team
 and the immediate context around the team. Nonetheless,
 we include several important organizational and market fac-
 tors as covariates in the model to examine how team factors
 influence innovativeness when the effect of such nonteam
 factors is taken into account.

 Focusing on the extent to which the characteristics of

 cross-functional teams and contextual influences affect new
 product innovativeness makes several contributions to both
 marketing practice and theory. For example, as a practical
 matter, because we are considering variables that can be
 influenced by managers, the findings of our study should
 provide clear recommendations that are directly related to
 enhancing new product innovativeness, an important under-
 lying explanation for new product success/failure.
 Considering that some of these variables may adversely
 affect team creativity, it is particularly useful to examine
 whether factors managers use when forming teams enhance
 or undermine new product innovativeness.

 In terms of theory, innovation research has focused on
 organizational-level antecedents and outcomes. Our study
 extends this work to the project level. Specifically, the effec-
 tiveness of new product development projects often is hin-
 dered by subtle and deeply rooted biases and stereotypes
 that project members from various functional areas hold
 toward one another (Ashforth and Mael 1989; Dougherty
 1992). Drawing on social identity research, we develop an
 approach to understanding and overcoming such biases and
 stereotypes and thereby enhancing project-level outcomes
 such as new product innovativeness.

 In the next section, we develop the conceptual underpin-
 nings of our study, which in turn support the selection of the
 specific variables on which we focus. We then discuss our
 hypotheses, describe the method used to test them, and pres-
 ent our results.

 CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND

 Construing New Product Innovativeness

 As noted previously, a primary determinant of new product
 success is the extent to which the product is different from
 competing alternatives in a way that is valued by customers.
 This notion of "meaningful uniqueness" provides the founda-
 tion for our definition of new product innovativeness and is
 consistent with several branches of literature that use the term.
 For example, research on the social psychology of creativity
 suggests that for an outcome to be innovative it must be novel
 and appropriate (Amabile 1983; Jackson and Messick 1965).
 Novelty, in turn, refers to the extent to which a concept, idea,
 or object differs from conventional practice within the domain
 of interest. Appropriateness is the extent to which a given out-
 put is viewed as useful or beneficial to some audience
 (Jackson and Messick 1965). Recently, a similar construal of
 innovativeness as meaningful novelty has been applied in the
 context of marketing programs for mature products (Andrews
 and Smith 1996). So, as used here, new product innovative-
 ness refers to the extent to which the product differs from com-
 peting alternatives in a way that is meaningful to customers.

 Antecedents of New Product Innovativeness

 Research on creativity and the creative process provides

 the starting point for identifying specific variables likely to
 affect new product innovativeness. According to this stream
 of research, there are six key conditions that are considered
 essential for the emergence of a creative outcome and that
 are relevant to the present study. First, it is generally recog-
 nized that the likelihood of producing innovative ideas
 improves as the diversity of input brought to bear on a prob-
 lem increases (i.e., diversity of input condition). Second,
 innovative ideas typically are the result of finding novel rela-
 tionships among diverse ideas and perspectives (i.e., discov-
 ery of novel linkages condition; Amabile 1983; Osborn
 1963). Third, innovative ideas are an outcome of an
 extended effort focused on a well-defined problem (Hogarth
 1980). As such, motivation to perform a given task is a fun-
 damental predictor of the innovativeness of the outcomes of
 the task (i.e., motivation to innovate condition; Amabile
 1983; Andrews and Smith 1996). Fourth, innovative ideas
 emerge from a nonroutine, as opposed to an algorithmic,
 problem-solving approach (Amabile 1983; Andrews and
 Smith 1996). Therefore, discovery of innovative ideas is
 facilitated if traditional perspectives and the routine ways of
 doing things are freely challenged (i.e., challenging tradi-
 tional perspectives condition). Fifth, innovative ideas, by
 their very definition, deviate from the status quo and there-
 fore not only engender a degree of risk but also may trigger
 defensive reactions in others (Hogarth 1980; Osborn 1963).
 Therefore, the possibility of discovering novel linkages is
 enhanced if there exists an atmosphere that promotes risk
 taking (i.e., promoting risk taking condition; Slater and
 Narver 1995). Sixth, after coming up with creative ideas, the
 next critical process is the successful implementation of
 these ideas, which requires that necessary resources and

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Cross-Functional Product Development Teams 75

 facilities be available in a timely manner (i.e., resource
 availability condition; Kanter 1983).

 These six conditions provide the basic conceptual foun-

 dation on which we build our model of new product innov-
 ativeness. Specifically, we identify variables related to the
 characteristics of the team and contextual influences on the
 team that are expected to play a critical role in giving rise to
 these conditions (Table 1 and Figure 1).

 team who previously belonged to groups that hold biases
 and stereotypes against one another develop a strong sense
 of team identity (Brewer and Miller 1984; Sethi 2000).
 From a cognitive perspective, in a high superordinate iden-
 tity team, the former interfunctional boundaries become
 weak, and instead a new, inclusive team-based boundary
 becomes important in the minds of members, which reduces
 the adverse effect of functional identities and orientations
 (Brewer and Miller 1984).1 Considering the promising role
 team identity can play, it is important to examine how
 superordinate identity in a cross-functional team affects
 innovativeness.2

 Team characteristics. Cross-functional teams can be

 viewed in terms of their (1) physical composition and (2)
 psychological characteristics (i.e., how members of the team
 relate to the team and to one another). Regarding the former,
 we focus on functional diversity within the team. Although
 a large diversity of functional perspectives is generally
 viewed as a favorable team characteristic, such diversity can
 increase decision-making difficulty (Ancona and Caldwell
 1992; Milliken and Martins 1996). This difficulty can lead
 to a more algorithmic decision-making process that is detri-
 mental to creativity.

 Another aspect of how members relate to the team, social
 cohesion, is more affective and refers to the strength of
 interpersonal ties among team members (Hogg 1992;
 Zaccaro and McCoy 1988). Although social cohesion has
 the potential to adversely influence some of the conditions

 Regarding psychological characteristics, one variable we

 consider, superordinate identity, refers to the extent to which
 members identify with the team (rather than merely with their
 functional areas) and perceive a stake in the success of the
 team (Mackie and Goethals 1987; Sethi 2000; Tajfel 1982).
 This variable is expected to play a critical role in cross-func-
 tional teams because it can influence integration of diverse
 perspectives. Normally, such integration is difficult to achieve
 in cross-functional settings because people from different
 functional areas hold biases and stereotypes toward one
 another. These biases and stereotypes to a large extent arise
 from deeply rooted functional identities that people hold
 (Ashforth and Mael 1989; Mackie and Goethals 1987; Tajfel
 1982). Unless functional identities are replaced by a sense of
 team identity, it may be difficult for members in a team to dis-
 cover critical novel linkages among diverse perspectives.

 Social identity research suggests that the adverse effect of
 functional identities can be mitigated if the members of a

 IAlthough some researchers have used a concept such as "superordinate
 goal," there is little commonality between this concept and superordinate
 identity. Superordinate goal refers to an outcome that is not specific to any
 members or their functional areas but is related to the overall team or the
 team's task (Mackie and Goethals 1987; Sherif and Sherif 1969). Such an
 outcome is normally imposed on the team. Whereas superordinate goal
 refers to an overarching outcome, superordinate identity is essentially a
 cognitive state in which members have a perception of oneness with the
 team instead of merely viewing themselves as representatives of a func-
 tional area. Superordinate identity and superordinate goal are related in that
 the former can facilitate both the acceptance and achievement of the latter
 by team members (Mackie and Goethals 1987).

 2Superordinate identity is similar in spirit to a recently proposed concept

 of relative functional identification that refers to the extent to which mem-
 bers feel a sense of connection with their function rather than with their
 organization (Fisher, Maltz, and Jaworski 1997). The difference between
 the two constructs, however, is that though superordinate identity is a
 group-level concept that captures the extent to which team-based identity
 overrides the functional identities of members, relative functional identifi-
 cation has been conceptualized at the organization level and relates to the
 tension between functional and organizational identification.

 CONDITIONS FOR CREATIVITY AND VARIABLES IN THE MODEL

 Table 1

 Conditions for Creativity Related Variables in the Model Variable Type
 1 Diversity of input 1. Number of functional areas I. Team factor

 2. Customers' Influence 2. Contextual influence
 3. Ease of communication in the firm 3. Covariate
 4. Project manager's operating style 4. Covariate

 2. Discovery of novel linkages 1. Superordinate identity 1. Team factor
 2. Social cohesion 2. Team factor
 3. Functional diversity 3. Team factor
 4. Team size 4. Covariate

 3. Motivation to innovate I. Superordinate identity 1. Team factor

 2. Project monitoring by senior management 2. Contextual influence
 3. Extent of competition among new products 3. Covariate
 4. Firm's reward structure for project teams 4. Covariate

 4. Challenging traditional perspectives 1. Superordinate identity 1. Team factor
 2. Social cohesion 2. Team factor
 3. Project manager's operating style 3. Covariate

 5. Promoting risk taking 1. Encouragement to take risk 1. Contextual influence

 6. Resource availability 1. Project monitoring by senior management 1. Contextual influence

 2. Resource availability 2. Covariate

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 76 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001

 TEAM-LEVEL FACTORS AFFECTING NEW PRODUCT INNOVATIVENESS

 Figure 1

 Contextual Influences

 Extent of Project

 Monitoring

 Customers' Influence

 Encouragement to

 Take Risk

 Team Characteristics

 Social Cohesion + +

 Superordinate +

 IdentityInnovativeness

 Functional Diversity

 for creativity (e.g., integration of diverse functional perspec-
 tives to discover novel ideas, challenging of functional per-
 spectives), it is not well understood how this variable will
 affect new product innovativeness. More critically, prior
 research on social cohesion has been done with groups in
 which members come from the same background and have
 similar perspectives. It is not known what type of effect
 social cohesion will have in teams in which members from
 different functional areas come to the team with attendant
 biases and stereotypes toward one another.

 taking) or could be due to an environment around the team
 that promotes a risk-taking orientation (Slater and Narver
 1995). Encouragement to take risk affects the extent to
 which new product development teams deviate from routine
 problem-solving approaches and feel comfortable pursuing
 untried ideas, a crucial factor for the emergence of innova-
 tiveness (Amabile 1988; Andrews and Smith 1996). It is par-
 ticularly important to examine whether this variable affects
 innovativeness, because many firms, in their search for
 improved quality through continuous improvement of exist-
 ing products and processes, may implicitly discourage such
 risk taking, because it is likely to disturb the pursuit of incre-
 mental continuous improvement (Clark and Fujimoto 1991).

 Contextual influences on the team. We consider three con-
 textual influences on the team that can play an important
 role in creating conditions that affect creativity. The first is
 the extent of project monitoring by senior management.
 Senior management's close monitoring of the project can
 provide a signal of the importance of a given project, which
 in turn is expected to affect the team's motivation level and
 aid in garnering resources from individuals/units outside the
 team (Andrews and Smith 1996; Gupta, Raj, and Wilemon
 1986; Kanter 1988). However, very close senior manage-
 ment monitoring can have a downside, as teams can view
 such monitoring as interference, which may adversely affect
 their motivation.

 The second contextual influence on the team is the extent

 to which the team is encouraged to take risk. Such encour-
 agement could be the result of senior managers urging the
 team to be venturesome (either through verbal encourage-
 ment or by setting up a reward system that encourages risk

 The third contextual influence on the team comes from

 customers. Teams that take customers' views into account, at
 least during the initial part of the development process, can
 increase the diversity of ideas that are available to them dur-
 ing the idea/concept development and design stages.
 However, some researchers believe that customers cannot
 help much in the development of unique products, because
 they can provide only incremental ideas (Bennett and Cooper
 1981). Given these conflicting views, it is important to inves-
 tigate how customers' influence affects innovativeness.

 Covariates. Although in this study our interest is mainly
 with team factors, we have included several organizational
 and market factors as covariates that can influence new
 product outcomes. By including these variables, we can bet-
 ter identify the unique effects of team factors and contextual

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Cross-Functional Product Development Teams 77

 Goethals 1987; Sherif and Sherif 1969). In other words, a
 feeling of psychological ownership of the project arises
 among team members, which enhances cooperative behav-
 iors and motivation (Pierce, Rubenfeld, and Morgan 1991).
 As a result, members in such a team are more likely to inte-
 grate a variety of diverse functional perspectives effectively
 (Deshpand6 and Zaltman 1982; Mackie and Goethals 1987).
 Therefore,

 HI: The level of superordinate identity in a cross-functional
 product development team is positively related to new prod-
 uct innovativeness.

 influences on innovativeness. Also, some of the team vari-
 ables we consider may be confounded with other team vari-
 ables not explicitly of interest in this study. When possible,
 we have included these other team variables (which are
 likely to create potential confounding) as covariates in the
 model. The first covariate of interest is the general ease of
 communication among functional areas at the firm level that
 can help the team acquire a wide variety of diverse perspec-
 tives from others in the firm and thereby have a positive
 influence on innovativeness. Second, we account for the
 effect of competition among new products in the target mar-
 ket: If team members are targeting a market in which com-
 petitors are vigorously introducing new products, this can
 help motivate the team to develop and launch a superior
 product in such a market. Third, if the reward structure in the
 firm is such that members involved in projects are rewarded
 on the basis of the project's overall performance rather than
 for their performance on their respective functional tasks, it
 is likely to enhance members' motivation to strive for a
 superior project outcome, which can improve product inno-
 vativeness (Amabile 1983). Fourth, if the project manager
 has an operating style that encourages members to partici-
 pate actively in discussions related to the project, it can help
 in the emergence of more diverse perspectives in the team as
 well as increase the amount of questioning and challenging
 of one another's perspectives (Slater and Narver 1995)--the
 conditions that can help in the development of innovative
 products. Fifth, to help a team implement its creative ideas,
 the organization must make adequate resources and facilities
 available to the team. Therefore, resource availability can be
 an important influence on product innovativeness. Sixth, we
 account for the effect of team size, and thus we are better
 able to get an estimate of the effect of functional diversity on
 innovativeness.

 Social cohesion. Social cohesion is generally viewed by
 managers as a desirable criterion for team formation. Some
 level of social cohesion is necessary for the team to work
 effectively. However, beyond a moderate level, social cohe-
 sion is expected to have a negative effect on new product inno-
 vativeness. This negative relationship can be explained on the
 basis of the occurrence of groupthink, which often arises in
 highly cohesive groups (Janis 1982). Groupthink refers to a
 high level of concurrence seeking and conformance by mem-
 bers of the group. Such behavior adversely affects the creativ-
 ity of a team's decisions, because it leads to an incomplete
 survey of alternatives, poor information search, and selective
 perception of information and alternatives (Janis 1982).

 between social cohesion and innovativeness, in our inter-
 views at the outset of this study, we found that new product
 development teams with extremely low levels of social
 cohesion are rare (managers usually attempt to assemble
 teams that will work well together). In other words, social
 cohesion typically will be in the moderate-to-high range,
 and thus we expect a negative relationship between social
 cohesion and innovativeness. Therefore,

 Although this discussion suggests a nonlinear relationship

 THEORY AND HYPOTHESES

 Characteristics of the Team

 H2: Beyond a moderate level, social cohesion is negatively

 related to new product innovativeness.

 Superordinate identity. By nature, a low superordinate

 identity team will be characterized by a retention of func-
 tional identities, biases, and stereotypes. As a result, mem-
 bers from one functional area may tend to overlook or reject
 the information and perspectives of members from other
 functional areas (Maltz and Kohli 1996). This problem is
 aggravated by interdepartmental rivalry and political
 maneuvering over scarce organizational resources (Friedkin
 and Simpson 1985; Maltz and Kohli 1996; Ruekert and
 Walker 1987). Consequently, members are unable to inte-
 grate the information and perspectives of different func-
 tional areas effectively (Jaworski and Kohli 1993; Slater and
 Narver 1995). As such, teams with low superordinate iden-
 tity are less likely to discover complex and novel linkages
 among market needs, technology, and the company's
 resources.

 Functional diversity. Team diversity refers to the number
 of functional areas represented on the team whose members
 are fully involved in the project. As the number of functional
 areas represented on the team increases, so does the variety
 of ideas and perspectives brought to the team. This, in turn,
 increases the possibility of discovering novel linkages
 (Milliken and Martins 1996; Osborn 1963). However, at
 some point, the diversity of ideas can create information
 overload, but because many of these perspectives are at odds
 with one another, high diversity also makes it difficult to
 resolve differences among perspectives (Olson, Walker, and
 Ruekert 1995). To handle such problems, it is not uncom-
 mon to find teams resorting to simplifying heuristics or
 algorithmic problem solving (Andrews and Smith 1996; Van
 de Ven 1986). As noted previously, such routine or algorith-
 mic problem solving is likely to reduce the ability of the
 team to discover novel linkages (Amabile 1983).

 In contrast, as noted previously, high superordinate iden-
 tity in a team can override the adverse effects of functional
 identities of team members (Brewer and Miller 1984;
 Mackie and Goethals 1987; Sherif and Sherif 1969). High
 superordinate identity enhances the perception of intrateam
 similarities and leads to psychological acceptance of mem-
 bers from other functional areas and their work methods,
 thereby reducing the adverse effect of interfunctional biases
 and stereotypes (Ashforth and Mael 1989; Mackie and

 This discussion suggests a nonlinear relationship between
 functional diversity and innovativeness. As functional diver-
 sity increases from a low to a moderate level, it enhances
 innovativeness. However, when functional diversity goes
 beyond a moderate level, it has a negative effect on innova-
 tiveness. Therefore,

 H3: New product innovativeness will be highest at a moderate

 level of functional diversity.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 78 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001

 Contextual Influences on the Team

 commitment to developing a truly innovative product
 (Kanter 1983, 1988). In other words, beyond a point, close
 monitoring of the project by senior management may have
 adverse consequences for innovativeness. Therefore,

 Encouragement to take risk. Innovative ideas, by defini-

 monitoring by senior management is moderate.

 H5: New product innovativeness will be highest when project

 Customers' influence on the new product development

 tion, deviate from the status quo and thus engender a
 degree of risk for those who propose them (Kanter 1983;
 Osborn 1963). It is therefore not surprising to find that
 innovative ideas are more likely to arise in environments
 that encourage risk taking (Amabile 1988; Gupta, Raj, and
 Wilemon 1986). Unfortunately, even though the very
 involvement in new product development activity should
 motivate people to take risks, organizational systems and
 routines, in subtle ways, tend to make product develop-
 ment professionals avoid new ideas and approaches (Cyert
 and March 1963; Van de Ven 1986). For example, after the
 failure of the Edsel, the unwritten rule at Ford Motor
 Company was "not to break the mold." As a result,
 although Ford product designers were the first to conceive
 of the contemporary (and very popular) minivan, the idea
 never went past the drawing board stage because it was
 considered inconsistent with the unwritten rule (Taylor
 1994). However, when the same designers from Ford
 moved to Chrysler and received encouragement to pursue
 the idea in the face of great uncertainty, the minivan they
 developed turned out to be one of the most innovative and
 successful new products in the recent history of the auto-
 mobile industry. Therefore, senior managers who want
 product development teams to strive for innovative out-
 comes should motivate team members to take the risk of
 pursuing unique and untried ideas. As such, we expect the
 following:

 process. In this study, we focus on customers' influence during
 the initial stages of the product development process-where
 the foundation for product innovativeness is usually laid. It has
 been argued that input from customers will result in only incre-
 mental product improvements that are less novel than what is
 possible through engineering-driven innovation (Bennett and
 Cooper 1981). Certainly, such a situation can arise if managers
 passively accept customer input and do not subject it to further
 evaluation. However, the bulk of the evidence suggests that
 customer input will enhance innovativeness. At the outset of a
 project, directly exposing members of the product develop-
 ment team to customers' needs/problems and the consumption
 context can motivate members to strive for more innovative
 solutions to customers' problems (Kanter 1988). Likewise,
 systematic study of lead users has proven to be a source of
 innovative ideas (von Hipple 1988). As a project goes on, cus-
 tomer research-in particular, extensive concept testing during
 the early stages of a project-is one of the major processes that
 distinguish successful new product development projects from
 failures (Cooper 1993). Indeed, given that one of the most
 basic issues addressed in concept testing is the extent to which
 a proposed new product adds value compared with existing
 alternatives, customer input should result in more innovative
 products. We therefore predict the following:

 H4: Encouragement given to a cross-functional product develop-
 ment team to take risk is positively related to new product
 innovativeness.

 Monitoring of the project by senior management. As
 noted previously, innovative ideas do not just happen.
 Rather, they typically emerge from an effort-intensive
 process that requires perseverance to overcome inevitable
 conceptual and technical obstacles. Indeed, one of the most
 significant determinants of the creativity of outcomes is the
 motivation people have to engage in the task at hand
 (Amabile 1983; Andrews and Smith 1996).

 In the context of cross-functional teams, close monitoring
 of a project by senior management signals to the team and
 to others in the firm that a particular project is important.
 This contributes to creating a sense of pride among team
 members and builds enthusiasm and excitement toward the
 project (Kanter 1988; Van de Ven 1986). In essence, close
 monitoring should elevate the team's motivation, which in
 turn leads to the development of innovative products
 (Amabile 1983).

 Close monitoring of a project by senior management can
 also help a team obtain cooperation for the project from oth-
 ers in the firm. Because a new product development team is
 dependent on the resources and facilities of various func-
 tional areas, such cooperation is critical to implementing a
 team's innovative ideas and plans. It is difficult not to coop-
 erate with a project team whose progress is closely moni-
 tored by senior management.

 Conversely, if monitoring of the project by senior man-
 agers becomes excessively close or involved, the team can
 perceive this as interference in the project. Such a perception
 can have a negative effect on the team's motivation and its

 H6: Customers' influence on the new product development
 process is positively related to new product innovativeness.

 Team Characteristics and Contextual Influences on the
 Team as Moderators of the Superordinate
 Identity-Innovativeness Relationship

 The integration of diverse perspectives and ideas is at the
 core of the creative process and therefore is a central deter-
 minant of the innovativeness of the new product concept. We
 have also discussed the expectation that a strong psycholog-
 ical bond (i.e., superordinate identity) among members in a
 cross-functional team will be a primary determinant of the
 extent to which the integration of diverse ideas and perspec-
 tives occurs. As such, it is worthwhile to examine conditions
 that may elevate or blunt the superordinate identity-innova-
 tiveness relationship.

 In essence, as superordinate identity increases, the poten-
 tial for surfacing innovative new product concepts increases.
 In this study, we examine the role of three factors that are
 expected to affect the extent to which this potential is real-
 ized: (1) encouragement to take risk, (2) social cohesion,
 and (3) functional diversity. We focus on these variables
 because they are among the factors most widely considered
 by managers in forming cross-functional teams (Gupta, Raj,
 and Wilemon 1986; Katzenbach and Smith 1993; Takeuchi
 and Nonaka 1986).

 Encouragement to take risk. Although an increase in
 superordinate identity creates the potential for creative
 breakthroughs, if encouragement to take risk is low, the

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Cross-Functional Product Development Teams 79

 METHOD

 Data Collection

 motivation to strive for such breakthroughs by thinking out-
 side the box is limited. We return to the Ford minivan exam-
 ple cited previously to examine how this might happen. It is
 We tested hypotheses using data collected through a mail
 conceivable that this team had a high degree of superordi-
 survey from key informants in cross-functional teams
 nate identity, but the unwritten rule of sticking to conven-
 involved in recent major new product initiatives. To identify
 tional practice would constrain any potential for break-
 candidate projects and related key informants, we created a list
 through thinking. Conversely, when encouragement to take
 of consumer product manufacturing firms and their divisions
 risk is high, we would expect the effect of superordinate
 that introduced new products within the two years preceding
 identity in such a team to be elevated. High encouragement
 this survey. Following similar key informant research, our goal
 to take risk provides the motivation to think outside the box
 was to identify a person who would be highly knowledgeable
 and tap the creative potential that increases as superordinate
 about team events and practices (Cini, Moreland, and Levine
 identity increases. As such, we expect the following:
 1993). In the present study, this person was the project man-
 ager. Project managers can belong to various functional areas,
 but we decided to focus only on projects that had project man-
 agers from the marketing area, because in consumer product
 companies (the focus of our study), many new product devel-
 opment projects are coordinated by marketing managers.

 innovativeness will be enhanced as encouragement given to
 the team to take risk increases.

 H7: The positive effect of superordinate identity on new product

 Social cohesion. As we discussed previously, the discov-

 ery of novel linkages among ideas and concepts does not
 just happen on its own but requires surfacing and challeng-
 ing assumptions held by various team members (Mason and
 Mitroff 1981). At a minimum, it requires that team members
 feel free to express opinions, perspectives, and beliefs that
 differ from those held by others in the team. However, as
 social cohesion goes beyond a moderate level, assumption
 challenging and sharing of divergent/dissenting beliefs may
 not readily occur and may even be thwarted (Janis 1982;
 King and Anderson 1990). Thus, when superordinate iden-
 tity increases, a moderate level of social cohesion enables a
 team to walk the fine line between integrating diverse views
 and simultaneously being able to challenge one another's
 ideas freely. In comparison, high social cohesion will have
 an adverse effect when superordinate identity increases.
 When members in a high superordinate identity team strive
 to integrate functional information, high social cohesion
 constrains the expression of dissenting views and the chal-
 lenging of assumptions underlying existing approaches and
 thus reduces the likelihood of discovering novel linkages.
 Therefore,

 H8: The positive effect of superordinate identity on new product

 innovativeness will be weakened as social cohesion
 increases from moderate to high levels.

 We contacted our short-listed firms by telephone to iden-
 tify managers from the marketing area who recently coordi-
 nated new product development projects. Next, we contacted
 these people and screened them to confirm that they had
 recently managed new product development initiatives and
 that such initiatives used a cross-functional team. Project
 managers who met these criteria were asked to complete
 questionnaires that were mailed to them after the screening.
 In completing the questionnaire, respondents were asked
 to focus on their most recently completed new product devel-
 opment project that met the previously discussed criteria.
 Questionnaires were sent to 240 project managers. A
 reminder with another copy of the questionnaire was sent to
 managers who had not responded after three weeks. A total
 of 141 usable responses were received, yielding a 58.8%
 response rate. The industries in the sample consisted of appli-
 ances, lawn care equipment, office supplies, toys, processed
 food products, health and beauty aids, and household prod-
 ucts. There were no significant differences between early and
 late respondents, which suggests that nonresponse bias was
 not a serious concern (Armstrong and Overton 1977). The
 average time taken for the development of the products
 reported in our study was 16.4 months, indicating that these
 were indeed major new product initiatives. On average, these
 projects were completed 7.8 months before data collection.

 Functional diversity. Functional diversity can be thought

 Measures

 of as providing the basic building blocks for creative think-
 ing--different perspectives and ideas. As such, when func-
 tional diversity is low, high superordinate identity teams
 have minimal raw material to work with; that is, the poten-
 tial to integrate diverse perspectives is high, but there are
 few perspectives to integrate. At the other extreme, however,
 when functional diversity becomes too great, it creates
 information overload and increases the general complexity
 of team problem solving. Under such conditions, there is a
 strong tendency to revert to algorithmic forms of problem
 solving (Van de Ven 1986), which circumvents the discovery
 of novel linkages. Thus, although superordinate identity
 increases the likelihood of integrating diverse perspectives,
 high functional diversity is expected to blunt this benefit by
 limiting a team's ability to discover new connections. As
 such, we expect the following:

 H9: The positive effect of superordinate identity on new product
 innovativeness will be highest at a moderate level of func-
 tional diversity.

 Whenever possible, existing measures of the constructs

 were used. All measures were pretested on 37 project man-
 agers. On the basis of the pretest, measures were refined.
 Detailed interviews were held with seven of these managers
 to ascertain their interpretation of the items in the measures.
 On the basis of their feedback, the questionnaire was further
 revised and administered to the full sample (for sample scale
 items, see the Appendix). Descriptive statistics and reliabil-
 ity for each measure and correlations among measures are
 included in Table 2.

 New product innovativeness was operationalized as the
 extent to which a new product is perceived to be novel com-
 pared with other competing products and appropriate from
 the perspective of the marketplace. This measure is a slight
 modification of the creativity scale used by Andrews and
 Smith (1996) and Besemer and O'Quin (1986). The innova-
 tiveness scale is a ten-item, seven-point semantic differential

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 80 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001

 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS, RELIABILITIES, AND INTERCORRELATIONS AMONG REFINED MEASURES

 Table 2

 Standard Simple Correlations

 Measures Mean Deviation Alpha 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

 1. Innovativeness 4.13 .59 .80 1.00
 2. Superordinate identity 4.82 1.32 .91 .39*** 1.00
 3. Social cohesion 5.07 1.11 .86 .05 .34*** 1.00
 4. Functional diversity 5.72 1.85 - .08 .14* .10 1.00
 5. Encouragement to take risk 4.41 1.36 .83 .33*** .32*** .13 .00 1.00
 6. Project monitoring 3.75 1.36 .68 .20** -.23*** -.08 .07 -.04 1.00
 7. Customers' influence 4.85 1.56 .91 .22*** .25*** -.02 .16* .18** -.03 i.00

 *p < .10.
 **p < .05.
 ***p < .01.

 scale that taps the novelty and appropriateness dimensions
 of innovativeness.3

 A principal component factor analysis using varimax

 rotation suggested that the scale had two dimensions: one
 representing novelty and the other appropriateness of the
 new product. Although these two dimensions are conceptu-
 ally different from each other, as discussed previously, they
 are an integral part of the overall concept of innovativeness
 of a new product and thus should be combined to form a sin-
 gle scale (Andrews and Smith 1996). To determine how
 these two dimensions should be combined, we regressed a
 global measure of innovativeness on novelty and appropri-
 ateness. The global measure was a single-item, seven-point
 scale that asked the respondents to rate how innovative the
 product was in satisfying customer needs compared with
 competing products. We used the standard regression coeffi-
 cients of novelty and appropriateness as weights for com-
 bining these dimensions.

 Superordinate identity was operationalized as the extent
 to which members of a team identify with the team (rather
 than merely with their functional areas) and perceive a stake
 in the success of the team. The superordinate identity meas-
 ure is based on a measure proposed by Hinkle and col-
 leagues (1989). The superordinate scale is a six-item, seven-
 point Likert-type scale.

 Social cohesion was measured as the degree of interper-
 sonal attraction, comfort, and commitment to maintaining
 close interpersonal relationships with other members of the
 project team. Our measure was based on a measure used by
 Zaccaro and McCoy (1988). The social cohesion scale is a
 four-item, seven-point semantic differential scale. The mean
 of this scale is 5.1, which suggests that social cohesion in the

 sample is beyond a moderate level, as was anticipated at the
 outset of this study.

 Functional diversity was operationalized as the number of

 functional areas represented on the team whose members
 were fully involved in the project rather than being ad hoc
 specialists or consultants who were engaged only for a lim-
 ited time (Brown and Eisenhardt 1995). The average num-
 ber of functional areas in a team was six.

 Encouragement to take risk was measured in terms of the

 degree to which team members perceived that they were
 encouraged to be venturesome and to pursue unique and
 untried ideas. A new four-item, seven-point Likert-type
 scale was developed to measure encouragement to take risk.
 Monitoring by senior management was operationalized as
 the extent to which senior management showed interest in the
 project and monitored its progress. A new three-item, seven-
 point Likert-type scale was developed for this construct.

 Customers' influence was operationalized as the extent to
 which input from end customers was relied on in the devel-
 opment of the product concept and design. Customer influ-
 ence is a new three-item, seven-point Likert-type scale.

 Covariates. The first covariate, ease of communication
 among departments, was measured on a two-item, seven-
 point Likert-type scale that was based on the items in the
 interdepartmental connectedness measure used by Jaworski
 and Kohli (1993). The second covariate, extent of competi-
 tion among new products, was operationalized as the aver-
 age number of new products that are launched in the target
 market every year. The project manager's style was meas-
 ured on a new three-item, seven-point scale that captures the
 extent to which the manager encouraged members to partic-
 ipate actively in the discussions/decisions related to the
 project. Reward structure was measured as the extent to
 which rewards for members involved in projects are linked
 to the performance of the overall project rather than to the
 performance on their respective functional tasks. Resource
 availability was measured by a single item. Finally, team
 size referred to the number of full-time members.

 Hypothesis Testing

 RESULTS

 3To examine the extent to which the judgment of the project manager

 about new product innovativeness reflected that of consumers who are the
 final judges of product innovativeness, we obtained additional data from
 consumers. Specifically, some of our respondents revealed the brand names
 of their products. From these, we picked 12 products that were recently
 introduced in the market. A product concept sheet was prepared for each
 product, which included a picture and a brief written description of the
 product. After reading a product concept sheet, consumers responded to the
 same innovativeness scale that was used by project managers. We collected
 328 responses from 82 respondents. To determine the extent to which con-
 sumers' assessments agreed with those of project managers, we examined
 the correlation between the average of consumers' ratings for a particular
 product and the corresponding manager's rating (n = 23). The correlation
 (r = .75, p < .01) suggests a reasonably high match between the two groups
 and supports the use of managers' ratings of new product innovativeness.

 We tested hypotheses using the moderated regression

 analysis suggested by Aiken and West (1991) and Jaccard,
 Wan, and Turrisi (1990). To minimize multicollinearity
 among interaction terms and their constituent terms in the
 regression model, we mean-centered all independent vari-

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Cross-Functional Product Development Teams 81

 Effects of Team Characteristics and Contextual Influences
 on New Product Innovativeness

 ables (Aiken and West 1991; Jaccard, Wan, and Turrisi
 -.16, t = -1.41, p < .10).4 Functional diversity was predicted
 1990). We also calculated variance inflation factors for
 to have an inverted-U relationship with innovativeness.
 independent variables in the model and found that all were
 However, we found no relationship between functional
 well below ten, the value above which there should be con-
 diversity and innovativeness: The coefficients of the linear
 cern about multicollinearity (Myers 1986). As can be seen in
 term (b = -.22, t = -.67, p < .30) and the squared term (b =
 Table 3, the terms in the model account for 32% of the vari-
 .07, t = .68, p < .30) are not significant. H3 is not supported.
 ance in new product innovativeness, and the F statistic was
 Consistent with our expectation, encouragement to take
 4.64 (p < .001).
 risk is positively related to new product innovativeness (b =
 .18, t = 1.97, p < .05). Thus, H4 is supported. It was hypoth-
 esized that monitoring by senior management would have a
 nonlinear (inverted-U) relationship with new product innov-
 ativeness (H5). This prediction is not supported because the
 coefficient of the squared term for monitoring is not signifi-
 cant (b = .01, t = .68, p < .30). However, the linear term for
 monitoring is significant and positive, suggesting that there
 exists a positive, centered main effect of monitoring by sen-
 ior management on new product innovativeness (b = .44, t =
 4.09, p < .01). Also, as expected, customers' influence is
 positively related to new product innovativeness (b = .17, t =
 1.72, p < .05). H6 is supported.

 It is important to note that because we have mean-
 centered the variables in the model, the interpretation of
 main effects changes slightly. In a main effects-only model,
 the main effects are interpreted as constant effects. For
 example, in a main effects model (y = ao + alX1 + a2X2), the
 coefficient of X, represents the effect of the variable X1 on
 Y, holding all other variables in the model constant. In a
 mean-centered interaction effects model, the coefficient of
 XI is instead interpreted as the regression of Y on X, when
 the variable X2 is at its mean value (Aiken and West 1991;
 Jaccard, Wan, and Turrisi 1990). Indeed, main effects in the
 latter model can be considered the weighted average effect
 across all observed values of the other predictors (Aiken and
 West 1991). In view of this interpretation, we refer to the
 main effects as centered main effects.

 We found that superordinate identity is positively related
 to new product innovativeness (b = .28, t = 3.26, p < .01). H1
 is supported. Also, as predicted in H2, social cohesion is
 negatively related to innovativeness, though marginally (b =

 4There was some concern that variables such as social cohesion, func-
 tional diversity, and encouragement to take risk can also act as antecedents
 of superordinate identity and thus may influence innovativeness through
 superordinate identity. We therefore conducted a test of mediation (Baron
 and Kenny 1986), which suggests that these variables are not antecedents
 of superordinate identity.

 UNSTANDARDIZED REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS

 Table 3

 Centered Main Effects b Standard Error t
 H1 Superordinate identity .28 (.09) 3.26***
 H2 Social cohesion -.16 (.11) -1.41*
 H3 Functional diversity -.22 (.35) -.67
 Diversity (squared term) .07 (.10) .68

 H4 Encouragement to take risk .18 (.09) 1.97**
 H5 Monitoring by senior management .44 (. 11) 4.09***

 Monitoring (squared term) .01 (.02) .68

 H6 Customers' influence .17 (.10) 1.72**

 Interaction Effects

 Moderating Effects of Characteristics of the Team and Contextual

 Influences on the Effect of Superordinate Identity

 H7 Superordinate identity x encouragement to take risk .02 (.01) 1.67**
 H8 Superordinate identity x social cohesion -.04 (.01) -3.01**
 H9 Superordinate identity x functional diversity -.04 (.03) -1.28*
 Superordinate identity x diversity (squared term) -.00 (.01) -.21

 Covariates

 Ease of interfunctional communication .40 (.19) 2.14**
 Resource availability .12 (.27) .44
 Competition among new products -.07 (.05) -1.31*
 Firm's reward structure for projects -. 12 (.28) -.43
 Project manager's operating style .15 (.16) .92
 Team size .22 (.26) .84

 R-square = .41
 Adjusted R-square = .32
 F = 4.64***

 *p < .10.
 **p < .05.
 ***p <.01.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 82 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001

 Team Characteristics and Team-Senior Management
 Interface as Moderators of the Superordinate
 Identity-Innovativeness Relationship

 Consistent with H7, the relationship between superordi-

 nate identity and new product innovativeness is strengthened
 by encouragement to take risk. The interaction between
 encouragement to take risk and superordinate identity is sig-
 nificant in the expected direction (b = .02, t = 1.67, p < .05).
 Likewise, beyond a moderate level, social cohesion weakens
 the relationship between superordinate identity and new
 product innovativeness (b = -.04, t = -3.01, p < .01). H8 is
 supported.

 Also, contrary to our expectations, we did not find an
 inverted-U relationship between monitoring of the project
 by senior management and innovativeness. Instead, our
 results suggest only a positive effect of monitoring on inno-
 vativeness. It is possible that the effects of close project
 monitoring need to be studied jointly with the effects of the
 type of monitoring or control (behavioral versus outcome)
 exercised by senior management (Hendersen and Lee 1992;
 Olson, Walker, and Ruekert 1995). We speculate that though
 behavioral control may restrict decision-making freedom
 and therefore creativity, outcome control would place no
 direct bounds on decision making per se. Perhaps many
 teams in our study were not under behavioral control, and as
 a result, close monitoring might not have had a negative
 effect on innovativeness. The potential for such an interac-
 tion suggests that type of control would be an interesting
 variable to include in future studies on cross-functional
 teams and product innovativeness.

 Limitations

 This study deals with relatively stable and mature con-
 sumer products for which the product development process
 consists of well-understood steps. Such products require a
 deliberate development process that emphasizes extensive
 planning. In contrast, for products in an uncertain industry,
 such as high technology, experiential tactics involving fre-
 quent iterations of design are more appropriate (Brown and
 Eisenhardt 1997; Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995). As such, the
 findings of our research may not generalize to firms that
 operate in uncertain or rapidly changing environments.

 Also, our study is focused primarily on internal dynamics
 in the team. As such, we have considered variables related to
 the characteristics of the team and contextual influences on
 the team that are expected to play an important role in
 affecting internal team dynamics and thereby influencing
 new product innovativeness. However, factors related to
 organization structure and culture are also expected to affect
 new product outcomes (Brown and Eisenhardt 1997;
 Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995). Although we have accounted
 for several organizational factors either as contextual influ-
 ences or as covariates, there are several others that our team-
 level study has not considered. Inclusion of organizational
 factors in future studies on teams can help draw implications
 for the design and development of organization structure
 and culture that help promote innovativeness in new product
 development teams.

 Research and Managerial Implications

 The findings of this study have several implications for
 researchers and managers. Regarding the former, recent
 work in the area of organizational innovation notes that the
 different "thought worlds" of functional areas can hinder
 new product development (Dougherty 1992). In the present
 study, we augment this research by showing that creating a
 strong superordinate identity within a cross-functional team
 can reduce the adverse effects of functional identities or
 thought worlds.

 More generally, the superordinate identity construct intro-
 duced in this study can serve as a foundation for further
 research on cross-functional teams in new product develop-
 ment and brand management. In particular, three research
 areas are in need of special attention. First, the development

 Finally, H9 predicts that the positive effect of superordi-
 nate identity on new product innovativeness will be highest
 at a moderate level of functional diversity. This hypothesis is
 not supported, as the coefficients of both the linear term (b =
 -.04, t = -1.28, p < .1) and the squared term (b = -.01, t =
 -.83, p < .25) of the interaction between functional diversity
 and superordinate identity are not significant.

 Covariates

 As expected, the covariate ease of communication among
 functional areas at the firm level has a positive effect on new
 product innovativeness (b = .40, t = 2.14, p < .05). Resource
 availability does not have any effect on innovativeness (b =
 .12, t = .44, p < .35). The extent of competition among new
 products has a weak, negative relationship with innovative-
 ness (b = -.07, t = -1.31, p < .10). One possible explanation
 for this negative effect could be that in markets character-
 ized by a high velocity of innovation, managers often find
 themselves in catch-up positions, which is likely to con-
 strain the time made available to the team for product devel-
 opment. High time pressure adversely affects creativity
 (Amabile 1983; Andrews and Smith 1996) and thus con-
 strains the innovativeness of the new product. Reward struc-
 ture does not influence innovativeness (b = -.12, t = -.43,
 p < .35). There is no effect of the project manager's operat-
 ing style on innovativeness (b = .15, t = .92, p < .20). Finally,
 team size is not related to innovativeness (b = .22, t = .84,
 p < .25).

 CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

 cross-functional teams and contextual influences on teams
 affect new product innovativeness. Our results indicate that
 innovativeness is positively related to the level of superordi-
 nate identity in the team, encouragement to take risk, cus-
 tomers' influence, and monitoring of the project by senior
 management. Social cohesion has a negative effective on
 new product innovativeness. Finally, the relationship
 between superordinate identity and new product innovative-
 ness is strengthened as encouragement to take risk increases,
 but it is weakened as social cohesion moves beyond a mod-
 erate level.

 Functional diversity had no effect on new product innov-
 ativeness. With an average of six functional areas in the
 team, the teams in our sample might have been beyond a
 threshold at which functional diversity matters. Likewise,
 this level of diversity might not have reached a threshold of
 being dysfunctional. Further research may be able to iden-
 tify teams with a wider range of functional diversity to
 understand how this variable affects innovativeness.

 In this research, we examined how the characteristics of

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Cross-Functional Product Development Teams 83

 Second, a psychological bond such as superordinate iden-

 of many complex products involves the use of multiple
 teams that handle different parts of the product or focus on
 different technologies involved in the product. The problems
 of such multiple-team projects can be different from those of
 the single-team projects that we have focused on in this
 study. For example, in multiple-team projects, managing
 interteam relations can turn out to be as complicated as man-
 aging intrateam relations. Researchers may want to examine
 whether superordinate identity is an equally important fac-
 tor in multiple-team projects in terms of creating harmo-
 nious and productive relationships among various teams.

 (or by manipulating this variable in an experimental setting)
 to understand if the relationship is nonlinear in nature; that
 is, as social cohesion increases from a low to a moderate
 level, innovativeness improves, but beyond the moderate
 level, innovativeness is hindered. Relatedly, from a practical
 perspective, senior managers should manage social cohesion
 carefully because of its negative effect on innovativeness
 and its ability to weaken the positive effect of superordinate
 identity on innovativeness.

 tity is expected to play a particularly crucial role in settings
 in which team members are located far from one another and
 rarely meet (as is increasingly happening in computer-medi-
 ated communication). In such teams, spatial proximity,
 which is considered important for integration among team
 members, is generally absent. The extent to which a strong
 sense of superordinate identity may be able to compensate
 for the absence of spatial proximity in such teams needs to
 be examined.

 Our study also informs senior managers that certain popu-
 lar notions about what is good for teams may not be correct.
 For example, it is generally believed that high diversity helps
 teams become more creative. However, our results suggest
 that functional diversity (within the range covered in this
 study) does not affect new product innovativeness.
 Considering that the formation of highly diverse product
 development teams has its own costs (e.g., many employees
 may be diverted from their current positions to work on the
 project, team members can face adjustment problems when
 they rejoin their functional areas after project completion;
 Ford and Randolph 1992), senior managers may want to
 include in teams only functional areas that are essential to the
 project. Representatives from areas that have been skipped
 can be appointed as part-time consultants to the team so that
 their input and feedback are still available to the project.

 Third, although we have focused on the effect of superor-

 dinate identity, creating a strong sense of organizational
 identity can be another way to overcome the adverse effect
 of functional identities (Fisher, Maltz, and Jaworski 1997).
 However, it might be speculated that because superordinate
 identity is based on an immediate and well-defined project
 team with which a member can identify easily, it is expected
 to be more salient and perhaps more effective than organi-
 zational identity, which is based on a diffused entity such as
 a large organization. In further research, it would be useful
 to compare the effects of these two factors on new product
 outcomes.

 Furthermore, regarding research implications, our study

 has empirically shown for the first time that, beyond a mod-
 erate level, social cohesion has a negative effect on new
 product innovativeness. Further research can explore this
 relationship in teams with a wide range of social cohesion

 Finally, this research reinforces the importance of a cul-
 ture that encourages risk taking among teams during the new
 product development process. If firms indeed want unique
 products, they need to be careful that any other steps they
 take do not subtly discourage such risk taking. For example,
 in their search for improved product quality, firms are
 increasingly subscribing to the notion of continuous
 improvement of existing products and processes. Such
 improvements have at their foundation the removal of vari-
 ation in and high standardization of these processes (Clark
 and Fujimoto 1991). However, innovativeness requires a cli-
 mate in which variation is accepted.

 Appendix

 SAMPLE SCALE ITEMS

 A. Innovativeness

 Novelty Predictable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Novel

 Commonplace 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Original

 Appropriateness Useful* 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Useless

 Appropriate* 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Inappropriate

 B. Superordinate Identity'

 1. Members felt strong ties to the team.
 2. Members behaved like departmental representatives who were driven by their respective departmental agendas.*

 1. Members were very friendly with each other.* 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Members were not very friendly with each other.
 2. Members were committed to maintaining close 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 There was no such commitment to maintaining close

 interpersonal relationships.* interpersonal relationships.

 C. Social Cohesion

 I. The team was encouraged to, take the risk of pursuing very new product ideas.
 2. It was expected that the team would be venturesome while developing this product.

 D. Encouragement to Take Riska

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 84 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001

 Appendix
 CONTINUED

 E. Monitoring of the Project by Senior Managementa

 1. Senior management was very actively involved in the project.
 2. Senior management very closely monitored the progress of the project.

 Extent to which input and feedback from end users was relied on during the

 1. Development of product idea/concept.*
 2. Development of design.*

 F Customers' Influenceb

 1. In this organization, employees from different departments feel comfortable contacting each other when the need arises.

 G. General Ease of Communication Among Departmentsa

 1. Encouraged team members to actively participate in project planning.

 H. Project Manager's Operating Style"

 *Reverse coded.
 a = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree.
 b = a great extent, 7= not at all.

 REFERENCES

 Aiken, Leona S. and Stephen G. West (1991), Multiple Regression:
 Testing and Interpreting Interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
 Publications.

 Amabile, Teresa M. (1983), The Social Psychology of Creativity.

 New York: Springer-Verlag.

 (1988), "A Model of Creativity and Innovation in

 Organizations," in Research in Organization Behavior, Vol. 10,
 Barry M. Staw and L.L. Cummings, eds. Greenwich, CT: JAI
 Press, 123-67.

 Ancona, Deborah G. and David F Caldwell (1992), "Demography
 and Design: Predictors of New Product Team Performance,"
 Organization Science, 3 (3), 321-41.

 Andrews, Jonlee and Daniel C. Smith (1996), "In Search of

 Marketing Imagination: Factors Affecting the Creativity of
 Marketing Programs for Mature Products," Journal of
 Marketing Research, 33 (May), 174-87.

 Armstrong, J. Scott and Terry S. Overton (1977), "Estimating

 Nonresponse Bias in Mail Surveys," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 14 (August), 396-402.

 Ashforth, Blake E. and Fred Mael (1989), "Social Identity Theory
 and the Organization," Academy of Management Review, 14 (1),
 20-39.

 Relentlessly Shifting Organizations," Administrative Science
 Quarterly, 42, 1-34.

 Cini, Marie A., Richard L. Moreland, and John M. Levine (1993),
 "Group Staffing Levels and Response to Prospective and New
 Group Members," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
 65 (4), 723-34.

 Clark, Kim B. and Takahiro Fujimoto (1991 ), Product Development

 Performance. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

 Cooper, Robert G. (1993), Winning at New Products. New York:

 Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.

 (1996), "New Products: What Separates the Winners from
 Losers," in The PDMA Handbook of New Product Development,
 Milton D. Rosenau, ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 3-18.

 Crawford, C. Merle (1977), "Marketing Research and the New
 Product Failure Rate," Journal of Marketing, 41 (April), 51-61.
 Cyert, Richard M. and James G. March (1963), A Behavioral

 Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

 Deshpand6, Rohit, John U. Farley, and Frederick E. Webster Jr.

 (1993), "Corporate Culture, Customer Orientation, and
 Innovativeness in Japanese Firms: A Quadrad Analysis," Journal
 of Marketing, 57 (January), 23-37.

 and Gerald Zaltman (1982), "Factors Affecting the Use of
 Market Information: A Path Analysis," Journal of Marketing
 Research, 21 (February), 14-31.

 Baron, Reuben M. and David A. Kenny (1986), "The
 Moderator-Mediator Variable Distinction in Social
 Psychological Research: Conceptual, Strategic, and Statistical
 Considerations," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
 51 (December), 1173-82.

 Bennett, R.C. and R.G. Cooper (1981), "The Misuse of Marketing:

 Dougherty, Deborah (1992), "Interpretive Barriers to Successful
 Product Innovation in Large Organizations," Organization
 Science, 3 (2), 179-202.

 Eisenhardt, Kathleen M. and Behnam N. Tabrizi (1995),

 An American Tragedy," Business Horizons, 24 (6), 51-61.

 Besemer, Susan and Karen O'Quin (1986), "Analyzing Creative
 Products: Refinement and Test of a Judging Instrument,"
 Journal of Creative Behavior, 20 (2), 115-26.

 Brewer, Marilynn B. and Norman Miller (1984), "Beyond the

 Contact Hypothesis: Theoretical Perspectives on
 Desegregation," in Groups in Contact: The Psychology of
 Desegregation, Norman Miller and Marilynn B. Brewer, eds.
 Orlando, FL: Academic Press, 281-302.

 Brown, Shona L. and Kathleen M. Eisenhardt (1995), "Product

 Development: Past Research, Present Findings, and Future
 Directions," Academy of Management Review, 20 (2), 343-78.

 and (1997), "The Art of Continuous Change:

 "Accelerating Adaptive Processes: Product Innovation in the
 Global Industry," Administrative Science Quarterly, 40 (March),
 84-110.

 Fisher, Robert J., Elliot Maltz, and Bernard J. Jaworski (1997),

 "Enhancing Communication Between Marketing and
 Engineering: The Moderating Role of Relative Functional
 Identification," Journal of Marketing, 61 (July), 54-70.

 Ford, Robert C. and W. Alan Randolph (1992) "Cross-Functional
 Structures: A Review and Integration of Matrix Organization and
 Project Management," Journal of Management, 18 (2), 267-94.
 Friedkin, Noah E. and Michael J. Simpson (1985), "Effects of
 Competition on Members' Identification with Their Subunits,"
 Administrative Science Quarterly, 30 (September), 377-94.

 Gupta, Ashok K., S.P. Raj, and David Wilemon (1986), "A Model

 Linking Complexity Theory and Time-Paced Evolution in

 for Studying R&D-Marketing Interface in the Product

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Cross-Functional Product Development Teams 85

 Development Process," Journal of Marketing, 50 (April), 7-17.
 Hendersen, John C. and Soonchul Lee (1992), "Managing 1/S
 Design Teams: A Control Theories Perspective," Management
 Science, 38 (6), 757-78.

 Diversity in Organizational Groups," Academy of Management
 Review, 21 (2), 402-23.

 Myers, Raymond H. (1986), Classical and Modern Regression

 with Applications. Boston: Duxbury Press.

 Hinkle, Steve, Laurie A. Taylor, D. Lee Fox-Cardamone, and

 Olson, Eric M., Orville C. Walker Jr., and Robert W. Ruekert

 Kimberly F. Crook (1989), "Intragroup Identification, and
 Intergroup Differentiation: A Multicomponent Approach,"
 British Journal of Social Psychology, 28 (December), 305-17.

 (1995), "Organizing for Effective New Product Development:
 The Moderating Role of Product Innovativeness," Journal of
 Marketing, 59 (January), 48-62.

 Hogarth, Robin (1980), Judgement and Choice. Chichester,

 Osborn, Alex F (1963), Applied Imagination. New York: Charles

 England: John Wiley & Sons.

 Scribner's Sons.

 Cohesiveness. New York: New York University Press.

 Hogg, Michael A. (1992), The Social Psychology of Group

 Pierce, Jon L., Stephen Rubenfeld, and Susan Morgan (1991),
 "Employee Ownership: A Conceptual Model of Process and
 Jaccard, James, Choi K. Wan, and Robert Turrisi (1990), "The
 Effects," Academy of Management Review, 16 (1), 121-44.
 Detection and Interpretation of Interaction Effects Between
 Continuous Variables in Multiple Regression," Multivariate
 Behavioral Research, 25 (October), 467-78.

 Interaction with Other Business Units: A Conceptual
 Framework and Empirical Evidence," Journal of Marketing, 51
 Jackson, Phillip W. and Samuel Messick (1965), "The Person, the
 (January), 1-19.

 Ruekert, Robert W. and Orville C. Walker Jr. (1987), "Marketing's

 Product, and the Response: Conceptual Problems in the
 Assessment of Creativity," Journal of Personality, 33
 (September), 309-29.

 Sethi, Rajesh (2000), "Superordinate Identity in Cross-Functional
 Product Development Teams: Its Antecedents and Effect on New
 Product Performance," Journal of Academy of Marketing
 Science, 28 (3), 330-41.

 Janis, Irving L. (1982), Groupthink. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
 Jaworski, Bernard J. and Ajay K. Kohli (1993), "Market

 Sherif, Muzafer and Carolyn W. Sherif (1969), Social Psychology.

 Orientation: Antecedents and Consequences," Journal of
 Marketing, 57 (July), 53-70.

 Kanter, Rosabeth Moss (1983), Change Masters. New York: Simon

 and Schuster.

 New York: Harper & Row.

 Slater, Stanley F. and John C. Narver (1995), "Market Orientation
 and Learning Organization," Journal of Marketing, 59 (July),
 63-74.

 (1988), "When a Thousand Flowers Bloom: Structural,
 Collective, and Social Conditions for Innovation in
 Organizations," in Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol.
 10, Barry M. Staw and L.L. Cummings, eds. Greenwich, CT:
 JAI Press, 169-211.

 Katzenbach, Jon R. and Douglas K. Smith (1993), Wisdom of

 Teams. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

 King, Nigel and Neil Anderson (1990), "Innovation in Working
 Groups," in Innovation and Creativity at Work, Michael A. West
 and James L. Farr, eds. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 81-100.
 Mackie, Diane M. and George R. Goethals (1987), "Individual and
 Group Goals," in Review of Personality and Social Psychology,
 C. Hendrick, ed. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 144-66.

 Maltz, Elliot and Ajay K. Kohli (1996), "Market Intelligence
 Dissemination Across Functional Boundaries," Journal of
 Marketing Research, 33 (February), 47-61.

 Mason, Richard 0. and Ian L. Mitroff (1981), Challenging

 Strategic Planning Assumptions. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

 Milliken, Frances J. and Luis L. Martins (1996), "Searching for

 Tajfel, Henri (1982), "Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations,"

 Annual Review of Psychology, 33, 1-39.

 Takeuchi, Hirotaka and Ikujiro Nonaka (1986), "The New New
 Product Development Game," Harvard Business Review, 64
 (January/February), 137-46.

 Taylor, Alex, III (1994), "lacocca's Minivan," Fortune, (May 30),

 56-66.

 Van de Ven, Andrew (1986), "Central Problems in the

 Management of Innovation," Management Science, 32 (5),
 590-607.

 von Hipple, Eric (1988), The Sources of Innovation. New York:

 Oxford University Press.

 Zaccaro, Stephen J. and Catherine M. McCoy (1988), "The Effects

 of Task and Interpersonal Cohesiveness on Performance of a
 Disjunctive Group Task," Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
 18 (10), 837-51.

 Zaltman, Gerald, Robert Duncan, and Jonny Holbek (1973),
 Innovations and Organizations. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
 Zangwill, Willard (1993), Lightning Strategies for Innovation.

 Common Threads: Understanding the Multiple Effects of

 New York: Lexington Books.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 21:42:27 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

