Lingnan University
Digital Commons @ Lingnan University

Staff Publications

1-2004

Lingnan Staff Publication

Eastern versus Western control beliefs at work : an
investigation of secondary control,
socioinstrumental control, and work locus of
control in China and the US
Paul E. SPECTOR

Juan I. SANCHEZ

Oi Ling SIU
Lingnan University, Hong Kong

Jesus SALGADO

Jianhong MA

Follow this and additional works at: http://commons.ln.edu.hk/sw_master

Part of the Work, Economy and Organizations Commons

Recommended Citation
Spector, P. E., Sanchez, J. I., Siu, O. L., Salgado, J., & Ma, J. (2004). Eastern versus Western control beliefs at work: An investigation of
secondary control, socioinstrumental control, and work locus of control in China and the US. Applied Psychology, 53(1), 38-60. doi:
10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x

This Journal article is brought to you for free and open access by the Lingnan Staff Publication at Digital Commons @ Lingnan University. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Staff Publications by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Lingnan University.


Eastern  versus  Western  Control  Beliefs  at  Work:  An  Investigation  of 
Secondary Control, Socioinstrumental Control, and Work Locus of Control 
in China and the US 
 

Paul E. Spector 

University of South Florida, USA 

Juan I. Sanchez 

Florida International University, USA 

Oi Ling Siu 

Lingnan University, Hong Kong 

Jesus Salgado 

University of Santiago, Spain 

Jianhong Ma 
Zhejiang University, People’s Republic of China 

 

Abstract 

La  theorie  et  la  recherche  concernant les  croyances  (LOC)  et  les  perceptions  du  controle  suggerent que  les 

Asiatiques tendent a obtenir des scores plus bas et a etre plus passifs que les Americains, mais ces travaux 

ont  ete  menes  a  l’aide  de  concepts  et  d’echelles  developpes  principalement  aux  USA  qui  certifient  une 

primaute  du  controle  interne  (ex:  en  changeant  l’environnement  pour  l’adapter  a  soi).  Une  equipe  de 

recherche  internationale  a  etendu  la  notion  de  croyance  dans  le  controle  en  developpant  des  echelles  qui 

permettent  de  reconsiderer  la  notion  en  faisant  etat  de  croyances  secondaires  dans  le  controle  (ex:  en 

adaptant  le  soi  a  l’environnement)  et  de  faire  etat  d’un  concept  nouveau  de  croyances  socio-

instrumentales (ex: le controle par les relations interpersonelles) qui permettent de rendre compte de maniere 

plus pertinente des croyances en un controle dans les cultures collectivistes. Nous nous attendions a ce que, 

par l’utilisation d’echelles culturellement appropriees, les Americains n’obtiennent pas une croyance en 

un controle plus importante que les Asiatiques. Les hypotheses ont ete partiellement confirmees en ce que les 

Americains se sont montres comme obtenant un controle plus bas que les Chinois (de Hong Kong et de RP 

de Chine) sur ces echelles. Il est suggere que voir les Asiatiques comme evitant passivement le controle au 

travail peut etre incorrect et du aux insuffisances de controle socio-instrumental. 

 

Research and theory concerning beliefs (locus of control) and perceptions of control suggest that Asians tend 

to be lower and more passive than Americans, but this work has been conducted mainly with US-developed 

constructs and scales that assess primary control (i.e. changing the environment to adapt to the self ). An 

international research team expanded the notion of control beliefs by developing scales to assess secondary 

control beliefs (i.e. adapting the self to the environment) and the new construct of socioinstrumental control 

beliefs (i.e. control via interpersonal relationships), both of which were thought to better fit the control beliefs 

of collectivist cultures than Westerndeveloped control scales. We expected that, when culturally appropriate 

 

1 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
scales  were  employed,  Americans  would  not  show  higher  control  beliefs  than  Asians.  Hypotheses  were 

partially confirmed that Americans would be lower than Chinese (Hong Kong and PR China) on these new 

scales. It is suggested that views of Asians as passive avoiders of control at work may be incorrect and due to 

the overlooking of socioinstrumental control. 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 

 

It  has  been  assumed  by  many  control  theorists  that  humans  have  a  universal  motive  to  exert 

control  or  mastery  over  their  environments  (Heckhausen  &  Schulz,  1995;  Schulz  &  Heckhausen, 

1996).  Indeed,  much  behavior  is  directed  toward  acquiring  or  maintaining  control  across  all 

domains of life, including work. Control variables, in one form or another, play a prominent role 

in  many  theories  of  organisational  behavior  (Terry  &  Jimmieson,  1999),  such  as  Hackman  and 

Oldham’s  (1976)  job  characteristics  theory  and  Karasek’s  (1979)  job  demands/control  model. 

Furthermore, having a sense of control is said to be a critical element in successful psychological 

adjustment to not only work but also other domains of life (Kobasa, Maddi, & Kahn, 1982; Skinner, 

1996),  and  this  is  thought  to  be  as  true  elsewhere  in  the  world  as  in  Western  society.  However, 

almost  all  workplace  control  research  has  been  either  conducted  in  the  US  and  other  Western 

nations, or it is based on Western theories. This potentially ethnocentric approach might have led 

to  a  misinterpretation  of  how  control  is  viewed  by  people  in  different  cultural  contexts,  because 

there  can  be  cultural  biases  built  into  the  definition  of  constructs  and  their  operationalisations 

(Boyacigiller & Adler, 1991). 

 

We  attempted  to  overcome  such  limitations  by  assembling  an  international  group  of  researchers 

who  designed  and  carried  out  this  study  of  beliefs  concerning  workplace  control.  This  study 

expands  the  traditional  Westernbased  locus  of  control  notion  by  introducing  two  new  control 

constructs:  Beliefs  about  control  exerted  through  others  (socioinstrumental  control),  and  beliefs 

about  control  of  one’s  reactions  to  the  environment,  the  latter  based  on  Rothbaum,  Weisz,  and 

Snyder’s (1982) concept of secondary control. These different asepcts of control are described in 

detail in the next section. 

 

THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTROL BELIEFS AND PERCEPTIONS 

 

It  can  be  meaningful  to  distinguish  objective  work  control  from  people’s  beliefs  and  perceptions 

about control, but it is the latter that is important for adjustment and well-being (Skinner, 1996). It 

is also possible to distinguish people’s perceptions about the control they have in the workplace, 

such  as  their  level  of  autonomy,  from  more  general  beliefs  about  control  as  reflected  in  locus  of 

control. Whereas autonomy concerns the extent to which people perceive themselves to be able to 

 

2 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
determine how, when, and where they do their work, locus of control is considered a personality 

variable that reflects the person’s beliefs about whether they or external forces are in control in a 

more  general  sense.  Individuals  who  believe  they  are  in  control  are  called  internals,  and  people 

who believe that external forces (luck, fate, or powerful others) are in control are called externals. 

The major difference between perceptions and control beliefs concerns the specificity and stability 

of the target of control.  A control perception concerns whether or not the person  can influence a 

particular event at a specified time, whereas control beliefs or locus of control concern whether or 

not  a  person  believes  he  or  she  generally  can  control  certain  types  of  events.  For  example,  the 

Work Locus of Control Scale (Spector, 1988) used in this study asks if the person believes people in 

general can control their own rewards (e.g. promotions) at work. 

 

Both control beliefs and perceptions have been prominent in research on job stress and well-being 

in  the  workplace.  According  to  Spector’s  (1998)  control  model  of  stress,  control  helps  filter 

perceptions  of  situations,  affecting  their  appraisal  (Lazarus  &  Folkman,  1984) as  being  benign  or 

threatening.  A  person  who  perceives  low  control  is  more  inclined  to  appraise  situations  as  job 

stressors,  which  is  likely  to  lead  to  job  strains.  It  has  been  well  established  that  various  control 

variables relate to job stressors and strains (e.g. Evans & Carrere, 1991; Ganster & Fusilier, 1989). 

Spector’s  (1986)  meta-analysis  showed  that  control  perceptions  at  work  related  to  both  job 

stressors  (role  ambiguity  and  role  conflict),  and  strains,  including  job  (dis)satisfaction,  physical 

symptoms, emotional distress, and intent to quit the job. Studies of locus of control at work have 

also shown a link with job stressors and strains. For example, Spector and O’Connell (1994) found 

in a longitudinal study that work locus of control in a sample of college students predicted their 

later  reports  of  job  stressors  (role  conflict,  role  ambiguity,  and  interpersonal  conflict)  and  strains 

(job satisfaction and work anxiety), all of which were assessed in the current study. 

 

Despite its well-established relation with stressors and strains, the Western conception of locus of 

control  has  remained  monolithic.  That  is,  control  beliefs  are  classified  into  either  external  or 

internal  based  on  whether  the  person  believes  in  direct  personal  control  or  sees  control  to  lie 

elsewhere  such  as  in  powerful  others.  This  notion  fails  to  consider  that  direct  control  is  not  the 

only  means  of  achieving  control,  and  that  cultural  differences  may  affect  how  people  experience 

and  view  control.  For  example,  in  collectivistic  cultures  people  tend  to  be  more  concerned  with 

group  harmony  and  can  be  hesitant  to  take  direct  and  independent  action  to  benefit  themselves 

(Kim,  Triandis,  Kagitçibasi,  Choi,  &  Yoon,  1994).  In  such  cultures,  people  focus  attention  on  the 

development  of  interpersonal  relationships,  and  may  attempt  to  influence  powerful  others  or 

groups  of  others  in  order  to  exert  control.  Such  attempts  may  appear to  be  passive  to  a  Western 

observer  who  may  overlook  the  function  of  the  subtle  forms  of  social  influence  that  characterize 

collectivistic cultures. 

 

 

3 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
PRIMARY VERSUS SECONDARY CONTROL 

 

Rothbaum  et  al.  (1982)  proposed  a  theory  that  suggests  control  can  be  classified  into  two 

categories—primary  and  secondary.  Primary  control  consists  of  actions  taken  by  a  person  to 

change  the  world,  or  in  other  words  is  the  attempt  to  adapt  the  world  to  the  person.  Secondary 

control, on the other hand, involves changing the self to fit the external environment. Rothbaum et 

al.  suggest  that  people  are  highly  motivated  to  adapt  to  the  world  and  that  these  two  forms  of 

control function in a hierarchy to accomplish that objective. Primary control is preferred and will 

generally  take  precedence.  However,  if  the  individual  is  unable  to  exert  primary  control, 

secondary will be used as a back-up coping response. Thus primary control involves direct action 

to change the world, whereas secondary control represents cognitively mediated action designed 

to change the person’s appraisals and emotional reactions. 

 

Secondary  control  consists  of  four  different  forms  (Rothbaum  et  al.,  1982).  Predictive  control 

involves  actions  taken  to  enhance  the  ability  to  predict  what  will  happen  in  the  future.  Often  a 

person  will  purposely  fail  in  a task  so  they  can  maintain  the ability  to  predict  the  outcome.  This 

failure  also  enables  the  person  to  maintain  self-esteem, since  if  one  doesn’t  really  try,  one  didn’t 

really fail. Illusory control involves making attributions to chance, and can result in both seeking 

out  chance  situations  (e.g.  playing  the  lottery)  and  engaging  in  superstitious  behavior.  Vicarious 

control  is  sought  by  associating  with  powerful  others  who  have  power,  such  as  managers  in  the 

organisation.  Interpretive  control  consists  of  attempts  to  find  meaning  in  events.  This  control  is 

mainly  cognitive  action  that  may  help  a  person  cope  with  the  world,  by  selectively  attending  to 

information that maintains beliefs about events. 

 

Rothbaum  et  al.  (1982)  argue  that  control  theorists  have  tended  to  misinterpret  control  actions, 

attributing  passive  and  submissive  behaviors  as  reflecting  a  lack  of  motivation  and  poor 

adjustment  to  the  world.  They  point  out  that  secondary  control  can  involve  highly  motivated 

action and a high level of effort, and is just as important as primary control in adaptation because 

it helps us cope with what is uncontrollable. Heckhausen and Schulz (1995) echo this idea in their 

developmental  theory,  arguing  that  both  forms  of  control  are  important,  and  that  secondary 

control functions to maintain and support primary control. 

 

CONTROL IN THE INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT 

 

It has been noted that cross-national differences exist in beliefs about control. Quite a few studies 

have  compared  countries  on  general  locus  of  control.  Asians  tend  to  believe  they  have  less 

personal  control  than  Americans  and  others  typically  classified  as  Western  (Hamid,  1994;  Hui, 

1982;  Smith,  Trompenaars,  &  Dugan,  1995).  Hui  (1982)  points  out  that  there  has  been  some 

 

4 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
inconsistency  in  results  due  to  the  use  of  scales  across  and  within  studies  that  assessed  different 

domains of life. For example, he notes that Asians may be particularly external when it comes to 

control over personal things in life, but may be less so when it comes to issues of societal control. 

 

Spector, Cooper, Sanchez, O’Driscoll, Sparks, et al. (2002) studied work locus of control across 24 

nations. They found that Asian samples (Japan, Hong Kong, PR China, and Taiwan) scored lower 

on  the  Work  Locus  of  Control  Scale  (Spector,  1988)  than  samples  from  a  wide  variety  of  regions 

around the world, including North America and Europe. Furthermore, locus of control means per 

country  were  associated  with  the  level  of  individualism–collectivism,  with  collectivism  being 

associated with externality (Spector, Cooper, Sanchez, O’Driscoll, et al., 2000). 

 

Other  streams  of  research  have  noted  cross-cultural  differences  in  control  beliefs.  Weisz, 

Rothbaum,  and  Blackburn  (1984;  see  also  Gould,  1999)  used  their  concepts  of  primary  and 

secondary  control  to  draw  distinctions  between  Eastern  and  Western  cultures  in  how  they  view 

and practice control. Contrasting Americans and Japanese, they suggested that the former tend to 

focus more on primary control whereas the latter emphasise secondary control. This can be seen in 

child  rearing  practice  as  the  Japanese  socialize  their  children  to  favor  secondary  control  over 

primary  control.  Evidence  for  this  distinction  in  the  workplace  can  be  found  in  a  study  by 

Lundberg  and  Peterson  (1994)  that  showed  that  Japanese  consider autonomy,  a  form  of  primary 

control, to be less important than Americans. 

 

SOCIOINSTRUMENTAL CONTROL 

 

It  seems  clearly  established  that  control  beliefs  and  behaviors  differ  between  East  and  West. 

However, one must be careful in interpreting the meaning of such differences, and in particular in 

assuming  that  seemingly  passive  and  submissive  behaviors  are  manifestations  of  secondary 

control,  that  is,  attempts  to  adapt  the  self  to  the  environment  rather  than  influencing  that 

environment. As Rothbaum et al. (1982) point out, it is possible to have primary manifestations of 

the four types of secondary control. For example, primary vicarious control would involve active 

attempts  to  influence  powerful  others.  Furthermore,  Heckhausen  and  Schulz  (1999)  question  the 

evidence  that  Asians  really  emphasise  secondary  control.  They  give  examples  of  how  control 

scales have tended to confound in their items primary/secondary with individualism/collectivism. 

 

Collectivist societies, such as in Asia, emphasise group harmony over individual achievement. To 

be  successful  in  an  organisational  setting,  one  must  learn  to  fit  in  with  others,  and  this  involves 

adopting  what  would  seem  to  a  Westerner,  a  passive  posture  of  withdrawal.  To  be  effective  in 

such  an  environment,  one  must  cultivate  relationships  with  colleagues  at  all  levels,  and  must 

express a high level of social sensitivity. Avoidance of conflict and focus on group achievement (as 

 

5 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
opposed  to  individual  achievement)  involves  a  different  set  of  behaviors  from  those  typical  in 

Western  individualist  society.  A  great  deal  of  what  a  Western  observer  may  deem  secondary 

control  might  instead  be  an  Asian  (or collectivist)  approach  to  primary  control.  We  use  the  term 

socioinstrumental  control  to  describe  the  idea  that  this  approach  involves  active  attempts  to 

influence the environment through social means. Where Asians differ from Americans and other 

Westerners  in  our  view  is  not  that  they  do  not  believe  they  can  be  effective  at  controlling  their 

environment,  but  rather  in  that  they  believe  the  social  world  mediates  such  effectiveness.  In 

essence, where a Westerner might believe he or she can just change the world, the Asian believes 

he or she must convince the group to change the world. 

 

THE CURRENT STUDY 

 

One of the criticisms of most cross-national research is that it involves the application of Western 

findings  and  theories  to  non-Western  countries  (Boyacigiller  &  Adler,  1991).  Our  plan  was  to 

compare  control  beliefs  in  China  and  the  US,  but  to  use  not  only  American  designed  scales,  but 

also scales designed by a multi-national research team including members from Hong Kong and 

PR China (PRC). We began with the Rothbaum et al. (1982) definitions of primary and secondary 

control.  The  existing  Work  Locus  of  Control Scale  (Spector,  1988)  was  used  to  assess  the  former, 

and  we  devised  a  new  scale  to  assess  the  latter.  In  addition  we  defined  our  new  concept  of 

socioinstrumental control as the active, primary control common to collectivist countries, and we 

developed a new scale to assess it. All team members wrote items to avoid potential cultural blind 

spots.  An  initial  item  pool  was  administered  first  to  a  sample  of  employed  American  college 

students,  and  the  scales  were  refined.  This  was  done  because  our  initial  item  pools  were  quite 

large and needed to be reduced to a smaller internally consistent set of items. Next the scales were 

administered to samples in the PRC, Hong Kong, and the US, along with measures of job stressors 

and job strains, in order to test a series of hypotheses. 

 

The first three hypotheses concerned differences in control beliefs among our three samples. Based 

on the existing literature, we expected to find locus of control differences among the samples. As 

found in Spector, Cooper, et al. (2000), we expected the following: 

Hypothesis 1: The US sample will be the most internal on work locus of control, followed by Hong 

Kong and then the PRC. 

 

Rothbaum  et  al.  (1982)  argue  that  Asians  are  higher  in  secondary  control  than  Americans  since 

they  are  socialised  to  prefer  this  approach  to  direct  primary  control.  Therefore,  we  expected  the 

following: 

Hypothesis 2: The US sample will be lower in secondary control than either Hong Kong or the PRC. 

 

 

6 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
Socioinstrumental  control  is  presumed  to  be  more  prevalent  in  collectivist  countries  than  in 

individualist countries due to their greater emphasis on group harmony and a notion of personal 

achievement that rests on subordination of the self to the group’s interests. Therefore, we expect 

the following: 

Hypothesis  3:  The  US  sample  will  be  lower  than  either  the  Hong  Kong  or  the  PRC  samples  on 

socioinstrumental control. 

 

The next hypothesis is based on the prior research suggesting that locus of control will relate to job 

stressors and strains. Most of this research, however, has been conducted in the US. Therefore, we 

expect to find this in our US sample, but it is less certain that results will be similar in Hong 

Kong or the PRC. We predict the following: 

Hypothesis 4 : Work locus of control will be related to job stressors and strains such that internality 

will be associated with low stressors and strains. 

 

Rothbaum  et  al.  (1982)  suggest  that  secondary  control  might  serve  much  the  same  function  in 

adaptation  to  the  world  as  primary  control.  In  the  former  case  one  adapts  the  self  to  the  world, 

whereas  in  the  latter  it  is  the  world  adapted  to  the  self.  It  has  been  characterised  as  a  means  by 

which people can compensate for lack of primary control, and thereby expand coping capabilities 

(Heckhausen  &  Schulz,  1995).  Therefore,  one  might  expect  to  find  that  secondary  control  will 

account for additional variance beyond that explained by work LOC, leading to the following: 

Hypothesis 5:  Secondary  control  will  account  for  incremental  variance  in  job stressors  and  strains 

over and above that accounted for by work LOC. 

 

Socioinstrumental control is proposed as a form of primary control used more often in collectivist 

than individualist countries. It functions where more direct forms of control are unavailable, and 

therefore  is  an  additional  control  tool  a  person  can  use.  Therefore,  we  would  expect  it  to  also 

account for additional variance in job stressors and strains over and above work LOC, leading to 

the following: 

Hypothesis 6:  Socioinstrumental  control  will  account  for  incremental  variance in  job  stressors  and 

strains over and above that accounted for by work LOC. 

 

METHOD 

 

Participants 

Participants  for  the  study  were  530  employed  individuals,  146  from  PR  China  (PRC),  130  from 

Hong  Kong,  and  254  from  the  US.  Initially  590  people  completed  questionnaires,  but  60  were 

disqualified either because they were not working at the time of the survey, or because they did 

not  have  the  nationality  of  the  host  country.  The  latter  primarily  occurred  in  the  US.  In  order  to 

 

7 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
control extraneous differences in samples across countries, we decided to select employed college 

students  and  university  support  personnel  as  our  target  populations.  The  US  samples  included 

employed  individuals  who  were  taking  university  coursework  as  either  part-time  or  full-time 

students  (n=164),  and  nonfaculty  support  personnel  from  the  University  of  South  Florida  (n=90). 

We  included  the  latter  group  in  order  to  check  that  employed  students  would  show  responses 

similar  to  a  more  typical  employed  group.  The  employed  students  were  from  two  universities: 

Florida  International  University  and  the  University  of  South  Florida.  These  institutions  were 

chosen because they are urban, located in the two largest metropolitan areas in the State of Florida: 

Miami  and  Tampa  Bay,  respectively,  and  have  nontraditional  student  bodies  comprising  older 

students, the majority of whom are employed. The situation is similar in the participating Chinese 

universities.  The  mean  age  for  the  PRC  sample  was  30,  and  the  Hong  Kong  sample  was  33.  The 

Hong  Kong  sample  consisted  of  83  students  and  47  university  support  personnel  from  one 

university. The PRC sample consisted of employed students from two universities. 

 

In  order  to  determine  if  the  American  students  were  different  from  the  support  staff,  we 

conducted two sets of analyses. First, we compared means for the students vs. the support staff on 

all 11 variables in the study using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Four of the ANOVAs 

were significant, with the means being significantly higher for students on intent to quit and state 

anxiety, and means being significantly higher for support staff on autonomy and job satisfaction. 

We also computed correlations of our three control measures with the other eight variables in the 

study for students and support staff separately. In only one case (job satisfaction with secondary 

control)  out  of  27  correlations  was  there  a  significant  difference,  according  to  the  z  test  for 

independent correlations. We concluded that the sample characteristics had little effect on results, 

and  combined  all  American  participants  into  a  single  group.  With  the  Hong  Kong  participants, 

there were significant mean differences for interpersonal conflict, role conflict, and work anxiety. 

In  all  three  cases  students  were  higher.  We  didn’t  compare  correlations  because  of  the  small 

sample size for the employed group. 

 

Measures 

Job Stressors. Four common measures of job  stressors were included in the study. Role ambiguity 

and  role  conflict  were  assessed  with  the  Rizzo, House,  and  Lirtzman  (1970)  scale.  Responses  are 

made on 5-point scales ranging from 1 (very false) to 1 (very true). Six items assess role ambiguity 

and  eight  items  assess  role  conflict.  Interpersonal  conflict  was  measured  with  the  Interpersonal 

Conflict at Work Scale (Spector & Jex, 1998). This is a 4-item scale with responses ranging from 1 

(rarely) to 5 (very often) that ask about frequency of conflicts with others at work. Autonomy (lack 

of  which  is  a  stressor)  was  measured  with  the  3-item  subscale  from  the  Hackman  and  Oldham 

(1975)  Job  Diagnostic  Survey.  It  was  modified  slightly  as  suggested  by  Idaszak  and  Drasgow 

(1987). Responses ranged from 1 (very inaccurate) to 7 (very accurate). 

 

8 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
 

Strains. Four  strains  were  assessed:  job  (dis)satisfaction,  work  anxiety, intent  to  quit  the  job,  and 

life  (dis)satisfaction.  Job  satisfaction  was  measured  with  the  Cammann,  Fichman,  Jenkins,  and 

Klesh  (1979) 3-item  scale. Because  of  internal  consistency  problems  with  the  Hong  Kong  sample, 

the  single  reverse  scored  item  was  eliminated  leaving  a  2-item  scale.  Responses  ranged  from  1 

(disagree  very  much)  to  6  (agree  very  much).  Work  anxiety  was  assessed  with  a  modification  of 

Spielberger’s (1979) state anxiety scale from the State-Trait Personality Inventory. The scale has 10 

items  with  responses  ranging  from  1  (not  at  all)  to  4  (very  much  so).  Instructions  were  modified 

slightly to ask the person to indicate how he or she had been feeling at work for the past month. It 

has been used this way in several studies, including Spector, Dwyer, and Jex (1988). Intent to quit 

was assessed with a single item measure (Spector et al., 1988) that asked how often the person has 

been  seriously  considering  quitting  from  1  (never)  to  6  (extremely  often).  Life  satisfaction  was 

measured with the 5-item Diener, Emmons, Larsen, and Griffin (1985) Satisfaction With Life Scale. 

Response choices range from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). 

 

Work Locus of Control. The Spector (1988) Work Locus of Control Scale (WLCS) was used to assess 

beliefs  about  personal  control  in  the  workplace.  This  16-item  measure  has  response  choices 

ranging from 1 (disagree very much) to 6 (agree very much). High scores represent externality. It was 

chosen  because  it  was  developed  in  the  US  to  assess  beliefs  about  what  would  be  classified  as 

primary control, that is, whether or not the respondent believes he or she can control rewards at 

work  through  his  or  her  own  actions.  Half  the  items  are  written  in  an  internal  direction  (beliefs 

that the individual has control) or the external (beliefs that luck or powerful others have control). 

 

Secondary and Socioinstrumental Control. 

Two  new  scales  were  developed  for  use  in  this  research.  The  conceptual  basis  for  the  secondary 

control  scale  came  from  Rothbaum  et  al.  (1982),  and  their  description  of  the  four  components  of 

secondary control. The idea for the socioinstrumental control scale came from the experience some 

of our group had in doing business in Latin America. In this region the development of personal 

relationships and the need for group harmony are greater than in the individualist US. Therefore, 

we  felt  that  this  construct  would  represent  an  alternative  means  of  primary  control  through  the 

cultivation  of  personal  relationships.  One  of  our  goals  was  to  avoid  potential  culture  bias  in  our 

new  scales  by  not  having  them  developed  exclusively  by  Americans.  To  avoid  this  problem,  the 

scale  items  were  written  by  our  international  team  of  researchers.  We  began  by  first  developing 

definitions  for  the  two  types  of  control.  Based  on  these  definitions  of  the  constructs,  each  of  us 

independently wrote items which were translated into English where necessary. An initial list of 

113 items was compiled. We each scanned the list and removed items that were either duplicates 

or  were  unclear,  reducing  the  number  to  87,  27  of  which  reflected  secondary  control  and  60  of 

which reflected  socioinstrumental control. This represented the initial item pool that was refined 

 

9 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
empirically in a pilot study. 

 

The goal of the pilot study was to reduce the number of items to a more manageable number. Our 

thinking was that we would choose a smaller, internally consistent subset using one country only, 

and then test the shorter version in the other two countries. 

 

This  first  version  of  the  scale  was  administered  to  126  employed  university  students  at  Florida 

International  University  and  the  University  of  South  Florida  (see  Participants  section  for  further 

details on this population, although not this sample). Response choices ranged from 1 (disagree very 

much) to 6 (agree very much). The WLCS was also included. Item analyses were conducted for each 

of our new scales, and were used to reduce the size of each scale. Eleven secondary control items 

yielded  an  internal  consistency  (coefficient  alpha)  of  .75  with  item-remainders  ranging  from  .28 

to .57, and this formed the final Secondary Control Scale (SCS). None of the remaining items was 

able to improve the internal consistency if added. The Socio Instrumental Control Scale (SICS) had 

24 items with a coefficient alpha of .87 and item-remainders ranging from .36 to .58. These scales 

were  independent,  with  an  intercorrelation  of  .12  (nonsignificant).  SCS  correlated  −.44  with  the 

WLCS, and SICS correlated .26, both of which were significant.  

 

Example items for the SCS are  “I take pride in the accomplishments of my  superiors at work” 

(vicarious control) and “In doing my work, I sometimes consider failure in my work as payment 

for  future  success”  (interpretative  control).  Example  items  for  the  SICS  are  “It  is  important  to 

cultivate relationships with superiors at work if you want to be effective” and“You can get your 

own way at work if you learn how to get along with other people.” 

 

The pilot study was successful in reducing the number of items to a smaller and more manageable 

number  that  demonstrated  reasonable  internal  consistency.  The  independence  of  the  two  new 

scales  suggests  they  assess  distinctly  different  constructs.  It  was  interesting  that  the  direction  of 

relation of each scale with the WLCS was opposite. With this American sample, externality in locus 

of  control  was  associated  with  a  high  score  on  socioinstrumental  control,  suggesting  that  people 

who  believe  control  is  achieved  through  cultivation  of  relationships  at  work  tend  to  have  an 

external  point  of  view.  However,  internality  and  not  externality  was  associated  with  secondary 

control.  This  runs  counter  to  the  ideas  expressed  in  Rothbaum  et  al.  (1982)  that  these  forms  of 

control would be compensatory, and therefore should be reciprocally related. Rather individuals 

who believe in primary control also tend to believe in secondary control. It should be kept in mind 

that Rothbaum et al. were concerned with control behavior and not beliefs, and this might explain 

why our results ran counter to their theorising. 

 

Procedure 

 

10 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
In the US samples, participants were recruited from undergraduate classes. A researcher came to 

class  and  asked  for volunteers  to  complete  a  questionnaire.  The  stated  criterion  for  participation 

was that the person had to be employed. It is difficult to give precise response rates, since it was 

not clear if nonrespondents did or did not meet the criterion, but in most cases almost everyone in 

the class participated, making response rates over 90 per cent. A mail survey was conducted of the 

university support personnel. Questionnaires were sent to 490 employees, for a response rate of 18 

per cent. In Hong Kong the procedure was quite similar with questionnaires being distributed and 

collected  in  class,  with  a  response  rate  of  91  per  cent  for  the  students  and  72  per  cent  for  the 

university support personnel. In the PRC the procedure for the students was the same as in Hong 

Kong. For the samples in Hong Kong and the PRC, the English version of the questionnaire was 

translated into Chinese by one author, and the translation was independently checked by another 

for accuracy. Modifications were made where necessary to maintain equivalence of meaning. 

 

RESULTS 

 

Internal consistency reliability (coefficient alpha) for all scales across the three samples can be seen 

in Table 1. For the US sample, all scales met the widely accepted minimum alpha of .70 (Nunnally, 

1978), ranging from .76 (SCS) to .91 (SICS). For Hong Kong alphas were satisfactory, except for role 

ambiguity that was .62. For the PRC, two alphas were low—job satisfaction at .65 and role conflict 

at .54. 

 

The first hypothesis of this study was that Americans would be more internal (higher in primary 

control beliefs) than Chinese. This was addressed by conducting a one-way ANOVA with the three 

samples as levels of the independent variable. As can be seen in Table 2, the ANOVA for the WLCS 

was highly significant, with a squared correlation of .38, and it was in the 

 

 

11 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
 
expected  direction  with  the  US  being  significantly  more  internal  than  Hong  Kong  that  was 

significantly more internal than the PRC. 

 

The  second  hypothesis  was  that  Chinese  would  be  higher  than  Americans  in  secondary  control. 

For  this  comparison,  the  ANOVA  was  significant,  but  the  effect  size  was  quite  small  with  a 

squared multiple correlation of only .01. Furthermore, results were not as expected. The PRC and 

the US scored higher than Hong Kong, but were not significantly different from one another. 

 

The  third  hypothesis  was  that  the  Chinese  would  be  higher  in  socioinstrumental  control  than 

Americans. The ANOVA for this variable was significant, with an effect size of .02. This partially 

confirmed expectations as the PRC had the highest mean on SICS, but Hong Kong and the US did 

not differ from one another. 

 

Table 2 also shows results of the sample comparisons of means for the other variables in the study. 

As  can  be  seen,  all  were  significant,  with  effect  sizes  varying  considerably  from  .03  for  intent  to 

quit  to  .28  for  interpersonal  conflict.  For  the  most  part,  the  US  tended to  be  lower  in  strains  and 

jobstressors than the PRC, with the exception of role ambiguity that was higher and autonomy that 

was not significantly different. The US also tended to have lower stressors and strains than Hong 

Kong,  except  for  life  satisfaction  and  intent  to  quit  that were  not  significantly  different.  In 5  of 8 

cases there were significant differences between Hong Kong and the PRC, and in each of those, the 

PRC was lower. 

 

Relations of WLCS with job stressors and strains was as expected (Hypothesis 4) for the US sample 

(shown  in  Table  3).  Internality  was  associated  with  low  stressors  and  strains  in  all  cases.  The 

pattern for secondary control was very similar, although correlations in all but one case tended to 

 

12 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
 

be  somewhat  smaller.  High  levels  of  secondary  control  were  associated  with  low  stressors  and 

strains. For socioinstrumental control, only autonomy was significant. 

 

Patterns for the other two samples were different. For Hong Kong, WLOC was significant for only 

job satisfaction, autonomy, and interpersonal conflict, with the latter having a sign opposite to the 

US sample. Secondary control was significant only for job satisfaction and autonomy, matching the 

sign  of  the  US.  Only  job  satisfaction  was  significant  for  socioinstrumental  control.  For  the  PRC 

sample,  only  two  correlations  were  significant—one  for  SCS  (job  satisfaction)  and  one  for  SICS 

(role conflict). 

 

Table 3 also contains correlations of the three control belief scales with job stressors and strains and 

with  one  another.  The  pattern of  relations  among  the  three  control  scales  for  the  US  sample  was 

very similar to that found in the pilot study. The biggest difference was that in this case SCS and 

SICS  correlated  significantly  at  .30  (note  the  pilot  correlation  was  .12).  Again  the  WLCS  was 

correlated positively with SICS (r = .23) and negatively with SCS (r = −.21). 

 

The patterns of correlations though were quite different in the other two samples, which differed 

from  one  another.  In  the  Hong  Kong  sample,  all  three  control  belief  scales  correlated  strongly, 

with both SCS and SICS correlating negatively with WLOC. Thus internals tended to also believe 

in  high  levels  of  the  other  two  forms  of  control.  In  the  PRC  SCS  and  SICS  showed  a  small 

correlation  (r  =  .27)  almost  identical  to  the  US.  However,  in  both  cases  secondary  and 

socioinstrumental control correlated positively with WLCS, which is the opposite to Hong Kong. 

 

13 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
 

The final set of analyses tested hypotheses 5 and 6 by exploring the incremental predictability of 

SCS  and  SICS  over  the  WLCS  for  each  job  stressor  and  strain.  A  series  of  hierarchical  multiple 

regressions  were  computed,  with  WLCS  and  either  SCS  or  SICS  entered  as  predictors,  and  each 

stressor and strain entered individually as criteria. Table 4 summarises the results for the SCS and 

Table 5 summarizes the results for SICS. The overall Fs, all of which were significant, are shown, as 

well  as  the  multiple  correlations  squared,  the  change  in  the  multiple  regression  squared  when 

either  SCS  or  SICS  was  entered  to  a  regression  with  WLCS  alone,  and  the  beta  weights 

(standardized  regression  coefficients)  for  WLCS  and  either  SCS  or  SICS.  Only  those  analyses 

where the overall multiple regression F was significant are shown. In no cases was the F significant 

for the PRC, so it isn’t shown in the table. 

 

For  Hong  Kong,  SCS  was  significant  (added  to  the  prediction  of  WLCS  alone)  at  p  <  .05  for 

interpersonal conflict, life satisfaction, and work anxiety. It was marginally significant at p < .10 for 

job  satisfaction  and  autonomy  for  which  WLCS  was  not  significant.  It  was  also  marginally 

significant  for  intent  to  quit.  For  the  US,  SCS  was  significant  for  job  satisfaction,  autonomy, 

interpersonal conflict, role ambiguity, and intent, and was marginally significant for work anxiety 

and life satisfaction. In the Hong Kong sample SICS was significant for interpersonal conflict, role 

conflict, and life 

 

14 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
 
satisfaction.  In  the  US  sample,  SICS  was  significant  for  job  satisfaction,  autonomy,  interpersonal 

conflict, role ambiguity, and intent to quit. 

 

DISCUSSION 

 

This  study  addressed  two  sets  of  hypotheses.  The  first  set  concerned  control  belief  differences 

among  Hong  Kong,  the  PRC,  and  the  US  samples,  and  the  second  set  concerned  relations  of 

control  beliefs  with  job  stressors  and  strains.  There  was  partial  support  for  the  first  set  of  three 

hypotheses.  As  expected,  the  US  sample  was  much  more  internal  than  the  Hong  Kong  or  PRC 

samples.  This  finding  was  not  surprising  since  a  recent  study  using  the  same  WLCS  instrument 

found  very  similar  results  (Spector  et  al.,  2002).  What  was  surprising,  however,  was  the  small 

differences in sample means for the other two control belief scales. Weisz et al. (1984) make a very 

strong  case  for  the  preference  for  secondary  control  in  Asian  society.  Although  they  mainly 

focused on Japan, they noted similarities to other Asian countries. We expected that control beliefs 

would show a similar magnitude of China–US difference to WLCS, but in the opposite direction. 

However, we found that the US sample was not significantly different from the PRC on SCS, and 

both  were  slightly  higher  than  Hong  Kong.  It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  beliefs,  just  like 

attitudes, might not fully correspond with behavior, and that Americans might have similar beliefs 

about  the  existence  of  secondary  control  at  work,  but  still  be  less  likely  to  attempt  secondary 

control than Asians. On the other hand, most participants in this study were in relatively low level 

jobs where personal autonomy and control tend to be low. Perhaps Americans in such situations 

 

15 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
make use of secondary control to cope, just as Asians do. 

 

Results with SICS showed as expected that the PRC was higher than the US, but unexpected was 

the lack of difference between the US and Hong Kong. Perhaps Hong Kong’s Westernization of 

the  workplace,  a  vestige  of  the  long-held  British  occupation,  accounts  for  the  greater  similarity 

with  the  US  than  we  found with  the PRC. Although  the  effect  was  small,  our  participants  in  the 

PRC  believe  more  strongly  in  socioinstrumental  control  in  the  workplace.  What  was  surprising 

was  that  Americans  were  not  much  lower,  thereby  hinting  at  the  belief  that  the  cultivation  of 

personal  relationships  in  the  workplace  is  important  across  cultures.  In  the  context  of  the 

workplace,  it  seems  likely  that  there  would  be  more  pressure  and  support  for  socioinstrumental 

behavior in the PRC than in the US, and therefore we expected to see more of it in the PRC than 

we found. 

 

There is one caution in the interpretation of means across countries, and that is the possibility of 

differential  response  bias.  It  has  been  suggested  that  Asians  have  a  tendency  to  avoid  strong 

agreement  with  positively  worded  items  due  to  a  cultural  tendency  toward  modesty  (Triandis, 

1994).  Thus  differences  might  be  due  to  differential  response  tendencies  rather  than  real 

underlying  differences  on  the  constructs  of  interest.  For  hypothesis  4,  we  found  some  degree  of 

support  for  the  US  sample,  but  not  for  the  two  Chinese  samples.  As  expected  based  on  prior 

research (e.g. Spector & O’Connell, 1994), the WLCS related significantly to all job stressors and 

strains in the US. We found similar correlations (although in most cases a bit lower) for secondary 

control. Socioinstrumental control showed little relation with job stressors and strains, which was 

counter  to  our  hypothesis  that  it  would  function  as  a  form  of  primary  control.  However,  it  is 

conceivable  that  this  approach  to  control  at  work  does  not  serve  the  same  function  as  locus  of 

control where job stressors and strains are concerned. Locus of control and secondary control are 

concerned with people’s coping at work. Socioinstrumental control focuses on influence tactics at 

work, and might be more relevant to achievement. In the study of Type A, it has been found that 

the dimension of achievement striving relates to performance and is unrelated to strain, whereas 

impatience/irritability  relates  to  strain  but  not  performance  (Spence,  Helmreich,  &  Pred,  1987). 

Perhaps  socioinstrumental  control  likewise  is  more  relevant  to  achievement  and  performance, 

where  other forms  of  control  are  relevant  to  adjustment  and  coping.  Additional  research  will  be 

needed to explore this possibility. 

 

The  Hong  Kong  sample  had  only  a  few  significant  relations  of  control  beliefs  with  job  stressors 

and  strains,  and  for  the  PRC  there  were  only  two  significant  correlations.  Results  with  job 

satisfaction and autonomy were similar to the US, but for interpersonal conflict, the relation was in 

the opposite direction. For the Hong Kong sample, internality was associated with more, not less, 

interpersonal  conflict.  One  possible  explanation  for  this  result  concerns  the  difference  in  job 

 

16 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
behaviors  by  internals  and  externals  and  how  they  might  affect  relations  with  colleagues  in  the 

two  countries.  Blau  (1993)  found  in  a  sample  of  bank  tellers  that  internals  put  more  effort  into 

enhancing  their  own  job  skills  that  would  benefit  their  careers.  This  pattern  might  well  lead 

internals to have greater conflict in a collectivist country because individuals are expected to avoid 

personal  achievement.  This  internal  style  might  then  lead  to  greater  conflict  because  coworkers 

might resent an individual’s focus on his or her own development. For secondary control, results 

for  job  satisfaction  and  autonomy  paralleled  those  for  WLCS  in  Hong  Kong,  but  there  was  a 

nonsignificant −.03 correlation for interpersonal conflict. 

 

There are several possible explanations for the lack of relation between the control variables and 

job stressors and strains in the Chinese samples. First, it should be kept in mind that our control 

variables concern generalized beliefs and are really personality variables. Research has shown that 

behavior in individualist societies has been found to be more traited (Church & Lonner, 1998), that 

is, collectivists show smaller relations between personality characteristics and behavior, as well as 

other  variables.  Whereas  individualists  tend  to  pay  attention  to  their  own  personal  desires  and 

motives,  collectivists  are  more  likely  to  submerge  such  individual  characteristics  to  the  needs  of 

the  group.  Given  that  Hong  Kong  and  to  a  greater  extent  the  PRC  are  collectivistic compared  to 

the US, perhaps it is not surprising that we found weaker relations there. Clearly more research is 

needed to explore Church and Lonner’s (1998) suggestion that personality may be less important 

in collectivist countries. 

 

Second, internal consistencies for some of the job stressor and strain variables were lower, and in a 

few  cases  substantially  lower,  than  in  the  US  sample.  In  fact  we  had  to  eliminate  the  negatively 

worded item from the job satisfaction scale because of internal consistency problems in the Hong 

Kong sample, leaving a 2-item measure. All of these scales were developed in the US, leaving open 

the  possibility  that  their  construct  validity  may  not  have  held  in  China.  Third,  the  sample  sizes 

were  smaller  in  the  two  Chinese  samples,  and  thus  there  was  less  statistical  power  to  find 

significance. Fourth, although we attempted to control for the characteristics of the  samples, it is 

possible that employed students and university employees differed between China and the US. 

 

The final possibility is that our control scales lacked construct validity. Although this is possible, 

we feel this is not the most likely explanation. Our new scales were developed by an international 

research  team,  and  the  majority  of  items  were  written  by  non-Americans.  Many  of  these  items 

were  originally  written 

in  Chinese,  so 

it 

is  unlikely 

that  mistranslation  or  cultural 

misunderstanding  would  have  distorted  meaning  when  used  in  China.  Furthermore,  this 

international team prescreened all items to be sure that each one was content valid (i.e. it reflected 

the intended constructs). In addition the scales showed good internal consistency reliability in the 

Chinese  samples,  particularly  the  socioinstrumental  control  scale.  There  was  also  known  group 

 

17 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
validity evidence for the control scales, with both showing the highest scores for the PRC, and the 

SICS  showing  the  lowest  score  for  the  US.  Finally,  relations  of  the  WLCS  with  job  stressors  and 

strains were as expected in the US, but were weaker in Hong Kong, and still weaker in the PRC, 

paralleling results for our new scales. Construct validity evidence for the WLCS has been provided 

by  researchers  in  both  the  US  and  a  wide  range  of  countries  around  the  world,  and  it  has  been 

used  in  several  studies  in  China  and  other  Asian  countries.  Had  results  for  this  scale  been  as 

expected in China as well as the US, it would have raised doubts about the other two control scales 

that did not yield similar results in China and the US. 

 

Hypotheses  5  and  6  concerned  the  incremental  predictability  for  SCS  and  SICS,  and  were 

addressed with multiple regression analyses. Results with the US, and to some extent with Hong 

Kong, support the idea that there is incremental predictability of our new control scales over the 

WLCS,  particularly  for  SCS.  For  the  US,  the  SCS  was  significant  in  five  of  eight  cases,  and 

marginally significant in two more. It accounted for additional variance in job stressors and strains 

beyond  work  LOC,  thereby  suggesting  that  it  might  play  a  positive  role  in  people’s  ability  to 

cope  with  stress.  In  Hong  Kong  we  found  that  SCS  also  accounted  for  incremental  variance  for 

some variables, but the patterns of results were not as clear-cut as with the US. 

 

There are several cases of  significant beta weights in the regression for variables whose bivariate 

correlations  demonstrated  that  they  were  unrelated  to  job  stressors  and  strains.  This  result 

suggests  the  presence  of  suppressor  effects  for  some  variables  (e.g.  interpersonal  conflict,  work 

anxiety, life satisfaction, and intent). Job satisfaction and autonomy are perhaps the only variables 

for  which  SCS  seems  to  provide  incremental  predictability,  and  both  cases  had  marginal 

significance. For the PRC there were no cases of significant incremental variance. 

 

For SICS we also see evidence for suppressor effects for both Hong Kong and the US. Although job 

satisfaction was significantly correlated with both WLCS and SICS for Hong Kong, when entered 

together  in  the  regression,  neither  was  even  marginally  significant.  For  the  US,  only  autonomy 

showed evidence for incremental predictability. The remaining significant beta weights are likely 

reflecting suppressor effects. Again, the PRC had no significant regressions. 

 

Some  of  the  largest  inter-sample  differences  in  correlations  were  among  the  three  control  belief 

scales.  In  the  US  sample,  there  were  modest  relations  mong  the  three  scales.  Furthermore, 

secondary  control  was  associated  with  nternality,  and  socioinstrumental  control  was  associated 

with externality. he results with secondary control were opposite to what might be expected ased 

on  the  theorising  of  Rothbaum  et  al.  (1982).  They  noted  that  secondary  ontrol  functions  as  a 

substitute for  primary control, so we expected o  find that secondary control was associated with 

externality.  However,  Rothbaum  et  al.  were  concerned  with  control  behavior  and  not  beliefs.  It 

 

18 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
may  be  that  Americans  who  believe  they  have  little  primary  control  also  believe  they  have  little 

secondary  control.  Both  forms  of  control  have  been  noted  as  potentially  effective  control  devices 

for effective adaptation to the environment (Heckhausen & Schulz, 1995), and so these beliefs may 

tend  to  develop  together  and  reflect  successful  adaptation  experiences  in  the  past.  In  our  study 

both  related  similarly  to  job  stressors  and  strains,  suggesting  that  they  may  serve  the  same 

function, which does support the Rothbaum et al. theory. 

 

The Hong Kong pattern was very different. All three scales were highly interrelated, with SCS and 

SICS correlated at .67. Furthermore, both were related negatively to WLCS, with high levels on our 

new  scales  associated  with  internality.  Had  the  same  pattern  occurred  with  the  PRC  sample,  we 

might have been able to conclude that this was a Chinese pattern, but results were again different. 

The  correlation  between  our  two  new  scales  in  the  PRC  was  similar  to  the  US  sample,  and  the 

relation of  SICS to  WLCS was in the same direction, although considerably larger (.23 vs. .51 for 

the US and PRC, respectively). However, the sign for the correlation between SCS and WLCS was 

opposite  to  that  in  the  US  and  Hong  Kong.  In  the  PRC  sample,  high  levels  of  secondary  control 

were associated with externality, suggesting the compensatory phenomenon. 

 

There  have  been  quite  a  few  studies  that  have  shown  how  Asians  tend  to  score  lower  than 

Americans and others from Western nations on scales that assess primary control, especially locus 

of control scales (Hamid, 1994; Hui, 1982; Smith et al., 1995). We argue that in large part this might 

have been due to the fact that the construct of locus of control was developed in the US to reflect 

American  views  of  control,  and  studies  have  tended  to  use  either  US-based  scales  or  scales  that 

were  patterned  on  them.  Consistent  with  our  prediction,  we  found  very  large  differences  on  the 

WLCS among Asian and other nations including the US in a prior study (Spector et al., 2002), as 

well  as  here.  However,  our  results  showed  that  when  control  was  conceptualised  with  national 

differences  in  mind,  and  when  the  scale  development  effort  involved  an  international  team,  not 

only  did  we  fail  to  find  such  large  differences,  but  with  one  scale  (socioinstrumental  control), 

Chinese from the PRC were higher than Americans. Thus the view that Chinese and perhaps other 

Asians are overly passive with low levels of control beliefs may not be accurate. Rather control in 

Chinese  and  other  collectivist  societies  may  operate  differently.  Weisz  et  al.  (1984)  suggest  that 

Asians in general may rely more on secondary than primary control. We would go a step further 

and suggest that Asians may rely more on socioinstrumental control, which is a form of primary 

control, but one that has been ignored in the control measures developed in the US. 

 

REFERENCES 

Blau,  G.  (1993).  Testing  the  relationship  of  locus  of  control  to  different  performance  dimensions. 

Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 66, 125–138. 

Boyacigiller, N.A., & Adler, N.J. (1991). The parochial dinosaur: Organizational science in a global 

 

19 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
context. Academy of Management Journal, 16, 262–290. 

Cammann,  C.,  Fichman,  M.,  Jenkins,  D.,  &  Klesh,  J.  (1979).  The  Michigan  Organizational 

Assessment Questionnaire. Unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 

Church,  A.T.,  &  Lonner,  W.J.  (1998).  The  cross-cultural  perspective  in  the  study  of  personality: 

Rationale and current research. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29, 32–62. 

Diener, E., Emmons, R.A., Larsen, R.J., & Griffin, S. (1985). The Satisfaction With Life Scale. Journal 

of Personality Assessment, 49, 71–75. 

Evans,  G.W.,  &  Carrere,  S.  (1991).  Traffic  congestion,  perceived  control,  and  psychophysiological 

stress among urban bus drivers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 658–663. 

Ganster, D.C., & Fusilier, M.R. (1989). Control in the workplace. In C.L. Cooper  & I.T. Robertson 

(Eds.), International review of industrial and organizational psychology 1989 (pp. 235–280). Chichester: 

John Wiley. 

Gould, S.J. (1999). A critique of Heckhausen and Schulz’s (1995) life-span theory of control from a 

cross-cultural perspective. Psychological Review, 106, 597–604. 

Hackman, J.R., & Oldham, G.R. (1975). Development of the job diagnostic survey. Journal of Applied 

Psychology, 60, 259–270. 

Hackman,  J.R.,  &  Oldham,  G.R.  (1976).  Motivation  through  the  design  of  work:  Test  of  a  theory. 

Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16, 250–279. 

Hamid, P.N. (1994). Self-monitoring, locus of control, and social encounters  of Chinese and New 

Zealand students. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 25, 353–368. 

Heckhausen, J., & Schulz, R. (1995). A life-span theory of control. Psychological Review, 102, 284–

384. 

Heckhausen, J., & Schulz, R. (1999). The primacy of primary control is a human universal: A reply 

to Gould’s (1999) critique of the life-span theory of control. Psychological Review, 106, 605–609. 

Hui,  C.H.  (1982).  Locus  of  control:  A  review  of  cross-cultural  research.  International  Journal  of 

Intercultural Relations, 6, 301–323. 

Idaszak,  J.R.,  &  Drasgow,  F.  (1987).  A  revision  of  the  Job  Diagnostic  Survey:  Elimination  of  a 

measurement artifact. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 69–74. 

Karasek, R.A., Jr. (1979). Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain: Implications for job 

redesign. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 285–307. 

Kim, U., Triandis, H.C., Kagitcibasi, C., Choi, S., & Yoon, G. (1994). Introduction. In U. Kim, H.C. 

Triandis, C. Kagitcibasi, S. Choi, & G. Yoon (Eds.), Individualism and collectivism: Theory, method, and 

applications (pp. 1–16). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Kobasa, S.C., Maddi, S.R., & Kahn, S. (1982). Hardiness and health: A prospective study. Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 168–177. 

Lazarus, R.S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal and coping. New York: Springer. 

Lundberg,  C.D.,  &  Peterson,  M.F.  (1994).  The  meaning  of  working  in  US  and  Japanese  local 

governments at three hierarchical levels. Human Relations, 47, 1459–1487. 

 

20 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
Nunnally, J.C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd edn.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Rizzo,  J.R.,  House,  R.J.,  &  Lirtzman,  S.I.  (1970).  Role  conflict  and  ambiguity  in  complex 

organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 15, 150–163. 

Rothbaum, F., Weisz, J.R., & Snyder, S.S. (1982). Changing the world and changing the self: A two-

process model of perceived control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 5–37. 

Schulz,  R.,  &  Heckhausen,  J.  (1996).  A  life  span  model  of  successful  aging.  American Psychologist, 

51, 702–714. 

Skinner, E.A. (1996). A guide to constructs of control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 

549–570. 

Smith, P.B., Trompenaars, F., & Dugan, S. (1995). The Rotter locus of control scale in 43 countries: 

A test of cultural relativity. International Journal of Psychology, 30, 377–400. 

Spector,  P.E.  (1982).  Behavior  in  organizations  as  a  function  of  employee’s  locus  of  control. 

Psychological Bulletin, 91, 482–497. 

Spector,  P.E.  (1986).  Perceived  control  by  employees:  A  meta-analysis  of  studies  concerning 

autonomy and participation at work. Human Relations, 39, 1005–1016. 

Spector,  P.E.  (1988).  Development  of  the  Work  Locus  of  Control  Scale.  Journal  of  Occupational 

Psychology, 61, 335–340. 

Spector,  P.E.  (1998).  A  control  model  of  the  job  stress  process.  In  C.L.  Cooper  (Ed.),  Theories  of 

organizational stress (pp. 153–169). London: Oxford University Press. 

Spector, P.E., Cooper, C.L., Sanchez, J.I., O’Driscoll, M., Sparks, K., Bernin, P., Bussing, A., Dewe, 

P.,  Hart,  P.,  Lu,  L.,  Miller,  K.,  Renault  de  Moraes,  L.,  Ostrognay,  G.M.,  Pagon,  M.,  Pitariu,  H., 

Poelmans,  S.,  Radhakrishnan,  P.,  Russinova,  V.,  Salamatov,  V.,  Salgado,  J.,  Shima,  S.,  Siu,  O.L., 

Stora, J.B., Teichmann, M., Theorell, T., Vlerick, P., Westman, M., Widerszal-Bazyl, M., Wong, P., & 

Yu, S. (2000). Do national levels of individualism and internal locus of control relate to well-being?: 

An ecological level international study. Paper presented at the Southern Management Association 

Conference, Orlando, Florida, 8–11 November. 

Spector, P.E., Cooper, C.L., Sanchez, J.I., O’Driscoll, M., Sparks, K., Bernin, P., Bussing, A., Dewe, 

P.,  Hart,  P.,  Lu,  L.,  Miller,  K.,  Renault  de  Moraes,  L.,  Ostrognay,  G.M.,  Pagon,  M.,  Pitariu,  H., 

Poelmans,  S.,  Radhakrishnan,  P.,  Russinova,  V.,  Salamatov,  V.,  Salgado,  J.,  Shima,  S.,  Siu,  O.L., 

Stora, J.B., Teichmann, M., Theorell, T., Vlerick, P., Westman, M., Widerszal-Bazyl, M., Wong, P., & 

Yu, S. (2002). A 24 nation/territory study of work locus of control in relation to well-being at work: 

How generalizable are western findings? Academy of Management Journal, 45, 453–466. 

Spector, P.E., Dwyer, D.J., & Jex, S.M. (1988). The relationship of job stressors to affective, health, 

and  performance  outcomes:  A  comparison  of  multiple  data  sources.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 

73, 11–19. 

Spector,  P.E.,  &  Jex,  S.M.  (1998).  Development  of  four  self-report  measures  of  job  stressors  and 

strain:  Interpersonal  Conflict  at  Work  Scale,  Organizational  Constraints  Scale,  Quantitative 

Workload Inventory, and Physical Symptoms Inventory. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 

 

21 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003
3, 356–367. 

Spector, P.E., & O’Connell, B.J. (1994). The contribution of personality traits, negative affectivity, 

locus  of  control  and  Type  A  to  the  subsequent  reports  of  job  stressors  and  job  strains.  Journal of 

Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 67, 1–11. 

Spence,  J.T.,  Helmreich,  R.L.,  &  Pred,  R.S.  (1987).  Impatience  versus  achievement  strivings  in  the 

Type  A  pattern:  Differential  effects  on  students’  health  and  academic  achievement.  Journal  of 

Applied Psychology, 72, 522–528. 

Spielberger,  C.D.  (1979).  Preliminary  manual  for  the  State-Trait  Personality  Inventory  (STPI). 

Unpublished manuscript, University of South Florida, Tampa. 

Terry, D.J., & Jimmieson, N.L. (1999). Work control and employee well-being: A decade review. In 

C.L.  Cooper  &  I.T.  Robertson  (Eds.),  International review of  industrial and organizational psychology, 

1999, volume 14 (pp. 95–148). Chichester: John Wiley. 

Triandis, H.C. (1994). Culture and social behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Weisz,  J.R.,  Rothbaum,  F.M.,  &  Blackburn,  T.C.  (1984).  Standing  out  and  standing  in:  The 

psychology of control in America and Japan. American Psychologist, 39, 955–969. 

 
 
 
 

 

22 

This is the post-printed version of an article. The final published version is available at Applied Psychology 53:1 (2004); doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2004.00160.x ISSN 0269-994X (Print) / 1464-0597 (Online)  Copyright © International Association for Applied Psychology, 2004. Published online: 22 Dec 2003