 
 
Proactive Corporate Environmental Strategy and the Development of Competitively
Valuable Organizational Capabilities
Author(s): Sanjay Sharma and  Harrie Vredenburg
Source: Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 19, No. 8 (Aug., 1998), pp. 729-753
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3094125
Accessed: 02-08-2017 16:35 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3094125?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Strategic
Management Journal

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Strategic Management Journal
 Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 729-753 (1998)

 I

 x

 PROACTIVE CORPORATE ENVIRONMENTAL
 STRATEGY AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF
 COMPETITIVELY VALUABLE ORGANIZATIONAL
 CAPABILITIES

 SANJAY SHARMA1* and HARRIE VREDENBURG2
 'Faculty of Commerce, St. Mary's University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
 2Faculty of Management, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada

 This article presents the results of a study conducted in two phases within a single industry
 context. The first phase involved comparative case studies to ground the applicability of the
 resource-based view of the firm within the domain of environmental responsiveness. The second
 phase involved testing the relationships observed during the case studies through a mail survey.
 It was found that strategies of proactive responsiveness to the uncertainties inherent at the
 interlace between the business and ecological issues were associated with the emergence of
 unique organizational capabilities. These capabilities, in turn, were seen to have implications
 for firm competitiveness. ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 INTRODUCTION

 Since the World Commission on Environment
 and Development Report of 1987 (commonly
 known as the 'Brundtland Commission Report')
 was published, corporate managers and man-
 agement scholars have been grappling with the
 questions of how and why corporations should
 incorporate environmental concerns into strategic
 decision making. The Brundtland Commission
 Report coined the term 'sustainable development'
 and explicitly postulated a positive role for the
 business corporation in furthering the cause of
 environmental protection (as opposed to the nega-
 tive traditional role of corporations being the
 'problem' and governments being the 'solution')
 by integrating environmental protection with eco-
 nomic performance. Since the Brundtland Com-
 mission Report raised the management of

 Key words: environmental strategy; capabilities; con-
 tinuous innovation; stakeholder integration; higher-
 order learning
 *Correspondence to: Sanjay Sharma, Faculty of Commerce,
 St. Mary's University, 923 Robie Street, Halifax, NS, Canada
 B3H 3C3

 environmental concerns to a strategic issue for
 the corporation, managers and management schol-
 ars have been debating the role of environmental
 strategy in the repertoire of strategic management.

 One stream of literature has focused on the
 concept of sustainable development and has
 attempted to redefine broadly the global societal
 role of the business corporation (Gladwin, Ken-
 nelly, and Krause, 1995; Hart, 1997; Sharma,
 Vredenburg, and Westley, 1994; Shrivastava,
 1995a; Starik and Rands, 1995: Westley and
 Vredenburg, 1996). Most of this literature says
 little about how moving to a sustainable develop-
 ment model will affect firm competitiveness.

 Other writers have cautioned that implementing
 such a broad redefinition of the role of the corpo-
 ration may be hazardous for the corporation's
 financial well-being (Walley and Whitehead,
 1994). These writers advocate a return to strict
 cost-benefit frameworks, investing in environ-
 mental practices that have paybacks within an
 economic time frame through reduced costs of
 regulatory compliance, lower waste disposal,
 energy and material savings, etc. Hart and Ahuja
 (1996), after empirically examining firms' savings
 from emission reduction, conclude that while

 CCC 0143-2095/98/080729-25 $17.50
 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Received 4 February 1997
 Final revision received 26 August 1997

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 730 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 there are initial cost savings for most firms due
 to the low cost of remedying existing inef-
 ficiencies and wastes, once the 'low hanging fruit
 has been harvested' it becomes increasingly dif-
 ficult to improve financial performance as the
 investments in emission reduction may exceed
 the savings generated.

 A third stream of literature has attempted to
 demonstrate how firms might gain competitive
 advantage in ways other than waste/efficiency
 cost savings from environmental strategies. Porter
 (1991) and Porter and van der Linde (1995)
 argue that strict environmental regulations will
 give firms in their jurisdiction a competitive
 advantage in other markets as other jurisdictions
 move standards upward as well, in the same way
 that operating in a demanding domestic consumer
 market 'toughens up' a firm for international
 competition. Jacobs (1992), Hawken (1993) and
 Vredenburg and Westley (1997) explore what
 'good' regulations and environmental standards
 might look like and how they might lead to
 corporate environmental innovation. Shrivastava
 (1995b) and Westley and Vredenburg (1991)
 show how firms may gain competitive advantage
 by gaining social legitimization. These authors
 rely primarily on case studies to make their argu-
 ments. Klassen and McLaughlin (1996), viewing
 the firm essentially as a 'black box,' find corre-
 lations between firm environmental performance
 and firm financial performance (as measured by
 stock performance) in subsequent time periods.
 This study suggests that environmental perform-
 ance may, in fact, be associated with more than
 the realization of greater efficiencies within a
 firm, lending some support to the argument that
 competitive advantage may be derived from fac-
 tors other than waste/efficiency savings.

 Hart (1995) speculates theoretically what might

 be happening inside Klassen and McLaughlin's
 'black box.' He applies the resource-based view
 of the firm (e.g., Barney and Zajac, 1994) to the
 domain of corporate environmental strategies.The
 resource-based view of the firm has gained prom-
 inence as a competitive theory of the firm (Barney
 and Zajac, 1994). This view argues that a firm's
 competitive strategies and performance depend
 significantly upon firm-specific organizational
 resources and capabilities. These capabilities are
 more likely to emerge during periods of greater
 turbulence and organizational change (Wernerfelt,
 1984). Indeed, the limited empirical research in

 this area has found that firm capabilities evolve
 as a result of firm response to competitive
 environments (Barnett, Greve, and Park, 1994;
 Levinthal and Myatt, 1994). In turn, these capa-
 bilities within organizations are seen to influence
 competitive strategies and organizational out-
 comes (Ginsberg, 1994; Barney and Hansen,
 1994). Developing his theoretical argument, Hart
 (1995) predicts that innovative environmental
 strategies can lead to the development of firm-
 specific capabilities which can be sources of com-
 petitive advantage. He argues that corporate
 response to calls for environmental protection is
 an important emerging competitive domain for
 businesses and might be best understood in terms
 of the resource-based view of the firm.

 The arguments linking environmental respon-
 siveness to organizational capabilities and per-
 formance have been theoretical to date. In the
 absence of empirical evidence for these relation-
 ships, cost-benefit frameworks are dominant and
 influence corporate managers to adopt only those
 limited investments in environmental practices
 which can yield tangible monetary benefits within
 an economic time frame. The objective of this
 article is to examine the validity of the hypothe-
 sized linkages between environmental responsive-
 ness strategies and the emergence of competi-
 tively valuable organizational capabilities (Hart,
 1995).

 This research was conducted within a single
 industry context. The first phase of the study
 involved comparative case studies through in-
 depth interviews in seven firms in the Canadian
 oil and gas industry to ground the resource-based
 view of the firm within the domain of corporate
 environmental responsiveness. This study was
 intended to examine linkages between environ-
 mental strategies and the development of capabili-
 ties, and understand the nature of any emergent
 capabilities and their competitive outcomes. The
 exploratory study was conducted longitudinally
 over a period of 18 months using the same cohort
 of respondent companies and managers. The
 second phase involved testing the emergent link-
 ages through a mail survey-based study of the
 Canadian oil and gas industry.

 The next section describes the research

 methods used in the exploratory study. The article
 then describes the findings of the case compari-
 sons conducted during the exploratory study. In
 this section, data from the exploratory study are

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 731

 supplemented by literature from corporate social
 performance, environmental strategies, organi-
 zational learning, and the resource-based view of
 the firm, to explain the linkage between proactive
 environmental responsiveness strategies and the
 emergence of organizational capabilities. The arti-
 cle then describes the research methods and the
 results of the mail survey which indicate that
 proactive environmental strategies are associated
 with the emergence of competitively valuable
 organizational capabilities. We end with a dis-
 cussion of the theoretical, research, and mana-
 gerial implications of this research.

 THE EXPLORATORY STUDY:
 RESEARCH METHOD

 We begin by explaining the rationale for choosing
 the case method for the exploratory study, the
 criteria for selecting the Canadian oil and gas
 industry as a domain, the criteria for selecting
 the seven firms included in the exploratory study,
 the data collection method and the data analysis
 techniques used.

 The case study is an appropriate method of
 empirical inquiry when the phenomena to be
 studied (in this case, corporate environmental
 responsiveness and organizational capabilities)
 can not be easily separated from their organi-
 zational context (Yin, 1989). Case comparisons
 enable an investigation of the 'what' and 'how'
 questions (Yin, 1989), such as: What are the
 different strategies of environmental responsive-
 ness adopted by different organizations within the
 same industry? How do these strategies impact
 upon organizational competitiveness? Compara-
 tive case studies of organizations within the same
 industrial context facilitate comparison through
 replication of results, either literally (when similar
 responses emerge) or theoretically (when contrary
 results emerge for predictable reasons), to enable
 'analytic generalization' (Yin, 1989). A common
 industrial context also facilitates control for rel-
 evant external influences such as the degree of
 environmental regulation, the degree of scrutiny
 by media and special interest groups, and indus-
 try-wide environmental standards and common
 practices.

 The Canadian oil and gas industry was chosen

 as a research setting because it is an example of
 an industry based on nonrenewable inputs, under

 pressure from its external stakeholders to change
 its environmental practices. Further, most of the
 industry is located in Alberta with head offices
 in Calgary. This concentration in one location
 reduced the diversity of external influences faced
 by individual firms in the industry and facilitated
 data collection by providing easy and repeated
 access to managers of the firms included in the
 study.

 Firms were picked from each size category
 (major, senior, intermediate, junior) and from
 each activity category (integrated, upstream, and
 downstream). This was to understand whether
 environmental responsiveness strategies were
 influenced by firm resources (as reflected by
 industry size categorization of 'majors,' 'seniors,'
 'intermediates,' and 'juniors') as also by different
 sets of stakeholder groups impacted by a firm's
 range of activities (upstream: exploration, drilling,
 crude oil production; downstream: refining and
 marketing; or integrated).

 Letters were sent out to the Chief Executive
 Officers (CEOs) of 15 companies requesting
 cooperation for the study. Twelve CEOs
 responded and agreed to provide access for
 research. Data collection was stopped after seven
 companies were studied and theoretical saturation
 seemed to have been reached, that is, new insights
 into the phenomena being examined were no
 longer gained (Glaser and Strauss, 1967). While
 it is possible that inclusion of more firms after
 this stage may lead to new insights, Glaser and
 Strauss (1967) stress that once theoretical satu-
 ration is reached, the phenomena to be studied
 have been substantially explained.

 Table 1 presents the comparative characteristics
 of companies included in the exploratory study.
 Company names are disguised for confidentiality.

 Data collection

 During the first phase of data collection in 1993,
 unstructured interviews totaling 36 hours were
 conducted with 19 senior and middle management
 executives of the seven companies. The execu-
 tives interviewed in each company included either
 the CEO or a member of the top management
 team, the environmental assessment manager, a
 staff manager, and a line/operations manager.
 In smaller companies, several functional areas
 happened to be combined into one position and
 fewer managers were interviewed. The managers

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strut. AgMtit. J., 19: 729-753 ( 1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 732 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 Table 1. Comparative company characteristics (names disguised for confidentiality)

 Buffalo Sioux Royal National U.S. Oil Farmers Northern

 Company Senior Intermediate Major Major Senior Intermediate Junior
 classification"

 Range of Integrated Downstream Integrated Integrated Integrated Upstream Upstream
 operationsh (except for

 retail)

 Sales C$ 1.5 bn. C$ 0.5 bn. C$ 10 bn. C$ 6 bn. C$ 4 bn. C$ 0.3 bn. C$ 0.1 bn.

 Employees 1500 1000 10,000 7,000 2400 700 400

 aCompany classifications within the industry are based on size in terms of a mix of sales and assets.
 hintegrated oil companies include operations covering the full range of petroleum industry activities, including exploration,
 production, refining, and retail marketing. Companies with operations focused in the upstream end of business almost
 exclusively engage in exploration and production activities, while companies with operations focused in the downstream end
 of business engage almost exclusively in refining and marketing activities.

 were identified through the snowball technique.
 During each interview, leads to other managers
 knowledgeable about environmental strategies and
 practices were identified. Interview transcripts
 were verified for accuracy by the managers. Each
 transcript was analyzed immediately following the
 interview and used as a basis to explore emerging
 themes in subsequent interviews. Follow-up inter-
 views were conducted with several managers to
 verify themes that emerged in subsequent inter-
 views. A literature search was conducted in tan-
 dem with data collection and analysis in order
 to ground the analysis theoretically (Glaser and
 Strauss, 1967).

 In the second phase of data collection, over
 the next 12 years, the seven companies included
 in the first study were contacted again and 27
 managers were interviewed. Each manager was
 interviewed between two and five times during
 the year. Most of these interviews were brief and
 were conducted over the telephone. The respon-
 dents were senior and middle managers and
 included 18 of the 19 managers interviewed in
 the first study. Nine managers were added at the
 suggestion of the first cohort of 18 managers as
 useful sources of information on environmental
 strategies and competitiveness of the companies.
 Most of these additional nine managers were
 in line/operating positions such as Exploration
 Manager, Drilling Supervisor, Marketing Man-
 ager, Refinery Manager, etc. This phase resulted
 in a further 33 hours of transcribed interview
 data. Thus a total of 69 hours of transcribed
 interview data were collected in two phases.

 One objective of the second phase of data
 collection was to verify that companies had con-

 tinued the environmental strategies identified in
 the first phase. The interviews in the second
 phase were specifically focused on the actions
 undertaken by companies to reduce the environ-
 mental impact of their operations. In terms of
 organizational outcomes, the interviews sought to
 ascertain whether managers perceived environ-
 mental practices as having had any positive or
 negative effects on corporate performance and
 competitiveness.

 Interview data were triangulated, during both
 phases, through a qualitative content analysis of
 corporate public documents such as annual
 reports, environmental reports, company newslet-
 ters, and newspaper reports for the period 1980-
 95. Interviews were also conducted with officials
 of the regulatory body (the Alberta Energy and
 Resources Conservation Board, renamed in 1995
 as the Alberta Energy and Utilities Board-
 hereafter AEUB), with officers of the industry
 association (the Canadian Association of Pe-
 troleum Producers-hereafter CAPP), and with
 representatives of two environmental groups
 monitoring the industry's practices. These data
 were used primarily to verify company inter-
 view data.

 Data analysis

 The interview transcripts were analyzed through
 the categorization and analysis of emergent con-
 cepts and ideas (Miles and Huberman, 1984) and
 constant comparison of these concepts (Glaser
 and Strauss, 1967) to identify common themes.
 An interview summary form (Miles and Huber-
 man, 1984) was prepared after each interview to

 ? 1998 John Wilcy & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 733

 highlight emergent themes, variables, and other
 issues of interest which would be followed up at
 subsequent interviews. Each interview was coded
 in accordance with these emerging themes and
 sentences relating to each different theme were
 entered in separate computer text files set up for
 each emergent theme. The number of references
 and intensity of support for each theme were
 identified within each file before deciding which
 themes to retain and which to drop as less theo-
 retically significant. Connections between the sig-
 nificant themes were investigated in the data. A
 number of the themes were dropped at earlier
 stages of data collection when subsequent inter-
 views revealed them as less theoretically
 important or part of another theoretical theme.
 The sifting process continued in tandem with data
 collection. If theoretical parallels could not be
 found, then the themes were abstracted into gen-
 eric descriptive labels.

 During the first phase of data collection in
 1993, the resource-based perspective was not the
 focus of data analysis. However, some of the
 emergent themes relating to organizational out-
 comes suggested labels from the resource-based
 literature (e.g., Amit and Schoemaker, 1993; Bar-
 ney, 1991; Hart, 1995). Therefore, the second
 phase of data collection in 1993-94 focused on
 the linkages between environmental strategies and
 organizational capabilities. The data analysis sug-
 gested a range of environmental responsiveness
 strategies adopted by these firms, and linkages
 with organizational outcomes in the form of
 organizational capabilities and competitive bene-
 fits.

 accidents and wastes, and waste reduction/reuse
 at production and refining sites. Dimensions taken
 from environmental management literature, such
 as those used by the Coalition for Environmen-
 tally Responsible Economies (CERES), by
 socially responsible investment funds (Kinder,
 Lydenberg, and Domini, 1992), and by the Busi-
 ness Council for Sustainable Development
 (Schmidheiny, 1992), included material use
 reduction and conservation, use of alternative
 fuels, energy conservation, less environmentally
 damaging products, stakeholder partnerships for
 environmental preservation, public disclosure, and
 commitment to research and employee training
 programs for environmental preservation.

 The companies included in the study exhibited
 a wide range of responses in dealing with the
 business/natural environment interface. Some
 companies exhibited specific areas of excellence
 in reducing environmental impact, such as Buf-
 falo's efforts in habitat/biodiversity preservation
 and waste reduction, Sioux's efforts in developing
 and selling less environmentally damaging fuels,
 and Royal's efforts in risk reduction. However,
 we looked for consistency of environmental prac-
 tices across all the dimensions that were relevant
 to a firm's range of operations. Therefore, even
 though Royal, U.S. Oil, and National were very
 active in stringent risk reduction, they had under-
 taken very limited environmental practices in the
 other dimensions such as habitat preservation,
 waste reduction, lower polluting products, stake-
 holder partnerships to reduce environmental
 impact, etc. Thus, companies were considered
 proactive only if they exhibited a consistent pat-
 tern of environmental practices, across all dimen-
 sions relevant to their range of activities, not
 required to be undertaken in fulfillment of
 environmental regulations or in response to iso-
 morphic pressures within the industry as standard
 business practices.

 ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSIVENESS
 AND ORGANIZATIONAL
 CAPABILITIES

 In addition to consistency across dimensions,

 Corporate environmental strategies were exam-
 ined along 11 dimensions. These were determined
 on the basis of the areas in which the oil and gas
 industry substantially impacts upon the natural
 environment, as well as dimensions that have
 been used to evaluate environmental performance
 in the literature. The impact of the oil industry
 on the natural environment is strongest in the
 areas of species habitat preservation at exploration
 and drill sites, environmental restoration of con-
 taminated soil, risk reduction of environmental

 the proactive firms (by our definition) should
 have exhibited a consistent pattern of such volun-
 tary actions over time. Two significant years for
 the industry from the environmental perspective
 were 1988 and 1993. In 1988, public attention
 was focused on the natural environment due to
 evidence of thinning of the Earth's ozone layer,
 evidence of climate change, the Exxon Valdez oil
 spill, increased stringency of Canadian environ-
 mental regulations, and the 'Energy Options'

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.

 Str1St. Mngmt. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 734 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 initiative in Canada to formulate a blueprint for
 a sustainable energy future. In 1993, all environ-
 mental regulations in Alberta were consolidated
 into one act and managers were made personally
 liable for environmental accidents. In order to
 be considered proactive, companies should have
 exhibited a consistent pattern of voluntary actions
 across all relevant dimensions before the events
 of 1988 catalyzed environmental action across
 most of the industry. Interviews with regulators,
 industry associations, and environmental groups,
 as well as an analysis of archival data for the
 period 1980-95, helped verify the claims made
 by managers about past practices. These generic
 strategy categories of reactive and proactive
 responses have been frequently used in the corpo-
 rate social performance literature (Post, 1978;
 Sethi, 1979).

 Based on the 11 dimensions of environmental

 response, two companies were classified as proac-
 tive and five as reactive. Buffalo Oil, a company
 considered proactive, has been an industry leader
 since 1981, in preserving natural habitats, species,
 and historical heritage sites impacted by its oper-
 ations. This company made considerable invest-
 ments in technologies and management practices
 to reduce its environmental impact. It undertook
 comprehensive environmental audits of its oper-
 ations (the first audit being conducted in 1983),
 innovated less environmentally damaging explo-
 ration and drilling techniques (including the
 development of horizontal drilling techniques),
 and voluntarily ceased oil exploration and drilling
 operations in areas of high negative ecological
 impact since 1987. In order to 'level the competi-
 tive playing field,' it lobbied the provincial
 government to set aside these areas as protected
 preserves under the Alberta government's Special
 Places 2000 program. Buffalo is an industry
 leader in technological innovations to reduce
 emissions, solid waste, and energy use in its
 refining and manufacturing operations. It holds
 over 50 patents in the areas of process improve-
 ment, sulfur dioxide recovery, waste reduction
 and disposal, soil restoration, and less polluting
 fuels. It has also invested in research into cleaner-
 burning fuels, renewable energy sources, and fuel
 cell technologies.

 The other proactive company, Sioux Oil, set

 up the first North American commercial operation
 to recycle used engine oil in 1980. It has since
 been actively engaged in developing and market-

 ing lesser polluting fuels such as vegetable-based
 engine oils, ethanol-blended gasoline, methanol,
 compressed natural gas for automobiles, and in
 educating consumers about the more responsible
 use of fossil fuels. It has also invested in research
 into renewable energy sources.

 On the other hand, the five companies iden-

 tified as having reactive environmental strategies
 emphasized the reduction of risk and liabilities of
 environmental accidents and spills. Environmental
 accidents cannot be insured and can cause finan-
 cial disruption, negative media exposure and dam-
 aged reputations for these companies. Royal, U.S.
 Oil, and National concentrated on eliminating
 spills and leakages while transporting oil and gas
 in pipelines and tankers, reducing leakages during
 transfers of petroleum products from tankers to
 underground tanks, and effective emergency
 response procedures in the event of an environ-
 mental accident. The regulators confirm that these
 three companies are exemplary at regulatory com-
 pliance. However, these three companies have not
 undertaken any voluntary environmental practices
 in the areas of habitat preservation, restoration,
 waste reduction (as opposed to emission/waste
 control as per regulations), material use reduction,
 development of less polluting petroleum products,
 and stakeholder partnerships for environmental
 preservation. In fact, the last dimension has been
 a major deficiency, with conflicts having taken
 place between these companies and local com-
 munities as well as environmental groups.

 The smaller companies, Northern and Farmers,
 appointed outside consultants to ensure that their
 'paper trails' are in order to show due diligence
 in the event of an environmental accident. They
 were doing the minimum to ensure regulatory
 compliance. This may have been due to their
 limited resources and smaller size resulting in a
 lower intensity of media attention.

 The environmental strategies of the seven com-

 panies did not appear to have any association
 with the range of activities of the companies.
 Buffalo is an integrated 'senior' company, Sioux
 is a downstream 'intermediate' company, while
 the reactive companies range from integrated
 'majors' to upstream 'juniors.' The ability to
 clearly separate the seven companies into two
 distinct categories based on their environmental
 responsiveness strategies facilitated comparison of
 the organizational outcomes associated with
 these strategies.

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mg,mt. J., 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 735

 Environmental responsiveness and
 organizational capabilities

 While managers of both reactive and proactive
 companies considered improving shareholder
 value an important mission, the former perceived
 environmental responsiveness as detracting from
 this objective. The proactive companies, in
 contrast, perceived a number of competitive bene-
 fits emerging from their environmental response.
 These included lower costs of
 processes/inputs/products, innovations in
 processes/products/operating systems, improved
 corporate reputation, and relationships with a
 wide range of stakeholders. In contrast, the
 reactive companies were unable to associate their
 corporate environmental responsiveness strategies
 with any positive organizational outcomes other
 than lower liabilities due to reduction in risk of
 environmental accidents.

 cated that the perceived linkages between
 environmental responsiveness and competitive
 benefits in proactive companies were due to the
 emergence of certain capabilities. Hence, the
 second phase of data collection specifically
 focused on this issue by explaining the concept
 of capabilities and asking managers if they per-
 ceived any capabilities as having been built up
 as a result of their environmental responsiveness
 strategies. However, examples of capabilities were
 not suggested to managers. The managers of the
 reactive companies indicated the capabilities of
 minimizing of risk and liability (Royal, U.S. Oil,
 and National) and exemplary regulatory com-
 pliance (Royal and National). We did not con-
 sider these as competitively valuable capabilities
 because both proactive and reactive companies
 were required to achieve these two objectives.
 The managers of the smaller reactive companies,
 Northern and Farmers, ridiculed the notion that
 environmental responsiveness could have any
 competitive benefits for their companies.

 These competitive benefits were perceived by
 the proactive company managers as the outcomes
 of strengths built up through environmental
 responsiveness strategies. These strengths were
 often described in terms of characteristics that
 identified them as organizational capabilities.
 Organizational capabilities are the coordinating
 mechanisms that enable the most efficient and
 competitive use of the firm's assets-whether
 tangible or intangible (Day, 1994). The competi-
 tive advantage of these capabilities stems from
 their elusive nature based on social complexity
 and deep embeddedness in organizations (Hart,
 1995; Teece, 1987; Winter, 1987). They are often
 invisible (Itami, 1987), based on tacit learning
 (Hart, 1995; Polanyi, 1962) that is causally
 ambiguous (Hart, 1995; Reed and DeFillippi,
 1990; Rumelt, 1987) and thus difficult to identify
 and imitate by competitors (Teece, 1987). These
 capabilities usually lack an identifiable owner in
 an organization and are not traded in factor mar-
 kets (Barney, 1991; Hart, 1995; Reed and DeFil-
 lipi, 1990). They are path dependent upon a
 combination of unique organizational actions and
 learning undertaken over a period of time
 (Barney, 1991; Dierickx and Cool, 1989; Hart,
 1995). They span several different functions and
 levels within an organization and are capable
 of multiple uses (Amit and Schoemaker, 1993;
 Barney, 1991).

 During the first phase of interviews, some of
 the themes emerging from the interviews indi-

 Table 2 shows how the 'first cut' categorization

 of themes based on a listing of common concepts
 and ideas emerging from the interview transcripts
 in the first phase of data collection. Table 3
 shows the capability themes emerging during
 more focused data collection in the second phase.
 An analysis of the interview data indicated three
 emergent capabilities.

 Capability for stakeholder integration

 This involves the ability to establish trust-based
 collaborative relationships with a wide variety of
 stakeholders, especially those with noneconomic
 goals. These stakeholders may include local com-
 munities, environmental groups, regulators, non-
 governmental organizations (NGOs), etc. Hart
 (1995) suggests stakeholder integration as a capa-
 bility arising as a result of product stewardship
 which requires the integration of perspectives of
 key external stakeholders such as environmental
 groups, community leaders, the media, and regu-
 lators into product design and development. Here
 it was observed that stakeholder integration
 emerged for the proactive companies not only as
 a result of product stewardship, but also as a
 result of habitat preservation, resource man-
 agement, waste reduction, and energy conser-
 vation. These companies engaged concerned
 stakeholder groups in dialogue over new explo-

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmut. J., 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 736 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 Table 2. Environmental responsiveness and organizational capabilities (first phase of data collection)

 Capabilities Illustrative quotes (P = proactive; R = reactive)

 Stakeholder (P) Buffalo: 'Our mission is to generate goodwill among our stakeholders.' 'We believe in
 integration integrating our neighbours into all aspects of our operations.' 'Our employees learn more about
 environmental issues from stakeholder groups than from training programs.' 'Even ... [an anti-
 oil industry activist] is willing to sit down and talk to us.' 'If our stakeholders advise us
 against a new development, we save ourselves a lot of grief and expense later on.' 'The
 involvement of stakeholders into operations is an ongoing process.'
 (P) Sioux: 'The ethanol blends would not have survived without our strong relationships with
 farmers in Saskatchewan and with crown corporations purchasing our products.' 'Our business
 is built on relationships with a wide range of citizen groups.'
 (R) Royal: 'The local communities and environmental groups have genuine concerns but we
 know the business better than they do. We always come up with the best solutions without
 interference.' 'We hold open houses every six months. Members of local communities are
 welcome to walk in and ask questions.'
 (R) Northern: 'We have emergency response procedures in place and have circulated
 information to residents in the areas we operate in ... what more are we expected to do?'
 (R) Farmers: 'To be honest, no one has a right to tell us how to run our business.'
 (R) U.S. Oil: 'We contribute to programs for protection of endangered species. We contribute
 to charitable causes. We run our business efficiently and expect local communities and
 environmental groups to trust us to do our best for environmental protection. Their involvement
 is more often disruptive than helpful.'

 Higher-order (P) Buffalo: 'Our interactions with stakeholders have opened up our minds to entirely new
 learning ways of running this business.' 'Talking openly with local communities and environmental

 groups opened our employees up to fresh perspectives.'
 (P) Sioux: 'We have the most exciting learning environment in the industry ... our employees
 consider this is one of the best perks.'
 (R) Royal: 'We know the business better than anyone else ... look at our profits. The issue
 here is not learning but squeezing increasing efficiency out of the existing operations.'

 Continuous (P) Buffalo: 'In our technologically mature industry, this is the one frontier open to fresh
 innovation learning, innovations, and productivity improvements.' 'A concern for environmental

 preservation has led to several process improvements and process cost reductions which we
 have patented and sold to companies in six different countries.' 'We pioneered and perfected
 horizontal drilling techniques ... all because we wanted to reduce our footprint on nature.'
 'Our exploration and development process, undertaken in consultation with stakeholders, has the
 lowest environmental impact in the entire industry.'
 (P) Sioux: 'We try to introduce at least three alternative fuels or less damaging fossil fuel
 products into the market every year.' 'Our past successes were based on adoption of already
 developed technologies. In recent years, our research and development centre has built up a
 strong program of research in alternative energy.'
 (R) Royal: 'This is a technologically mature industry. No one is going to make any major
 improvements.'
 (R): U.S. Oil: 'With 50 to 70 years of reserves left, companies will not scramble to improve
 processes and products.'
 (R) National: 'We should be investing in improving technologies in the Third World ... that's
 where you'll get more bang for the buck.' 'It doesn't make sense to spend billions of dollars
 to improve sulfur dioxide recovery another 2 percent.'
 (R) Farmers: 'We use state-of-the-art equipment ... what sort of improvements do you
 expect?'

 ( 1998 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.

 St,rat. Mg,it. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 737

 Table 3. Theme analysis of organizational capabilities (second phase of data collection)

 First-order themes Second-order themes Final themes

 * The ability for an early sensing

 * Ability to collaborate with

 of societal concerns

 * Positive ties/relationships with

 stakeholders to find solutions to
 environmental problems

 stakeholders

 * Ability to solve problems

 collaboratively

 * Ability to communicate with

 stakeholders in the environmental
 domain

 * Goodwill reserves among

 * Ability to steeer new

 Stakeholder Integration
 (Hart, 1995)

 developments effectively through
 public consultation processes

 neighbors

 * Ability to work with communities

 and interest groups for
 environmental solutions

 * Organization-wide culture of
 listening to local communities
 and environmental groups

 * Capability of explaining

 company's point of view to
 external stakeholders

 * Goodwill reserves leading to the

 company receiving the benefit-of-
 the-doubt from regulators,
 communities, and environmental
 groups

 * Capability of steering new

 developments through public
 consultation process

 * A knowledge base of

 * Line-staff cooperation and

 Continuous higher-order learning

 environmental information and
 biodiversity data

 integration around environmental
 information exchange

 * Constant updating of the

 * Continuous expansion of

 knowledge about the
 business/natural environment
 interface

 * Ability to look for solutions to

 environmental problems from
 fresh angles

 knowledge base on environmental
 impacts

 * An ability to understand the

 environmental impact of
 corporate operations

 * An ability to look for solutions

 to environmental problems from
 fresh angles

 * Formal and informal channels of

 environmental information
 exchange

 * Integration of line and staff

 functions for information
 exchange and dissemination
 around environmental practices
 * Feedback systems for reporting
 of environmental performance

 * Control systems to reward

 environmental reporting and
 solutions

 ( 1998 John Wilcy & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmit. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 738 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 Table 3. Continued

 First-order themes Second-order themes Final themes

 * Capability of constant * Ability to experiment on the Continuous innovation

 experimentation business/natural environment (modified from 'Continuous
 * The ability to take a long-term domain Improvement'-Hart, 1995)

 view of experimental actions * Ability to balance environmental
 * A reservoir of accumulating objectives with ecological goals

 technical operational knowledge * Ability to spot opportunities

 * The ability to take a fresh amidst changes in social

 perspective of traditional expectations and environmental
 operations/processes regulations

 * A culture of innovativeness * Ability to innovate and
 * An ability to balance continuously improve operations

 environmental objectives with while reducing environmental
 ecological goals impact

 * The ability to spot opportunities

 in adverse situations and crises

 * The ability to make continuous

 improvements in processes,
 products, systems

 * Acting before the rest of the

 industry

 * Ability to preempt regulations
 * Ability to generate feasible low-

 cost solutions to environmental
 problems

 * Control systems to reward
 environmental solutions

 * Corporate culture of * Leadership in environmental This theme dropped as beint
 environmental leadership regulatory compliance abstract and not competitively

 * Corporate culture of exemplary valuable

 regulatory compliance

 rations, developments, site location, plant design,
 new product, and used oil recycling decisions.
 One catalyst may be the greater emphasis placed
 in Canada on public consultation, and hence
 stakeholder involvement, in the environmental
 regulation of industry (Pasquero, 1991).

 The process started when Buffalo and Sioux,
 having decided, around 1980, to assume an
 environmental leadership stance, determined that
 it was essential to improve their managers' under-
 standing of environmental issues through inter-
 action with multiple stakeholders concerned with
 the preservation of the natural environment. The
 twin goals of goodwill generation among diverse
 stakeholder groups and reducing corporate
 environmental impact became important goals for
 both companies. Both companies provided organi-
 zational incentives to facilitate the development
 of employees' abilities to listen to and incorporate

 the viewpoints of the concerned stakeholders.
 Employees were rewarded not only for achieving
 production and financial goals, but also for
 achieving low levels of stakeholder complaints,
 negative publicity and high levels of positive
 feedback from stakeholder groups. Further,
 employees were also provided discretion through
 flexibility in a portion of their operating budgets
 to experiment with different ways of reducing
 environmental impact. This enabled employees to
 respond to some of the suggestions of external
 stakeholders, further improving collaborative
 relationships and mutual trust.

 Thus, proactive companies benefited from a
 battery of subtle sources of social influence
 derived from their employees' close relationships
 with the representatives of these stakeholder
 groups. These close interactions increased the
 likelihood that stakeholder representatives had

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmit. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 739

 positive and favorable influences on critical
 decisions made by these groups in respect of the
 proactive companies (Cialdini, 1984). Buffalo's
 refinery manager explained:

 This process took around five to seven years of
 consistent actions and behavior to seep into the
 organizational culture . . . New employees learned
 quickly that developing positive relationships
 with a wide variety of stakeholders is as
 important as satisfying customers and earning an
 above average return for investors.

 While Buffalo's emphasis was on relationship-

 building with stakeholder groups at the upstream
 end of operations, Sioux's emphasis was on
 relationship-building with suppliers and customer
 groups which include farmers, government agen-
 cies, crown corporations, nonprofit organizations,
 and NGOs. These groups supported Sioux's move
 towards less environmentally damaging fuel alter-
 natives. Sioux's recycled engine oil was pur-
 chased by members of these groups during the
 12 years it lost money on this product, keeping
 the pioneering operation alive. With growing
 awareness of environmental degradation during
 the 1990s, more consumers began to buy recycled
 oil and the more expensive vegetable-based oils,
 making this operation profitable.

 toward environmental groups and local communi-
 ties who 'blocked' or opposed their business oper-
 ations, arguing that these groups affected their
 ability to generate jobs and revenues. These com-
 panies are still actively fighting and lobbying to
 open up protected natural areas for development.
 The environmental groups and local communi-

 ties confirmed that the reactive companies do not
 acknowledge their stake in new developments
 which may have major environmental impacts.
 At the same time, they confirmed their positive
 collaborative relationships with the proactive
 companies based on mutual consultation for
 environmental preservation. They trusted these
 companies to try their best to reduce environmen-
 tal impact in accordance with these consultations.
 Even the representative of Greenpeace, committed
 to closing down the industry, said:

 We can talk to these (proactive) companies ...
 they are in a dirty business but at least they try
 harder than the larger companies with more
 resources.

 On the other hand, the reactive companies
 emphasized the role of legal and public relations
 departments in handling the concerns of stake-
 holders with noneconomic motivations. These
 companies' managers indicated that persuasion
 and image management were more important in
 their dealings with these groups. They perceived
 their actions as driven by the concerns of primary
 stakeholders (Clarkson, 1995) such as investors
 who have representation on their boards, cus-
 tomers who have purchasing power, and regu-
 lators who have sanctioning power. In contrast,
 the proactive companies' managers were more
 proud of their relationships with environmental
 groups, local communities, regulators and other
 groups motivated primarily by noneconomic goals
 such as values for the preservation of the environ-
 ment. For the proactive companies, joint problem
 solving, information sharing and negotiations
 (Gray, 1989; Vredenburg and Westley, 1997)
 took place primarily within the framework of
 environmental protection and not within the
 framework of the economic transaction. The
 reactive companies assumed adversarial positions

 According to the officials of the regulatory
 agency (AEUB), while no company has a perfect
 record in meeting emissions and solid wastes
 limits, the two proactive companies made more
 sincere efforts than others to cut down their
 emissions and wastes. The regulators confirmed
 that they give the 'benefit-of-the-doubt' to 'sin-
 cere companies' in case of minor infractions, and
 concentrate on companies that tend to have a
 'bad attitude' toward environmental standards. In
 general, the regulators have an overall positive
 view of the larger reactive companies (Royal,
 U.S. Oil, and National) as well, but a negative
 view of the two smaller companies (Northern and
 Farmers) in terms of 'sincerity.' This is consistent
 with the definition of the reactive companies as
 those staying within regulatory boundaries.

 Some of the competitive benefits of this firm-
 specific capability lie in improved corporate repu-
 tations that translate into favorable economic
 dealings including retail sales and increased good-
 will that leads to the easing of opposition to
 everyday operations and development plans. The
 proactive companies are able to go through public
 consultation hearings and approval processes for
 new developments much faster. This leads to
 savings in project cost over-runs, lower interest

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strut. Mgmt. J., 19: 729-753 ( 1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 740 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 charges, and lower litigation expenses. The
 reactive companies face stiff opposition, and these
 hearings can go on for years without resolution.
 In 1994, U.S. Oil had to withdraw from a major
 new development in Alberta after spending over
 $15 million on development expenses and legal
 charges during 1991-94. U.S. Oil did not consult
 with local communities or environmental groups
 and try to address their concerns about the
 environmental impacts of the project. In contrast,
 Buffalo and Sioux always consult these groups
 before announcing new developments. If their
 stakeholders clearly indicate that the development
 is not desirable due to ecological sensitivity, these
 companies withdraw without spending time and
 money on legal battles.

 The trust and credibility developed by proactive

 companies with a variety of stakeholder groups
 is a path-dependent strategic capability that can
 not be easily imitated by competitors. This capa-
 bility is an asset, based upon over a decade of
 consistent flow of actions (Dierickx and Cool,
 1989; Hart 1995) by the companies to reduce
 their impact on the natural environment in consul-
 tation with a diversity of stakeholder groups. This
 capability is firm-specific because it is based on
 fundamental changes in business philosophies and
 values accompanied by changes in organization
 design over a period of a decade or more. This
 capability is internally socially complex since it
 resides in every employee by virtue of corporate
 culture. At the same time, this capability is exter-
 nally socially complex (Coff, 1997) based on
 collaborative trust-based relationships between
 boundary spanners and external stakeholders.

 Capability for higher-order learning

 An organizational mandate to improve under-
 standing of environmental issues exposed the
 managers of the proactive companies to a variety
 of external influences, and thus sparked shared
 learning processes. Organizational learning is
 defined as 'the development of insights, knowl-
 edge, and associations between past actions, the
 effectiveness of those actions, and future actions'
 (Fiol and Lyles, 1985: 811). Leaming within
 organizations is indicated by successful organi-
 zational coping with rapid environmental change
 (Duncan and Weiss, 1979; Hedberg, 1981; Pfeffer
 and Salancik, 1978; Weick, 1979) and behavioral
 outcomes based on shared ideology and under-

 standing of the changes taking place (Daft and
 Weick, 1984; Fiol and Lyles, 1985; Starbuck,
 Greve, and Hedberg, 1978).

 Changes in the business environment that moti-
 vate exploration of alternative organizational rou-
 tines, technologies, environments, and objectives,
 may lead to higher-order (or higher-level-Fiol
 and Lyles, 1985; double-loop-Argyris and
 Sch6n, 1978) learning. Higher-order learning
 involves the development of different interpre-
 tations of new and existing information, as a
 result of developing new understandings of sur-
 rounding events (Fiol, 1994). This type of learn-
 ing characterizes organizational change under
 conditions of ambiguity and uncertain information
 (Lant and Mezias, 1992; March and Olsen, 1976;
 Miller and Friesen, 1980; Starbuck et al., 1978).
 This is not unlike the ambiguity and lack of
 information that currently characterizes the
 business/natural environment interface in the
 Canadian oil and gas industry.

 The strategies that an organization may adopt
 to deal with these ambiguities and lack of infor-
 mation will create a context for issue inter-
 pretation and decision-making (Daft and Weick,
 1984; Ginsberg and Venkataraman, 1992, 1995;
 Thomas and McDaniel, 1990) and lead to higher-
 order organizational learning (Fiol and Lyles,
 1985). Thus, environmental strategies can lead to
 different paths of learning and knowledge creation
 on the business/natural environment interface
 for each firm. Facilitation of experimentation
 (searches for alternative routines-March, 1988)
 by managers can lead to the recognition of new
 goals and the means to achieve these goals. These
 learning processes, in turn, result in major reori-
 entations that involve changed norms, values,
 world-views, or frames of reference (Argyris and
 Sch6n, 1978; Bateson, 1972; Shrivastava and
 Mitroff, 1982).

 Similarly, changing business paradigms and

 fundamental shifts in philosophy occur when the
 firm's managers deal with the uncertain outcomes
 of incorporating environmental considerations into
 their decision processes. Besides consideration of
 the systemic impact of the natural environment on
 business (Shrivastava, 1995a), some fundamental
 philosophical changes in organizational thinking
 involve a shift to thinking toward closed systems
 and circular flows instead of linear processing
 systems, material conservation instead of
 efficiency in maximizing output and the use of

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmi. J., 19: 729-753 ( 1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Straiegy and Organizational Capabilities

 741

 renewable energy sources. Thus, not only per-
 formance below aspirations, as the literature dis-
 cusses at length, will trigger higher-order learning
 (Argyris and Sch6n, 1978; Cyert and March,
 1963; Lant and Mezias, 1990; Milliken and Lant,
 1991), but fundamental shifts in philosophy
 accompanying proactive environmental strategies
 can create an experiential base of activities that
 triggers the processes of higher-order learning
 within organizations. According to the environ-
 mental assessment manager of Buffalo:

 In our technologically mature industry, this is the
 one frontier open to fresh learning, innovations,
 and productivity improvements.

 Managers of Buffalo and Sioux explained that
 in opening up communication channels to ideas
 from stakeholders such as local communities and
 environmental groups, they were able to look
 inwards and find ways of accomplishing the
 objectives of these groups while generating
 improvements within their organizations. This
 was seen as a circular process in which outside
 stakeholder influences sparked internal learning,
 which, in turn, triggered innovation leading to
 demonstrated actions for environmental protec-
 tion. These actions, in turn, led to better relation-
 ships with external groups, feeding back as
 greater outside influence to reinforce organi-
 zational learning.

 There are few benchmarks and a low level

 of existing knowledge in the industry regarding
 effective ways of reducing environmental impact.
 Thus, solutions for reducing these impacts were
 often left to the discretion of line managers. This
 discretion was accompanied by the integration of
 knowledge acquired from stakeholders, diffusion
 of knowledge within the organization, keeping
 up the momentum of learning, and feedback on
 knowledge application. In both companies, in
 order to encourage interaction, monthly meetings
 under the themes 'environmental leadership'
 (Buffalo) and 'alternative energy development'
 (Sioux) brought together a changing mix of man-
 agers from all of the company's facilities and
 operations. These groups formally and informally
 discussed advances in knowledge on the
 business/natural environment interface and
 actions taken to reduce environmental impact in
 each managers' operational domain.

 This is a firm-specific capability since the same

 managers may not be able to adopt similar stances

 on experimentation, learning, and knowledge gen-
 eration in organizations that do not provide a
 similar context. This capability is path dependent,
 involving a series of unique interactions and an
 experiential base of organizational activities over
 a long period of time. It must be noted here that
 proactive corporate environmental responsiveness
 is but one of the possible catalysts for building
 up an organization's capability for higher-order
 learning. It is possible that companies with
 reactive environmental strategies may build a
 similar capability as a result of other influences.
 However, the managers of the reactive companies
 did not associate environmental responsiveness
 with any capability or learning processes. Higher-
 order learning not only leads to capability devel-
 opment within companies, but is also a capability
 that leads to competitive benefits in terms of
 improved operations, increased efficiencies, cost
 reductions, higher productivity, as well as the
 triggering of a capability of continuous innovation.

 Capability for continuous innovation

 Higher-order learning processes, triggered by
 environmental responsiveness strategies, lead to
 a changing experiential base of organizational
 activities, routines, and goals. Changes in technol-
 ogies, processes, specifications, inputs, and prod-
 ucts can stimulate the building-up of internal
 capabilities and knowledge-based invisible assets
 (Itami, 1987). While environmental change pro-
 vides an opportunity for a firm to be the first
 mover, the likelihood of a firm benefiting in a
 sustained manner from the first-mover status will
 depend upon the development of these capabili-
 ties. As the window for technological innovations
 gets shorter, even internal innovations in systems
 and management practices are rarely defensible
 against competitive actions. However, a capability
 of continuously generating a stream of inno-
 vations enables an organization to stay a step
 ahead of competitors who do not possess this
 capability. Hart (1995) calls this the capability
 of continuous improvement resulting from organi-
 zational efforts to reduce, minimize, and elimi-
 nate waste.

 The managers of the reactive companies con-
 sidered the industry as mature with 50-70 years
 of commercially viable oil stocks remaining.
 Hence, they saw no incentives for major techno-
 logical improvements. In contrast, these factors

 C 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Stra(t. Mgiit. J., 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 742 S. Sharna and H. Vredenburg

 were not seen as constraints by the proactive
 companies. Table 4 provides numbers in different
 activity areas for the seven companies in respect
 to all innovations perceived to be related to
 environmental responsiveness.

 The table provides numbers separately for inno-

 vations up to 1993 and during 1994. The latter
 indicate the continuing momentum of innovations
 for proactive companies. The numbers in
 parentheses indicate patents filed for, or obtained,
 for these innovations. The Appendix descriptively
 lists some of the major innovations attributed by
 these companies to their environmental respon-
 siveness. As can be seen from Table 4 and the
 Appendix, Buffalo has a greater concentration
 of technological innovations in its upstream and
 manufacturing operations, while Sioux has con-
 centrated on product-based innovations. At the
 same time, the reactive companies do not associ-
 ate many innovations with their environmental
 strategies.

 It may be noted here that the research study

 did not seek to understand and explore the emer-
 gence of innovations not perceived to be
 associated with environmental responsiveness by
 these companies. Thus, reactive companies may

 have an independent stream of innovations totally
 unrelated to environmental responsiveness. More-
 over, the numbers of innovations do not reflect
 the visible excitement of dealing with a whole
 new area of continuing opportunity evidenced by
 the managers of Buffalo and Sioux. This excite-
 ment was missing among the reactive companies.
 The capability to innovate in the proactive com-
 panies was not confined to a specific operation
 or functional area, but appeared to be a pervasive
 part of the organizational culture.

 The proactive companies provided an organi-
 zational context to support experimentation and
 the seeking of opportunities at the
 business/natural environment interface in an
 efficient and effective manner through employee
 compensation systems and by facilitating mana-
 gerial discretion. This context encouraged
 employees to respond to these external influences,
 resulting in changing environmental philosophies
 and the emergence of unique organizational capa-
 bilities. Thus, new capabilities were developed in
 a period of perceived turbulence (Wernerfelt,
 1984) and organizational change required to
 accommodate environmental strategies. This leads
 to the following hypotheses:

 Table 4. Innovations (patents) related to environmental responsiveness (second phase of data collection)

 Buffalo Sioux Royal National U.S. Oil Farmers Northern

 (P) (P) (R) (R) (R) (R) (R)

 Innovations (1980-93)
 Approx. total (patents filed)
 Drilling and exploration 23 (16) - 2 (1) 5 (1) 5 (3) None None
 Process 16 (7) 2 (2) - 2 2
 Waste and emission
 control
 Products 33 (17) 5 (2) 2 (1) 2 2 (1)
 Others 9 (2) 25 (20) 2 (2) 2 (2) 2 (2)

 8 (3) - - 1 2

 Innovations (1994)
 Approx. total (patents filed)
 Drilling and exploration 7 (5) - I(1) 1 1
 Process 4 (2) 1 (1) - 1 - None None
 Waste and emission 14 (8) 1(1) 1 (1) 1 (1)
 control
 Products I (1) 5 (5)
 Others I (1) - ! 1

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgm,t. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 743

 Hypothesis 1: The greater the degree to
 which a company adopts proactive environ-
 mental responsiveness strategies, the greater
 the likelihood that firm-specific organizational
 capabilities will emerge.

 Hypothesis 2: The greater the degree to
 which firm-specific organizational capabilities
 emerge within a company, the greater the like-
 lihood of competitive benefits flowing from
 these capabilities.

 The second hypothesis essentially is a test of the
 resource-based view of the firm; that is, organi-
 zational capabilities are competitively valuable.
 The first hypothesis does not rule out the emer-
 gence of organizational capabilities due to other
 types of organizational strategies as well as other
 organizational and environmental influences. The
 hypothesized relationships were tested through a
 mail survey in the Canadian oil and gas industry.

 A SURVEY OF THE CANADIAN OIL
 AND GAS INDUSTRY: RESEARCH
 METHOD

 The mail survey was conducted through a
 questionnaire-based research instrument. A 95-
 item, 7-point Likert-type, continuous scale was
 used to measure environmental strategies
 (ENVSTRGY). Due to unidimensionality of the
 items (as indicated by factor analysis), simple
 averages of the items were used to construct
 this scale. Perceptual measures using multiple
 respondents were used due to the unavailability of
 quantitative data bases that can reliably measure
 corporate environmental strategies in the Cana-
 dian oil and gas industry. The items constituting
 this scale, shown in Table 5, were based on the
 11 dimensions used in the exploratory research.
 High scores indicate proactive strategies of
 environmental responsiveness. While this scale
 does not provide a discrete separation between
 reactive and proactive strategies, it is adequate to
 test Hypothesis 1 that companies which score
 higher on environmental responsiveness strategies
 will also score higher on the organizational capa-
 bilities scale.

 Table 6(a) presents the items included in the
 organizational capabilities (CAPABLTY) meas-
 ure. Since hypothesis testing was done within

 the larger context of the entire industry, it was
 considered necessary to supplement the three
 capabilities emerging from the exploratory study
 with a more general measure that could accom-
 modate other capabilities that companies may
 associate with environmental responsiveness.
 Thus, the capabilities construct was based both
 on the exploratory study and concepts drawn
 from the resource-based view literature. The three
 capabilities emerging from the exploratory
 study-that is, stakeholder integration, continuous
 innovation, and organizational learning-were
 included in the measure. Characteristics of organi-
 zational capabilities drawn from the resource-
 based literature included causal ambiguity (Hart,
 1995; Reed and DeFillippi, 1990; Rumelt, 1987;
 Teece, 1987), lack of an identifiable owner in an
 organization (Barney, 1991; Reed and DeFillipi,
 1990), path dependency (Barney, 1991; Dierickx
 and Cool, 1989; Hart, 1995), and social com-
 plexity (Amit and Schoemaker, 1993; Barney,
 1991), among others. Data collection was com-
 pleted in spring 1995 and hence the survey did
 not include capabilities such as 'shared vision'
 predicted later by Hart (1995).

 In order to test Hypothesis 2, a competitive
 benefits measure was developed. Table 6(b)
 presents the measure for competitive benefits
 (BENEFIT) intended to measure the competitive
 outcomes of the capabilities. The items constitut-
 ing this measure were determined based on com-
 petitively beneficial outcomes of the capabilities
 perceived by managers during the exploratory
 study. These included cost reduction (Hart, 1995),
 improved operations and management practices,
 product quality, employee morale, corporate repu-
 tation and goodwill, faster regulatory approvals,
 product differentiation, improved ability to com-
 pete in the future (Hart, 1995), etc.

 This research instrument was vetted by a group

 of university-based management researchers and
 industry experts, and then pretested among a
 group of 25 oil and gas industry managers.
 Reliability (Cronbach's coefficient alpha) checks
 were run for the constructs used. Most constructs
 exhibited high reliability in excess of 0.80. Tables
 5, 6(a) and 6(b) include the Cronbach's coef-
 ficient alpha scores for the constructs. Data diag-
 nostics tests for normality, homoscedasticity, and
 linearity indicated no violations of regression
 assumptions. Factor analysis using oblimin
 rotation revealed that each of the three constructs,

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strit(. Mgmit. J., 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 744 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 Table 5. List of items constituting the environmental strategies measure (overall construct reliability-Cronbach's
 coefficient alpha: 0.84)

 1. To what extent has your company modified business practices in the following areas of operation, in

 order to reduce impact on animal species and natural habitats?
 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.85)

 * Exploration and prospecting sites
 * Drilling sites and wellheads
 * Oil and gas production
 * Oil and gas gathering pipelines
 * Refining facilities
 * Transportation of petroleum products/chemicals

 2. To what extent has your company undertaken the following voluntary actions (i.e., actions that are not

 required by regulations) for environmental restoration?
 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.83)

 Clean-up of abandoned well sites
 Restoration of organic properties of contaminated soil
 Clean-up of abandoned retail gas station sites
 Protection of, and withdrawal from, ecologically sensitive habitats
 Disposal and treatment of hazardous/toxic wastes

 * Compensation to local communities, employees, and other impacted parties for injury caused due to the

 company's environmental policies and accidents

 3. To what extent has your company reduced wastes and emissions from operations as a result of the

 following actions?
 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.81)

 * Safe disposal of solid/hazardous wastes
 * Investment in pollution/emission control equipment
 * Recycling programs
 * Closed-loop waste use within the organization
 * Closed-loop waste use with other organizations
 * Process modifications to reduce waste at source
 * Changes in input material specifications
 * Modifications of product specifications
 * Implemented new technology to reduce wastes

 4. To what extent has your company reduced purchases of nonrenewable materials, chemicals, and

 components, as a result of the following actions?
 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.84)

 * Reduction in total materials used
 * Substitution by renewable materials
 * Use of recycled/waste materials

 5. To what extent has your company reduced the use of traditional fuels, by substitution of, and research

 into, the following energy sources?
 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.83)

 * Substitution by renewable energy sources

 (i) Photovoltaics/solar energy
 (ii) Wind power

 * Substitution by alternative energy sources

 (i) Natural gas
 (ii) Geothermal energy
 (iii) Methane
 (iv) Biomass
 (v) Energy from wastes

 * Increase in co-generation facilities
 * Investment in research into alternative energy sources

 ( 1998 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.

 Stri-it. Mgimt. J., 19: 729-753 ( 1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy anid Organizational Capabilities 745

 Table 5. Continued

 6. To what extent has your company reduced energy use, due to the following actions'?

 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.82)

 * Better housekeeping/maintenance procedures
 * Retrofitting/replacement of high-energy-consuming equipment
 * Changes in process technology
 * Changes in product specifications

 Changes in specifications of input materials

 7. To what extent has your company undertaken the following actions to reduce the environmental impact of

 its products'?
 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.97)

 * Introduced gasoline blends with lower emissions
 * Introduced chemicals with lower environmental impact
 * Made changes in packaging for engine oils/chemicals sold:

 (i) Reduced packaging
 (ii) Introduced packaging made from recycled materials
 (iii) Introduced biodegradable/recyclable packaging
 (iv) Eliminated packaging that damages the ozone layer
 Introduced used engine oil collection facilities
 Adopted comprehensive product life cycle analysis
 Obtained ecological certification of a product or service
 Reduced production of, eliminated, or replaced a product harmful to the environment

 * Changed product specifications in order to make production processes less environmentally damaging

 Combined the functions of more than one product

 8. To what extent has your company undertaken the following actions to reduce the risk of environmental

 accidents, spills, and releases?
 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.82)

 * Investments in equipment and control/alarm systems
 * Rigorous emergency response procedures
 * Employee training in emergency response procedures
 * Employee involvement and responsibility for emergency response
 * Training of local communities in emergency response procedures
 * Fundamental changes in design of processes and products to reduce/eliminate environmental accidents,

 spills, releases, and hazardous waste

 * Reduce/eliminate storage and use of hazardous chemicals/wastes

 9. To what extent has your company established partnerships to reduce environmental impact?

 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.80)

 * Technology and research alliances with other companies:

 (i) Within the oil and gas industry
 (ii) Outside the oil and gas industry

 * Agreements with other companies to process wastes
 * Partnerships to establish environmental standards for products, processes, operations, and materials with:

 (i) Other companies
 (ii) Environmental groups
 (iii) Suppliers
 (iv) Distributors or retailers
 (v) Industry associations

 * Establishment of consultative councils with local communities/governments, and environmental groups
 * Education programs for reduction of wasteful consumption
 * Partnerships in developing countries for environmental preservation

 ( 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Str-t. Mgmt. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 746 S. Sharna and H. Vredenburg

 Table 5. Continued

 10. Indicate the extent to which your company undertakes the following actions for environmental audit,

 public disclosure, employee training and immunity?
 (Dimension Cronbach's coefficient alpha 0.84)

 Detailed assessment of the environmental impact of operations (every years)
 Comprehensive environmental audit (every years)
 Release of a public environmental stewardship report (every years)
 Employee training programs on environmental issues

 * Provide immunity and protection to employees who report environmental accidents to management or

 authorities

 * Inform in a timely manner everyone who may be affected by conditions that might endanger health,

 safety, or the environment

 * Follow environmental practices according to North American regulations in developing countries where

 environmental regulations are less stringent

 * Invest in research for environmental preservation:

 (i) Within company
 (ii) With industry associations
 (iii) With universities and other research agencies

 ENVSTRGY, CAPABLTY, and BENEFITS were
 measures of a single variable.

 Data collection and analysis

 between three to five persons for each company.
 The first mailings elicited a return of around 60
 percent within 2 weeks. Follow-up faxes and
 telephone calls after two weeks resulted in a
 total response rate of 90 percent (99 out of 110
 companies). The high response rate is largely
 attributable to the follow-up by telephone and
 fax, a mention of the funding support by CAPP
 (which agreed to undertake all mailing) in the
 cover letter, and the fact that the institution with
 which the researchers were affiliated is well
 known among Canadian managers.

 The questionnaire was administered to the total
 population of Canadian oil and gas companies in
 the Compact Disclosures data base with annual
 sales revenues in excess of $20 million. This
 population definition was intended to exclude the
 smallest companies which were hypothesized to
 lack the resources and motivation both to go
 beyond minimum regulatory compliance and to
 respond to a 13-page questionnaire. Each com-
 pany was contacted by telephone to obtain names
 of potential respondent managers knowledgeable
 about the phenomena to be measured. The tele-
 phone contact also helped eliminate companies
 that had merged with other companies or were
 otherwise ineligible for the study. These telephone
 contacts identified the names of the CEO or a
 member of the top management team more likely
 to respond, the manager responsible for environ-
 mental affairs, a crude oil production and/or
 refinery manager, divisional supervisors, a drilling
 supervisor, and a marketing manager. The l 10
 companies thus included in the survey accounted
 for approximately 80 percent of the total annual
 sales revenues in the Canadian oil and gas sector.
 Based on the names obtained during initial
 telephone contacts, questionnaires were mailed to

 Sixty-four companies (65%) provided multiple
 respondents. Of these, 40 companies provided
 two responses (usually from a manager in charge
 of environmental affairs and a member of the
 senior management team), 16 companies provided
 three responses (including a line manager such
 as exploration manager/refinery manager/drilling
 supervisor), 6 companies provided four responses,
 and 2 companies provided five responses.
 Obtaining multiple responses in strategy research
 provides perspectives from different levels and
 functional areas within a company. Strategy may
 be emergent and the top management viewpoint
 need not necessarily reflect the pattern of actions
 that constitutes strategy within an organization
 (Mintzberg, 1978, 1994). A 65 percent multiple
 response from top and middle managers was con-
 sidered a healthy measure for triangulating differ-
 ent viewpoints within the companies for measur-
 ing strategy. The data indicated an interrespondent
 reliability greater than 0.80 on most measures.

 ? 1998 John Wilcy & Sons, Ltd.

 Str-tLt. M<gitt. J., 19: 729-753 ( 1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 747

 Table 6(a). Items constituting the measure for organizational capabilities

 Capabilities (reliability-Cronbach's coefficient alpha: 0.93)

 The following items list some characteristics associated with organizational capabilities. Please indicate the
 extent to which you perceive capabilities, with the following characteristics, emerging within your organization
 as a consequence of your environmental practices:

 S

 0

 0

 0

 0

 0

 0

 They take a long period of time to build up
 Competitors can not build up these capabilities faster through a greater application of resources
 They can not be easily be identified or imitated by competitors
 They span (provide benefits) to several functional areas/departments
 They span (provide benefits) to different levels within the company
 They lack a clearly identified owner within the company, i.e. an employee cannot leave with
 organizational reputation, knowledge, relationships, etc.
 They act as triggers for collective learning within the company
 They act as triggers for innovation within the company
 They act as triggers for collaborative problem solving with stakeholders
 They combine with other assets to generate benefits for the company, e.g. improved reputation combines
 with an established retail network

 Table 6(b) Items constituting the measure for organizational benefits

 Benefits (reliability-Cronbach 's coefficient alpha: 0.96)
 Please indicate the extent to which the company's environmental practices have led to any of the following
 competitive benefits?

 * Reduction in costs:
 (i) Material costs
 (ii) Process/production costs
 (iii) Costs of regulatory compliance

 * Improved operations:

 (i) Increased process/production efficiency
 (ii) Increases in productivity
 (iii) Increased knowledge about effective ways of managing operations
 (iv) Process innovations
 Improved product quality
 Product innovations

 * Organization-wide learning among employees
 * Improved employee morale
 * Overall improved company reputation or goodwill
 * Better relationships with stakeholders such as local communities, regulators, and environmental groups

 Thus, multiple responses were averaged in order
 to arrive at variable values representative of the
 company as a whole.

 The response rate of 90 percent largely pre-
 empted a nonresponse bias risk in the data. More-
 over, a scan of the 11 companies out of 110 which
 did not respond indicated 1 senior company, 2
 intermediates, and 7 junior companies. This was
 roughly the same in demographic proportions to
 the company population surveyed, further minimiz-
 ing the nonresponse risk. The hypotheses were
 tested using multivariate regression.

 THE MAIL SURVEY: RESULTS

 Two regression models were tested according to
 the hypotheses presented above. The first (1)
 predicted that companies which score higher
 on environmental responsiveness strategies
 (ENVSTRGY) will also score higher on the
 organizational capabilities (CAPABLTY) meas-
 ure. The second (2) predicted that higher levels
 of competitive benefits (BENEFITS) will be
 associated with higher scores on the organi-
 zational capabilities (CAPABLTY) measure.

 ( 1998 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.

 Strtt. Mgmit. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 748 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 CAPABLTY = ca + b ENVSTRGY + e (1)

 DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS

 BENEFITS = a, + b, CAPABLTY + e1 (2)

 Table 7 presents the results of the regression
 analysis.

 Both hypothesized relationships were found to
 be statistically significant at p < 0.0001. Environ-
 mental responsiveness strategies of the companies
 appear to explain around 20 percent of the vari-
 ation in the emergence of organizational capabili-
 ties within these organizations. Further, organi-
 zational capabilities appear to explain around 51
 percent of the variation in the competitive benefits
 emerging in these organizations. Thus, proac-
 tiveness in environmental responsiveness is per-
 ceived to be associated with the emergence of
 organizational capabilities, and does not appear
 to have a negative impact on corporate competi-
 tiveness.

 The study addresses the debate regarding the role
 of environmental strategy in firm competitiveness
 by exploring empirically the relationship between
 environmental strategy and the emergence of
 competitively valuable organizational capabilities.
 Early advocates of the 'green is gold' school
 argued that cost savings due to increased
 efficiency and waste elimination more than com-
 pensated for the cost of such environmental strate-
 gies. When these arguments proved overly
 simplistic and sometimes erroneous (Hart and
 Ahuja, 1996; Walley and Whitehead, 1994), more
 elaborate theoretical arguments premised on the
 resource-based view of the firm were advanced
 (Hart, 1995). Empirical findings using stock
 prices as a firm performance measure and
 environmental awards and crises as proxy vari-
 ables of environmental strategy suggested that a

 Table 7. Results of regression analysis

 Variables Unstd. b Beta (B) t-value p (one-tailed)

 (S.E.)

 Dependent variable: CAPABLTY
 ENVSTRGY 0.0082 0.4569 5.059 0.0000

 (0.0016)

 Constant 1.8822 0.454 0.0000

 (0.4145)
 R2 0.2088
 Adjusted R2 0.2006
 F-statistic 25.5910
 Probability of F 0.0000
 N 99

 Dependent variable: BENEFIT
 CAPABLTY 0.7481 0.7207 10.186 0.0000

 (0.0734)

 Constant 0.6271 2.091 0.0392

 (0.2999)
 R2 0.5194
 Adjusted R2 0.5144
 F-statistic 103.7581

 Probability of F 0.0000
 N 99

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 749

 more complex intraorganizational relationship
 may exist (Klassen and McLaughlin, 1996). Our
 study provides some empirical evidence for the
 theoretical argument that proactive environmental
 strategy may lead to the development of unique
 competitively valuable organizational capabilities
 (Hart, 1995).

 Using comparative case studies, we found evi-
 dence of the development of a capability for
 stakeholder integration, a capability for higher-
 order learning, and a capability for continuous
 innovation in firms which we labeled as having
 proactive environmental strategies, based on self-
 reported environmental activities and triangulated
 with external (regulators and environmental
 group) commentators.

 Statistical tests showed that proactive environ-

 mental strategy explained more than 20 percent
 of the variance in the firms' reports of whether
 their environmental strategy can be associated
 with the the development of unique organizational
 capabilities as conceived by the resource-based
 view of the firm (that is, they are path dependent,
 inimitable, socially complex, etc.).

 These unique organizational capabilities,

 resulting from proactive environmental strategies,
 appear to account for more than 50 percent of
 the firms' self-reported variance in competitive
 benefits (that is, process/product/operational
 innovations, cost reductions, improved corporate
 reputations, better employee morale, etc.). These
 findings suggest that, in fact, proactive environ-
 mental strategies may invoke the processes sug-
 gested by the resource-based view of the firm
 and lead to competitive advantage.

 of the oil and gas industry wherever possible, the
 study relies heavily on self-reported measures
 provided by company managers. This is a
 methodological weakness shared with much other
 research examining corporate strategies. Never-
 theless, future studies could add to our confidence
 in the results reported here by replicating this
 study using more direct objective measures of the
 theoretical constructs.

 This paper is an empirical exploration and test

 of the resource-based view of the firm perspective
 that companies can gain competitive advantage
 from proactive environmental strategy (Hart,
 1995). Further ramifications and theoretical link-
 ages are left to future research which could
 inform our understanding of the linkage between
 particular dimensions of each of the major con-
 structs in our study. For example, does the capa-
 bility of stakeholder integration lead to improved
 morale, goodwill and reputation while the capa-
 bility of continuous learning leads to improved
 operations and cost reduction?

 It is possible that the findings reported here
 are limited to the Canadian context where prac-
 tices such as extensive public consultation proc-
 esses are perhaps more prevalent and expected in
 the environmental domain than in other national
 contexts (Pasquero, 1991). The authors are cur-
 rently engaged in replicating and extending the
 study in the United States and in Latin American
 countries. Future studies may replicate and extend
 the study in other industries where environmental
 concerns may present themselves differently than
 in the oil and gas industry. Future studies may
 also extend the study to dependent measures of
 firm financial performance, measured objectively
 as return on investment, return on equity or stock
 price changes, or through self-reported measures
 compared to industry average (e.g., Govindarajan,
 1984; Gupta, 1987). Both types of measures have
 been used in other studies linking the corporate
 strategies to financial performance.

 Limitations and future research

 This study was focused on environmental strategy
 as a source for competitively valuable organi-
 zational capabilities, and it does not rule out the
 possibility that other organizational strategies may
 also lead to the development of competitively
 valuable organizational capabilities. It is also pos-
 sible that the environmentally reactive firms in
 this study developed competitively valuable
 organizational capabilities from other corporate
 strategies. Future studies might explore what other
 types of strategies lead to the development of
 such capabilities.

 Although attempts were made in this study to
 triangulate data by using independent observers

 Implications

 As opportunities for developing corporate com-
 petitive advantage diminish in a world of global
 competition, shortening product life cycles, and
 declining barriers to entry, the resource-based
 view of the firm may provide increasing guidance
 to the development of competitive strategies. As
 a theory of the firm predicated on developing

 ? 199X John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgiit. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 750 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 organizational capabilities that can provide sus-
 tained competitive advantage, complex and com-
 prehensive environmental strategies may indeed,
 as Hart (1995) argues, be an important emergent
 competitive domain to which leading firms should
 pay heed.

 Public policy makers might look to 'raising the

 bar' environmentally in a predictable and timely
 fashion leaving details of how to meet the
 requirements to firms' own technical and mana-
 gerial innovativeness. This would favor firms who
 proactively develop environmentally based capa-
 bilities while 'pulling up' the rest of the industry's
 environmental performance.

 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

 The authors would like to thank the two anony-
 mous SMJ reviewers for their constructive com-
 ments.

 REFERENCES

 Amit, R. and P. J. H. Schoemaker (1993). 'Strategic
 assets and organizational rent', Strategic Manage-
 ment Journal, 14(1), pp. 33-46.

 Argyris, C. and D. A. Schon (1978). Organizational

 Learning. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

 Barnett, W. P, H. R. Greve and D. Y. Park (1994). 'An

 Cyert, R. M. and J. G. March (1963). A Behavioral
 Theory of the Firm. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
 Cliffs, NJ.

 Daft, R. L. and K. E. Weick (1984). 'Toward a model

 of organizations as interpretation systems', Academy
 of Management Review, 9, pp. 284-295.

 Day, G. S. (1994). 'The capabilities of market driven

 organizations.' Journal of Marketing, 58, pp. 37-52.

 Dierickx, I. and K. Cool (1989). 'Asset stock accumu-
 lation and sustainability of competitive advantage.'
 Managemnent Science, 35, pp. 1504-1511.

 Duncan, R. B. and A. Weiss (1979). 'Organizational
 learning: Implications for organizational design'. In
 B Staw (ed.), Research in Organizational Behavior.
 JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 75-123.

 Fiol, C. M. (1994). 'Consensus, diversity, and learning
 in organizations', Organization Science, 5(3), pp.
 403-420.

 Fiol, C. M. and M. A. Lyles (1985). 'Organizational
 learning', Academy of Management Review, 10(4),
 pp. 803-816.

 Ginsberg, A. (1994). 'Minding the competition: From

 mapping to mastery', Strategic Management Jour-
 nal, Winter Special Issue, 15, pp. 153-174.

 Ginsberg, A. and N. Venkataraman (1992). 'Investing

 in new information technology: The role of competi-
 tive posture and issue diagnosis', Strategic Manage-
 ment Journal, Summer Special Issue, 13, pp. 37-53.
 Ginsberg, A. and N. Venkataraman (1995). 'Insti-
 tutional initiatives for technological change: From
 issue interpretation to strategic choice', Organization
 Studies, 16, pp. 425-448.

 Gladwin, T. N., J. J. Kennelly, and T. S. Krause

 evolutionary model of organizational performance',
 Strategic Management Journal, Winter Special Issue,
 15, pp. 11-28.

 Barney, J.B. (1991). 'Firm resources and sustained
 competitive advantage', Journal of Management,
 17(1 ), pp. 99-120.

 Barney, J.B. and M.H. Hansen (1994). 'Trustworthiness

 as a source of competitive advantage', Strategic
 Management Journal, Winter Special Issue, 15, pp.
 175-190.

 Barney, J. B. and E. J. Zajac (1994). 'Competitive

 organizational behavior: Toward an organizationally-
 based theory of competitive advantage', Strategic
 Management Journal, Winter 1994, 15, pp. 5-9.

 Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind.

 Ballantine, New York.

 Cialdini, R. B. (1984). Influence. William Morrow,

 New York.

 Clarkson, M. B. E. (1995). 'A stakeholder framework
 for analyzing and evaluating corporate social per-
 formance', Academy of Management Journal, 20(1),
 pp. 92-117.

 Coff, R. W. (1997). 'Human assets and management
 dilemmas: Coping with hazards on the road to the
 resource-based theory,' Academy of Management
 Review, 23(2), pp. 374-402.

 (1995). 'Shifting paradigms for sustainable develop-
 ment: Implications for management theory and
 research', Academy of Management Review, 20(4),
 pp. 874-907.

 Glaser, B. G. and A. L. Strauss (1967). The Discovery
 of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative
 Research. Aldine, Chicago, IL.

 Govindarajan, V. (1984). 'Appropriateness of account-

 ing data in performance evaluation: An empirical
 examination of environmental uncertainty as an
 intervening variable', Accounting, Organizations,
 and Society, 9(2), pp. 125-135.

 Gray, B. (1989). Collaborating: Finding Common

 Ground for Multiparty Problems. Jossey-Bass, San
 Francisco, CA.

 Gupta, A. K. (1987). 'SBU strategies, corporate-SBU
 relations, and SBU effectiveness in strategy
 implementation', Academy of Management Journal,
 30(3), pp. 477-500.

 Hart, S. L. (1995). 'A natural-resource based view of
 the firm', Academy of Management Review, 20(4),
 pp. 986-1014.

 Hart, S. L. (1997). 'Beyond greening: Strategies for a
 sustainable world', Harvard Business Review, 25(1),
 pp. 66-76.

 Hart, S. L. and G. Ahuja (1996). 'Does it pay to be

 green? An empirical examination of the relationship
 between emission reduction and firm performance,'
 Business Strategy and the Environment, 5, pp. 30-37.

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgiin. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 751

 Hawken, P. (1993). The Ecology of Conmmerce: A
 Declaration of Sustainability. Harper, New York.
 Hedberg, B. (1981). 'How organizations learn and un-

 Post, J. E. (1978). Corporate Behavior and Social

 Change. Reston Publishing, Reston, VA.

 Reed, R. and R. J. DeFillippi (1990). 'Causal ambi-

 learn?'. In P. C. Nystorm and W. H. Starbuck (eds.),
 Handbook of Organizational Design, Vol. 2. Oxford
 University Press, New York, pp. 8-27.

 guity, barriers to imitation and sustainable competi-
 tive advantage', Academy of Management Review,
 15, pp. 88-102.

 Itami, H. (1987). Mobilizing Invisible Assets. Harvard

 University Press, Cambridge, MA.

 Jacobs, J. (1992). Systems of Survival, Vintage Books,

 New York.

 Kinder, P., S. D. Lydenberg and A. L. Domini (1992).

 Investing for Good: Making Money while Being
 Socially Responsible. Harper Business, New York.
 Klassen, R. D. and C. P. McLaughlin (1996). 'The

 impact of environmental management on firm per-
 formance', Management Science, 42, pp. 1199-
 1213.

 Lant, T. and S. J Mezias (1990). 'Managing discontinu-
 ous change: A simulation study of organizational
 learning and entrepreneurship', Academy of Manage-
 ment Journal, 11, pp. 147-179.

 Lant, T. K. and S. J. Mezias (1992). 'An organizational
 learning model of convergence and reorientation',
 Organization Science, 3(1), pp. 47-71.

 Levinthal, D. and J. Myatt (1994). 'Co-evolution of
 capabilities and industry: The evolution of mutual
 fund processing', Strategic Management Journal,
 Winter Special Issue, 15, pp. 45-62.

 March, J. G. (1988). 'Variable risk preferences and

 Rumelt, R. P. (1987). 'Theory, strategy, and
 entrepreneurship'. In D. Teece (ed.), The Competi-
 tive Challenge: Strategies for Industrial Innovation
 and Renewal. Ballinger Division, Harper & Row,
 Cambridge, MA, pp. 137-158.

 Schmidheiny, S. (1992). Changing Course: A Global
 Business Perspective on Development and the
 Environment. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

 Sethi, S. P. (1979). 'A conceptual framework for
 environmental analysis of social issues and evalu-
 ation of business response patterns', Academy of
 Management Review, 4, pp. 63-74.

 Sharma, S., H. Vredenburg and F. Westley (1994).
 'Strategic bridging: A role for the multinational
 corporation in Third World development', Journal
 of Applied Behavioral Science, 30(4), pp. 458-476.
 Shrivastava, P. (1995a). 'The role of corporations in
 achieving ecological sustainability', Academy of
 Management Review, 20(4), pp. 936-960.

 Shrivastava, P. ( 1995b). 'Environmental technologies
 and competitive advantage', Strategic Management
 Journal, Summer Special Issue, 16, pp. 183-200.

 adaptive aspirations', Journal of Economic Behavior
 and Organization, 9, pp. 5-24.

 March, J. G. and J. P. Olsen (1976). Ambiguity and
 Choice in Organizations. Universitetsforlagt,
 Bergen, Norway.

 Miles, M. B. and A. M. Huberman (1984). Qualitative

 Data Anzalysis: A Sourcebook of New Methods. Sage,
 Newbury Park, CA.

 Shrivastava, P. and I. I. Mitroff (1982). 'Frames of
 reference managers use: A study in applied soci-
 ology of knowledge'. In R. Lamb (ed.), Advances
 in Strategic Management. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT,
 pp. 161-182.

 Starbuck, W. H., A. Greve and B. Hedberg (1978).
 'Responding to crisis', Journal of Business Adminis-
 tration, 9(2), pp. 112-137.

 Starik, M. and G. P. Rands (1995). 'Weaving and

 Miller, D. and P. H. Friesen (1980). 'Momentum and
 revolution in organization adaptation', Academy of
 Management Journal, 23, pp. 591-614.

 Milliken, F. and T. K. Lant (1991). 'The effect of an

 integrated web: Multilevel and multisystem perspec-
 tives of ecologically sustainable organizations,'
 Academy of Management Review, 20(4), pp. 908-935.

 Teece, D. (1987). 'Profiting from technological inno-

 organization's recent performance history on stra-
 tegic persistence and change: The role of managerial
 interpretations'. In P. Shrivastava, A. Huff and J.
 Dutton (eds.), Advances in Strategic Management,
 Vol. 7. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 129-156.

 Mintzberg, H. (1978). 'Patterns in strategy formation',

 Management Science, 24(9), pp. 937-948.

 Mintzberg, H. (1994). The Rise and Fall of Strategic

 Planning. Free Press, New York.

 Pasquero, J. (1991). 'Supraorganizational collaboration:
 The Canadian environmental experiment', Journal
 of Applied Behavioural Science, 27(1), pp. 38-64.
 Pfeffer, J. and J. Salancik (1978). The External Control

 of Organizations. Harper & Row, New York.

 Polanyi, M. (1962). Personal Knowledge: Towards a
 Post-critical Philosophy. University of Chicago
 Press, Chicago, IL.

 Porter, M. E. (1991). 'America's green strategy', Scien-

 tific American, April, p. 168.

 Porter, M. E. and C. van der Linde (1995). 'Green
 and competitive', Harvard Business Review, 73(5),
 pp. 120-134, 196.

 vation: Implications for integration, collaboration,
 licensing, and public policy'. In D. Teece (ed.), The
 Competitive Challenge. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA,
 pp. 185-220.

 Thomas, J. B. and R. R. McDaniel (1990). 'Interpreting
 strategic issues: Effects of strategy and the infor-
 mation-processing structure of top management
 teams', Academy of Management Journal, 33, pp.
 286-306.

 Vredenburg, H. and F. Westley (1997). 'Fostering inno-

 vation toward sustainability in renewable resource
 industries: The effects of regulation on organi-
 zational response.' Optimum: The Journal of Public
 Sector Management, 27(2), pp. 32-40.

 Walley, N. and B. Whitehead (1994). 'It's not easy
 being green,' Harvard Business Review, 72(3), pp.
 46-52.

 Weick, K. E. (1979). Social Psychology of Organizing.

 Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

 Wernerfelt, B. (1984). 'A resource-based view of the
 firm', Strategic Management Journal, 5(2), pp.
 171-180.

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mguit. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 752 S. Sharma and H. Vredenburg

 Westley, F. and H. Vredenburg (1991). 'Strategic bridg-

 ing: The collaboration between environmentalists
 and business in the marketing of green products,'
 Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 27, pp.
 65-91.

 practice with environmental protection', Journal of
 Management Inquiry, 5, pp. 104-119.

 Winter, S. (1987). 'Knowledge and competence as

 strategic assets', In D. Teece (ed.), The Competitive
 Challenge. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, pp. 159-184.

 Westley, F. and H. Vredenburg (1996). 'Sustainability
 and the corporation: Criteria for aligning economic

 Yin, R. K. (1989). Case Study Research: Design and

 Methods. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.

 APPENDIX: List of innovations in the
 oil and gas industry

 Reactive companies

 * Royal Petroleum: Advancements in soil resto-

 ration technology between 1991 and 1994.

 * Royal Petroleum and National Oil: Joint devel-
 opment of emergency response guidelines and
 risk assessment procedures for the oil and gas
 industry during 1989-93.

 Proactive companies

 Buffalo Oil-Pre- /1993
 * Patented technology to recover oil by crushing
 used filters to reduce solid waste disposal space
 and costs. The recovered oil is collected and
 sent to Sioux's recovery plant.

 * Patented process improvements to reduce

 wastes and improve recovery in oil refining by
 5 percent. This innovation has been sold to
 over 30 oil refiners in six countries.

 covering over 200 species in ecologically sensi-
 tive areas. This data base is used as a common
 resource and is lent to regulators and smaller
 companies required to conduct environmental
 assessments.

 * Patented innovations in refineries undertaken

 with low investment allow a 99 percent average
 rate of sulfur recovery, resulting in 40 percent
 less sulfur dioxide emissions than permitted
 under the license requirements of 98 percent
 recovery. In contrast, the managers of reactive
 companies stated that reduction of air emissions
 by 1 percent from 98 percent to 99 percent
 would involve an investment of $1 billion for
 the entire oil and gas industry.

 * Patented waste management procedures at

 refineries to recycle oily waste.

 * Patented development of innovative and low-

 cost asphalt reclaimers at refineries.

 * The first oil company to set up high-altitude
 meteorological monitoring systems to assist all
 plants in meeting air quality standards and
 reduce carbon dioxide emissions.

 * Patented improvements in the technology of
 horizontal drilling of wells that reduce the
 requirement for number of wells that need to
 be drilled to access a pool of oil. This also
 reduces costs of oil production and improves
 efficiency.

 * Patented improvements in remote-sensing tech-

 nology for oil exploration from the air.

 * Several innovations to reduce environmental
 impact during prospecting, exploration, and
 development, such as the use of backpacking
 and horses to study geological formations in
 ecologically sensitive areas. These changes
 resulted in better relationships with communi-
 ties and environmental groups and exploration
 costs reductions.

 * Development of the industry's first detailed
 environmental assessment procedure in 1985.
 The law requiring detailed environmental
 assessment was passed in 1986.

 * Development of a unique detailed data base
 of migration patterns and habitat biodiversity

 * Pioneered the collection plan at service stations
 (with Sioux) to recover used engine oil from
 consumers.

 * The first oil company to set up land-farms in
 1983, at its refineries to biodegrade oily
 sludges.

 *In 1982 it developed the use of steamers to
 clean oil from equipment instead of using
 chemical solvents. These innovations resulted
 from an ongoing process of thorough house-
 keeping analysis, replacement of components
 and high-energy use equipment, and analysis of
 waste patterns.

 Buffalo Oil- 1993-94

 * Patented process for recovery of sulfur contami-

 nated with soil.

 * Development of higher-efficiency vapor recov-
 ery systems technology to capture gasoline
 vapor from storage tanks to reduce ground-level
 ozone buildup.

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Striat. Mgiit. J.. 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Environmental Strategy and Organizational Capabilities

 753

 * Advances in ongoing research in photovoltaic
 cell-based batteries in collaboration with
 research institutes in the United States, Japan,
 and Europe.

 * Ongoing expansion of the data base on species
 migration patterns and biodiversity by docu-
 mentation of 11 more species of flora and fauna.

 * Set up the first used engine oil collection pro-

 gram from gas stations in Canada in 1981.

 * In 1985, it set up the first commercial plant in
 Canada to manufacture vegetable-based engine
 oils. Pioneered ethanol-blended gasoline in Can-
 ada in 1979.

 * Patent on the development of a super-

 * Several new patents on innovations to reduce
 wastes and steam recovery in the refining
 process.

 * Development of two new high oxygenated
 blends of petroleum with lower carbon emis-
 sions. Its fully owned subsidiary in the United
 States is a world leader in hydrogenation tech-
 nology, specializing in the development and
 licensing of advanced technologies for produ-
 cing environmentally clean fuels from various
 fossil fuels such as heavy crude oils and high-
 sulfur coals.

 Sioux Oil- pre-1993
 * Sioux pioneered the technology for large-scale
 cleaning of used engine oil to produce usable
 clean engine oil. The first plant was set up
 in 1980.

 lightweight fuel tank for storage of compressed
 natural gas for automotive use.

 * 1988: Set up a facility to convert trucks and

 automobile engines to natural gas.

 Sioux: 1993-94

 *Patents on 10 percent improvements in prod-
 uctivity at its ethanol distilleries while reduc-
 ing wastes.

 * Advancements in research in photovoltaic cell-

 based rechargeable automotive batteries.

 * Development of a new ethanol blend: 10 per-
 cent ethanol and highly oxygenated and
 reformulated gasoline that has the lowest total
 emissions of particulates and carbon gases in
 the world.

 ? 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Strat. Mgmt. J., 19: 729-753 (1998)

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 16:35:35 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

