Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Cleaner Production

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / j c l e p r o

Buyeresupplier relationships on environmental issues: a contingency
perspective
Cristina Sancha a, Christina W.Y. Wong b, *, Cristina Gimenez Thomsen a
a ESADE Business School, Universitat Ramon Llull, Barcelona, Spain
b Business Division, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 25 February 2014
Received in revised form
4 September 2014
Accepted 5 September 2014
Available online 21 September 2014

Keywords:
Buyeresupplier relationships
Environmental
Contingency

Our study analyzes the effectiveness of governance mechanisms (transactional or relational) in managing
buyeresupplier relationships with respect to environmental issues. Based on data from 170 ﬁrms located
in Hong Kong, this study empirically identiﬁes the mechanism that enhances suppliers' commitment
towards environmental protection, and hence allows buying ﬁrms to improve their environmental
performance. In addition, we have adopted a contingency perspective to investigate the conditions
(namely product complexity, relationship stability and relationship adaptability) under which these
governance mechanisms are more effective in nurturing supplier commitment. Our results suggest that
while both mechanisms lead to suppliers' commitment with environmental issues, their effectiveness
can be leveraged if they are applied under speciﬁc conditions. In particular, transactional mechanisms are
more effective in situations of high product complexity and high relationship stability and adaptability.
Relational mechanisms show higher effectiveness if they are used in the context of low product
complexity and low relationship adaptability. Furthermore, implications for managers are also derived
from this study.

© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

One of the key challenges companies face with respect to
environmental sustainability is its extension to other supply chain
members. In fact, suppliers' poor environmental management can
jeopardize the buying ﬁrm's environmental performance (Faruk
et al., 2002). It is therefore important that buying ﬁrms properly
govern their relationships with suppliers to foster their suppliers'
commitment to green initiatives. Many ﬁrms use similar mecha-
nisms to govern the environmental management of their suppliers
but they seem to provide different results. For example, Hitachi, a
Japanese multinational in the electronic sector that was awarded
with the 2012 Green Award and is known for its active involvement
in environmental initiatives, asserts that it collaborates with its
suppliers to guarantee that they are environmentally responsible in
their operations. However, other companies, such as Nike, which
followed the same approach failed to achieve the same positive

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: cristina.sancha@esade.edu (C. Sancha), Christina.wy.wong@
polyu.edu.hk, tcchris@polyu.edu.hk (C.W.Y. Wong), cristina.gimenez@esade.edu
(C. Gimenez Thomsen).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.09.026
0959-6526/© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

results, and its suppliers were found to have environmentally
irresponsible behaviors. Other ﬁrms have opted to contractually
specify their suppliers' environmental requirements. For example,
Mattel, an American toy manufacturing company, in its contracts
clearly states its environmental policy and requests its suppliers to
abide by the policy. Yet, Mattel has been forced to recall nearly 1
million products because a supplier had used lead paint in the
products. These real-life case examples suggest that there are
different governance mechanisms in terms of explicit and implicit
control that ﬁrms can use to green up their suppliers and that each
governance mechanism may be effective only under certain
circumstances.

The green supply chain management (GSCM) literature has
emphasized the use of mechanisms to green up suppliers, ranging
from codes of conduct, assessment tools, to collaborative practices
(e.g., Simpson et al., 2007; Rao and Holt, 2005; Zhu and Sarkis,
2004; Lee and Lam, 2012). However, the effectiveness of speci-
fying suppliers' environmental obligations in contracts has been
underexplored. This paper draws on the buyeresupplier relation-
ship (BSR) literature and examines environmental governance in
supply chain relationships from two key governance mechanisms:
transactional (in terms of explicit contract) and relational mecha-
nisms (in terms of implicit control). It is important to mention that


1850

C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

the effectiveness of these governance mechanisms on relationship
outcomes (e.g., operational performance, satisfaction, oppor-
tunism) has been widely studied (e.g., Li et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2009;
Lumineau and Henderson, 2012; Mahapatra et al., 2010; Nyaga
et al., 2010). However, to the best of our knowledge, the study
about the effectiveness of governance mechanisms in the context of
GSCM, though highly important to ensure suppliers being envi-
ronmentally responsible, has been largely neglected. Hence, it is
worthwhile to investigate under which circumstances the tradi-
tional means of governance are effective in enhancing suppliers'
environmental behavior.

In this paper, our objective is to determine the effectiveness of
governance mechanisms (transactional or relational) in managing
BSR with respect to environmental issues. Speciﬁcally, this study
empirically identiﬁes the mechanism that enhances suppliers'
commitment towards environmental protection, and hence allows
the buying ﬁrm to improve its environmental performance. We
adopt the contingency approach and investigate under which
contingencies these mechanisms are more effective in nurturing
supplier commitment. Understanding the impact of key contextual
variables (i.e., operational and relational contingencies) is crucial
for identifying the appropriate governance structure to manage
environmental issues in a BSR. As such, this study aims to answer
the following research questions: (1) what are the appropriate
governance mechanisms
commitment on
complying to environmental requirements? and (2) what are the
conditions under which these mechanisms are effective in
achieving supplier commitment?

to gain supplier

By drawing on prior BSR literature, this study contributes to and
provides new insights into the GSCM literature. In particular, we
examine the neglected role of explicit contract and implicit control
on supplier commitment in environmental management. This
study extends the current understanding about the effectiveness of
transactional and relational mechanisms in terms of explicit con-
tract and implicit control in environmental governance by exam-
ining the effect of different contextual variables. In addition to these
contributions to the existing research, we provide key managerial
guidelines to managers in managing green supply chains. For
instance, the ﬁndings inform managers the circumstances under
which it is more advisable to manage their suppliers' environ-
mental relationship explicitly by using an explicit contract or
implicitly by building mutual understanding of how to carry out
solutions and improve the environmental performance.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we provide the
theoretical background on transactional and relational mechanisms
as well as the development of the hypotheses. The methodology
used is described in Section 3. In Section 4 we present the hy-
potheses testing and the obtained results. The discussion of the
results together with the theoretical and managerial implications
are presented in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6 we provide some
conclusions, state the limitations of the paper and suggest future
lines of research.

2. Theoretical background and hypotheses development

2.1. Governance of buyeresupplier relationships

Goal differences, opportunistic behavior, and different opera-
tional routines make the governance of BSR essential (Birnberg,
1998; Jap and Ganesan, 2000; Mohr and Spekman, 1994). Gover-
nance between business partners refers to the mechanisms in a
relationship that guide the parties' behavior with the aim of ful-
ﬁlling some common objectives (Liu et al., 2009). In the BSR liter-
ature, there are two traditional sets of mechanisms to govern such
relationships, namely transactional and relational mechanisms

(Aulakh et al., 1996; Brown et al., 1995; Heide and John, 1992; Jap
and Ganesan, 2000; Lumineau and Henderson, 2012). While
transactional mechanisms govern exchanges amongst parties
through the use of explicit and detailed contracts (Heide and John,
1992; Heide and Stump, 1995; Lusch and Brown, 1996; Williamson,
1985), relational mechanisms govern such exchanges through
shared behavioral expectations that imply implicit control and
mutual understanding between parties (Gibbs, 1981; Heide and
John, 1992; Lusch and Brown, 1996; Macneil, 1980).

Transactional and relational mechanisms are generally considered
in previous research as effective governance mechanisms in curtailing
opportunism, mitigating conﬂict and enhancing performance
(Cannon et al., 2000; Cavusgil et al., 2004; Jap and Ganesan, 2000; Li
et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2009; Nyaga et al., 2010; Poppo and Zenger,
2002). For instance, Cavusgil et al. (2004) found that relational
norms are an effective tool for deterring opportunism. Similarly, Liu
et al. (2009) suggested that both relational and transactional mecha-
nisms are effective in alleviating opportunism, yet, transactional
mechanisms are more powerful than relational mechanisms.

Regarding the effectiveness of these mechanisms on perfor-
mance, prior studies have considered performance from different
perspectives. Some of them have looked at the traditional measures
of operational performance (i.e., quality, delivery, ﬂexibility and
cost) in their research (Cannon et al., 2000; Jap and Ganesan, 2000;
Liu et al., 2009; Nyaga et al., 2010), while others have considered
relationship performance (e.g., satisfaction with the relationship,
achievement of common goals) (Jap and Ganesan, 2000; Li et al.,
2010; Poppo and Zenger, 2002). Cannon et al. (2000) found that
transactional (i.e., contracts) and relational (i.e., social norms)
mechanisms were both effective in enhancing operational perfor-
mance. Similarly, Liu et al. (2009) found that although both
mechanisms are effective in contributing to performance im-
provements,
relational mechanisms are more profound in
improving performance than transactional ones. As an explanation
of the different performance impacts of the two mechanisms, Jap
and Ganesan (2000) suggest that the effectiveness of these gover-
nance mechanisms on enhancing operational performance, pre-
venting conﬂict, and improving relationship satisfaction is
contingent on the relationship phase. While relational mechanisms
are vital in the maturity phase of the relationship, transactional
mechanisms are essential in the decline phase. These results indi-
cate the important role of contingencies in a BSR that may affect the
performance impacts of different governance mechanisms.

To answer the research questions of this study, we examine the
impact of transactional and relational mechanisms on relational
performance (i.e., supplier commitment) by drawing on the trans-
action cost economics (TCE) and social exchange theory. TCE, whose
primary objective is to design effective governance mechanisms to
govern exchanges between exchange parties, prescribes formal
contracts as a governance tool. According to TCE, transactional
mechanisms are derived from economic rationality that governs BSR
through the use of explicit contracts (Heide and John,1992; Lusch and
Brown, 1996; Williamson, 1985). As stated by Williamson (1985),
explicit contracts “entail comprehensive contracting whereby all
relevant future contingencies pertaining to the supply of a product or
service are described and discounted with respect to both likelihood
and futurity” (p. 69). In that sense, a detailed contract, which stipu-
lates the rights and obligations of exchange parties and limits
acceptable behavior between them, can effectively protect the rela-
tionship against opportunistic behavior and bounded rationality
since it (1) speciﬁes rewards and sanctions, (2) provides details about
the resolution of conﬂicts and disputes, and (3) helps establish the
longevity of the relationship (Coase, 1937; Williamson, 1985).

On the other hand, social exchange theory describes BSR as social
interactions and socially embedded relationships in economic


C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

1851

activities (Granovetter, 1985). Governance is then the result of
agreed values and processes that are derived from these social re-
lationships (Macneil, 1980; Noordewier et al., 1990; Heide and John,
1992). The enforcement of the relationship obligations is based on
social processes that promote norms of ﬂexibility, solidarity, and
information exchange. These relational norms facilitate adaptation
to unexpected events, joint problem solving and joint action be-
tween exchange parties, which promote mutuality and cooperation
between both parties (Poppo and Zenger, 2002). In other words,
relational mechanisms govern BSR by generating common stan-
dards of expected behavior and relational norms that increase the
parties' commitment towards the relationship (Granovetter, 1985;
Seabright et al., 1992). Relational norms, which refer to the ex-
pected behavior shared by both parties, circumscribe and guide the
parties' conduct helping them to achieve their goals (Heide and John,
1992) and improve the relationship (Macneil, 1980; Noordewier
et al., 1990). These relationship improvements are related to the
expectations of continuity that accompany relational mechanisms,
which encourage both parties to invest in the relationship.

In this paper, our objective is to extend the presented BSR
framework (i.e., transactional and relational governance mecha-
nisms) to the GSCM context. In the context of environmental sus-
tainability, the need to govern such relationships is pivotal since
there is high risk of suppliers acting opportunistically. In our study,
we deﬁne transactional mechanisms as explicit contracts that
entail the speciﬁcation of the buyer's environmental requirements
to suppliers. On the other hand, relational mechanisms are
considered as implicit control that describes the parties' mutual
understanding with respect
In the
following sections we develop hypotheses related to the effec-
tiveness of each governance mechanism on achieving suppliers'
environmental commitment (i.e., willingness to comply with the
buyers' environmental requirements) and their effect on the buying
ﬁrm's environmental performance.

to environmental

issues.

2.2. Hypotheses development

2.2.1. Transactional mechanisms

Transactional mechanisms are those that govern BSR through
detailed and binding contractual agreements (explicit contracts
hereafter) (Cannon and Perreault, 1999). Explicit contracts stipulate
the parties' rights and obligations, specify duties and expected
outputs to be delivered, and propose penalties for non-compliance
(Cannon and Perreault, 1999; Liu et al., 2009; Poppo and Zenger,
2002; Reuer and Ari~no, 2007; Williamson, 1985). In that sense,
contracts provide the parties with a framework that will guide task
fulﬁllment and will constrain opportunistic behavior (Carson et al.,
2006; Liu et al., 2009). If contracts are sufﬁciently elaborated and
carefully built they can become a form of quasi-integration and
establish an interﬁrm authority that
can lead behavior
(Stinchcombe, 1985). As pointed out by Yu et al. (2006), explicit
contracts will serve to increase suppliers' compliance with the
buyer's requirements as a way to support their relationship. This
means that, in the context of environmental sustainability, the
stipulation of environmental requirements and conditions by the
buyer in a contract will result in the supplier making efforts to
comply with them (e.g., make environmental evaluations of their
products or improve their business operation). Therefore, we hy-
pothesize that:

H1: Explicit contract, in which the buyer speciﬁes environ-
mental requirements, is positively associated with the sup-
pliers' commitment to buyer's environmental requirements.

2.2.2. Relational mechanisms

In some cases, contracts can be a liability since they can become
increasingly complex, speciﬁc, and difﬁcult to account for all the
uncertainties in a BSR, hence favoring the development of rela-
tional mechanisms to govern such relationships (Reve, 1986; Nyaga
et al., 2010). Relational mechanisms, rather than counting on
enforceable contractual agreements, rely on implicit norms that
determine the appropriate behavior in a BSR and help identify
mutual understandings between partners with respect to their
obligations (Lusch and Brown, 1996). These norms provide an
important safeguard against opportunistic behavior (Cani€els et al.,
2012; Macneil, 1980; Dwyer et al., 1987). Hence, implicit norms
create informal pressures that lead to cooperation and guide the
partners' behavior
the relationship requirements
(Kauffman and Carter, 2006; Lusch and Brown, 1996; Ring and Van
de Ven, 1994). In BSRs governed by implicit norms, suppliers are
more willing to make investments related to green initiatives
(Cani€els et al., 2013). The institutional forces induced from implicit
control reﬂect the social reinforcement of partner ﬁrms to coop-
erate and join force to address environmental issues in the supply
chain. Such relational mechanism is conductive to collaboration
and commitment for long-term exchange and social legitimacy.
Mutual understandings with respect to environmental issues (e.g.,
environmental protection requirements, actions to take in case of
environmental accident) will encourage the supplier to adopt such
behaviors that lead to the fulﬁllment of the buyers' environmental
requirements. Therefore, we hypothesize that:

to fulﬁll

H2: Implicit control by buyers on environmental manage-
ment is positively associated with suppliers' commitment to
buyers' environmental requirements.

Supply chain environmental governance, whether explicit con-
tracts or implicit control, is described as being effective in suppliers'
compliance with buyers' environmental requirements. Based on
the contingency theory, contextual variables inﬂuence the effec-
tiveness of these governance mechanisms,
implying that the
impact of environmental governance (i.e., explicit contract and
implicit control) on suppliers' environmental commitment is not
universal and may be affected by different contingencies. Addi-
tionally, “alignment” theory suggests that any strategy is only
appropriate in a given set of conditions or situations (Chorn, 1991).
In this
(i.e., product
complexity) and relational conditions (i.e., relationship stability
and adaptability) as exchange conditions that potentially affect the
effectiveness of supply chain environmental governance on the
suppliers' environmental commitment. In the following lines we
describe their role and hypothesize their impact on the relation-
ships between environmental governance mechanisms and sup-
plier commitment.

study, we consider both operational

2.2.3. Explicit contract, implicit control and product complexity

Explicit contracts are crucial to structure and control BSR
(Cannon and Perreault, 1999). However, “contracts are not indeﬁ-
nitely elastic” (Williamson, 1991, p. 273) meaning that regardless
how explicit a contract is, there will be certain dimensions of the
relationship that may be impossible to specify.
It is virtually
impossible to account contractually for every possible set of cir-
cumstances that may arise in a BSR (Johnson, 2006). As a result, the
ability of the exchange partners (i.e., buyer and supplier) to fulﬁll
the relationship requirements is constrained (Macneil, 1980). As
such, product complexity, understood as the customizability,


1852

C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

intricacy, and varieties of the products (Schoenherr et al., 2010),
might be a hindrance for the effectiveness of contracts in the
governance of BSR. Product complexity implies that the level of
sophistication and technicality of the suppliers' products increases
resulting in more complex contracts. As product complexity in-
creases, the number of technicalities, speciﬁcities and requirements
to be considered also increases. In this context, contracts will not be
able to account for all of them. Based on this limitation, explicit
contracts will be a rigid mechanism to govern the relationship and
will be less effective in achieving environmental commitment. For
example, if a speciﬁcity has not been considered in the contract, the
supplier may be reluctant to adapt its processes (especially, if it
incurs more costs). In fact, Williamson (1991) describes contracts as
being more effective in perfectly competitive markets that involve
simple and functional products rather than complex ones. There-
fore, we hypothesize that:

relationship stability). In contexts of low relationship stability, the
supplier does not see the maintenance of a harmonious relation-
ship with the buyer as a preference and may not cooperate in ful-
ﬁlling the contractual requirements, showing lower levels of
commitment (Lai et al., 2005). Therefore, we expect that specifying
the buyer's environmental requirements in a contract will be more
effective in contexts of high relationship stability. The supplier will
be willing to make sacriﬁces (e.g., product modiﬁcations such as the
use of more environmentally friendly raw materials) for the beneﬁt
of the relationship, showing willingness to comply with the buyer's
environmental requirements (i.e., higher commitment). Thus, we
hypothesize that:

H1b: The effectiveness of explicit contracts on the suppliers'
environmental commitment is higher when relationship
stability is high, as opposed to low relationship stability.

H1a: The effectiveness of explicit contracts on the suppliers'
environmental commitment
is higher when product
complexity is low as opposed to high product complexity.

As pointed out by Nyaga et al. (2010), limitations coming from
explicit contracts are better addressed by relational mechanisms
(i.e., implicit norms). This means that the explicit contract short-
comings that arise in situations of high product complexity can be
overcome by the use of implicit norms. Relational mechanisms (i.e.,
implicit control) are described as being more suitable for situations
involving complex and innovative products (Dyer, 1997; Teece et al.,
1997) since they entail openly sharing useful information, ideas or
initiatives, solving possible conﬂicts and problems by working
together and participating in joint decision making between both
partners (Macneil, 1980; Heide and John, 1992; Jap and Ganesan,
2000). As such, the use of relational mechanisms provides a ﬂex-
ible governance mechanism for partner ﬁrms to mitigate compli-
cations that may arise in managing complex products. Thus, we
hypothesize that:

The same reasoning applies for the relationship between im-
plicit control and the suppliers' environmental commitment. Im-
plicit control in a BSR suggests the existence of expected and
acceptable environmental performance and standards that are
shared by buyers and suppliers (Heide, 1994). It provides a set of
guidelines of environmental requirements that govern the de-
cisions and actions of suppliers. Although implicit control enables
mutual understanding of responsibilities and roles of suppliers,
restraining the temptation of opportunism (Yang et al., 2008, 2009),
such condition may change based on the level of relationship sta-
bility. When suppliers perceive a non-harmonious relationship and
do not see the potential of future cooperation in the BSR, the im-
plicit control fails to curtail the self-interest seeking of suppliers.
This is mainly because the objectives of gaining legitimacy by
following the institutional governance for mutual beneﬁts in
environmental protection diminish. On the contrary, suppliers are
likely to continue to commit to the environmental requirements
governed by implicit control when they perceive a future exchange
relationship. Thus, we hypothesize that:

H2a: The effectiveness of implicit control mechanisms on
supplier's environmental commitment
is higher when
product complexity is high as opposed to low product
complexity.

H2b: The effectiveness of implicit control on the suppliers'
environmental commitment is higher when relationship
stability is high, as opposed to low relationship stability.

2.2.4. Explicit contract, implicit control and relationship stability

Relationship stability involves adopting a long-term orientation
towards the relationship rather than understanding partners' ex-
changes as discrete events (Dwyer et al., 1987; Lai et al., 2005). For a
relationship to be described as stable, the joint work of partners is
needed. In addition, it requires the partners to be willing to make
short-term sacriﬁces to realize long-term beneﬁts of the relation-
ship (Dwyer et al., 1987). Lai et al. (2005) consider willingness to
adopt harmony, to foster cooperation and to maintain a good
relationship with the supply chain partner as indicators of rela-
tionship stability.

We have argued for a positive relationship between explicit
contracts and supplier commitment to environmental
issues.
However, the effectiveness of this contractual agreement in leading
the supplier to make efforts to comply with the buyers' environ-
mental requirements may be hampered if the supplier does not see
the relationship with the buyer as a long-lasting one (i.e., low

2.2.5. Explicit contract, implicit control and relationship
adaptability

Relationship adaptability entails the willingness of one ex-
change party to make investments in the relationship to fulﬁll the
needs or requirements of the other exchange party (Cannon and
Perreault, 1999). These investments can imply adaptations in pro-
cesses, products or procedures. For instance, partners can adapt
their inventory and distribution policies, product features or even
change capital equipment (Hallen et al., 1991; Noordewier et al.,
1990). These adaptations can be initiated by any of the parties
and can be mutual or one-sided (Campbell, 1985). In BSR suppliers
can be expected to adapt to the needs of their customers (Hallen
et al., 1991). In this line, we will focus on those adaptations that
the supplier makes to fulﬁll the buying ﬁrm's environmental re-
quirements. By committing resources to the relationship, the sup-
plier adapts to the needs of the buyer (Metcalf et al., 1990).
Therefore, these adaptations are speciﬁc investments that show
commitment by the supplier (Ford, 1981). For instance, to comply


C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

1853

with customers' environmental requirements (e.g., reduce the
products' environmental footprint), suppliers can be expected to
adapt their production processes by changing their current capital
equipment to the one that pollutes less. In previous lines we have
hypothesized a positive and direct effect between both types of
governance mechanisms (i.e., explicit contract and implicit control)
and supplier's environmental commitment, meaning that the
formal stipulation of environmental requirements by the buyer in
the contract and the mutual understanding between buyer and
supplier with respect to environmental issues will lead to suppliers'
efforts in fulﬁlling the buying ﬁrm's environmental requirements.
To meet buyers' environmental requirements, suppliers may
need to modify their products, processes or even procedures (e.g.,
avoid using hazardous materials or use recycled materials). The
suppliers' willingness to invest in making necessary adaptations
(i.e., relationship adaptability) will ease the compliance with the
buyers' environmental requirements both coming from explicit
contracts and/or implicit norms. However, in contexts of low rela-
tionship adaptability, the supplier will not implement the needed
changes, making the compliance with the buyer's requirements
more difﬁcult. In fact, attempts at greening suppliers are bound to
fail if suppliers are not able to make the required adaptations
(Cani€els et al., 2012). In that sense, we believe that the effectiveness
of explicit contracts and implicit control on supplier commitment
will be moderated by the extent to which the supplier is willing to
adapt to the buying ﬁrm's requirements and hypothesized that:

H1c: The effectiveness of explicit contracts on the suppliers'
environmental commitment is higher when relationship
adaptability is high, as opposed to low relationship
adaptability.

H2c: The effectiveness of implicit control on the suppliers'
environmental commitment is higher when relationship
adaptability is high, as opposed to low relationship
adaptability.

2.2.6. Supplier's commitment and environmental performance

requirements

(e.g., product

Commitment is the key element to successful relationships
(Morgan and Hunt, 1994) and is deﬁned as “an enduring desire to
maintain a valued relationship” (Moorman et al., 1992, p. 316). In
this study we focus on supplier's commitment and we deﬁne it as
the efforts made by the supplier to comply with the buying ﬁrm
environmental
improvements).
Commitment leads to mutual beneﬁts for both parties in a rela-
tionship (i.e., buyer and supplier) (Anderson and Weitz, 1992). In
fact, as stated by Morberg and Speh (2003) the partners' desired
outcomes can only be achieved through the partner's existing
commitment to the relationship. If the supplier is committed to its
relationship with a buying ﬁrm, the supplier will make efforts to
ensure that their relationship continues and will therefore meet the
buying ﬁrm's environmental requirements (Prahinski and Benton,
2004) contributing to improve its performance. In other words,
suppliers' efforts to comply with buying ﬁrm's environmental re-
quirements (i.e., supplier commitment) (Wong, 2013) will result in
improved environmental performance for the buying ﬁrm (e.g.,
reduction in hazardous materials used as a result of suppliers'
providing more environmentally friendly products). Accordingly,
we hypothesize (Fig. 1):

H3: Supplier commitment is positively related to buying
ﬁrm's environmental performance.

3. Methodology

3.1. Sample and data collection

The garment trading industry in Hong Kong was selected to be
the empirical setting for a number of reasons. While many consider
China as being the world's largest garment production base and
export country (China Research and Intelligence Co. Ltd., 2012),
with growing trend of clothing consumption due to rapid economic
growth (Gu, 2011), Hong Kong plays a signiﬁcant role as the major
entrep^ot for foreign companies to source and market garments in
the Chinese mainland. Being the world's 10th largest trading
economy, 62% of Hong Kong re-exports were of China origin, while
54% were destined for the China market (Hong Kong Census and
Statistics Department, 2013). The garment trading ﬁrms in Hong
Kong facilitate trade and provide value added services, such as
sourcing and quality assurance. However, Chinese manufacturers
were recently accused of conducting environmentally irresponsible
acts, such as discharging toxic and hazardous waste, raising public
concern of products made in China (Barboza, 2011; Watts, 2011).
Such case also raises hesitation of international garment retailers,
e.g., Nike, Adidas, and H&M, in sourcing from China, as they are
being criticized for not being able to monitor and manage their
Chinese manufacturers. Facing the increasing concern of environ-
mental damages, the garment trading ﬁrms play a major role in
supplier management to ensure supplier compliance to environ-
mental regulations and speciﬁcations. This study focuses on the
garment trading industry to minimize potential effects of industrial
and product differences, ensuring high internal validity.

According to the Hong Kong Statistics and Census Department,
the population of the garment ﬁrms in Hong Kong in 2013 was
approximately 1000. The sample for this study was randomly
drawn from Dun & Bradstreet. A mailing list of 800 garment trading
ﬁrms was established and three waves of surveys were adminis-
trated. 170 usable responses were collected, representing a
response rate of 21.25%, which is similar to prior environmental
management studies targeting executives as key-informants
(Wiengarten et al., 2013). Executives, such as CEO, president, vice
president, director, environmental managers, operations managers,
sourcing managers, and supply chain managers, were identiﬁed as
target respondents due to their knowledge in environmental and
supplier management, and environmental performance. In addi-
tion, 47.6% of the respondents have been working with the com-
pany for more than 5 years, thus they possess knowledge of the
management of suppliers in China.

The garment trading ﬁrms in Hong Kong are relatively small in
scale. In fact, more than 50% of them have less than 10 employees
(Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department, 2013). This is in line
with our sample, in which 56.5% of the sample ﬁrms have less than
10 employees. Table 1 summarizes the proﬁle of respondents.

3.2. Bias issues

If respondents differ substantially from non-respondents, non-
response bias might be a threat to our study. To test for non-
response bias, we used the extrapolation method suggested by
Armstrong and Overton (1977), which assumes that late re-
spondents are similar to non-respondents. In that sense, we con-
ducted t-test to compare the ﬁrst-wave and the second-wave


1854

C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

Fig. 1. Research model.

mailing responses. t-test is appropriate to analyze differences
among groups (e.g., early and late respondents) by assessing
whether the means of two groups are statistically different from
each other (Trochim, 2002). In that sense, as our objective is to
analyze if the responses of early and late respondents differ, we
found the use of t-test suitable. Our results showed no statistical
differences across the variables at p < 0.05, suggesting that non-
response bias is not an issue in our study. Further, we tested for
non-response bias by comparing whether there is signiﬁcant dif-
ference across the variables of early respondents and the re-
spondents who initially declined to respond but returned the
questionnaire later. The test results show no signiﬁcant difference
at p < 0.05. These results collectively suggest that non-response
bias is not an issue in this study.

Since the data was collected from a single informant, common
method variance can be an issue. We therefore took steps to
minimize the problem. We ﬁrst segmented the questions in the
questionnaire into sections pertaining to the dependent and inde-
pendent variables (Podsakoff et al., 2003). Second, we assessed
through Harman's one-factor test (Podsakoff and Organ, 1986) if
there was only one factor that accounted for the majority of the
covariance. The results indicated that no single factor accounted for
more than 40% of the total variance, providing preliminary evi-
dence that common method variance is not an issue in this study.
Third, following Lindell and Whitney (2001), we used a marker
variable to detect common method variance. We used ﬁrm
ownership type as marker variable, which is theoretically unrelated
to the dependent variables in our study. We found that ﬁrm
ownership type is not signiﬁcantly related to any of the variables,
suggesting that common method bias is not a considerable concern
in this study.

3.3. Measures

To improve the validity of the measurement, we adapted
existing scales from the literature for our constructs: explicit con-
tract (Cannon and Perreault, 1999; Heide and Stump, 1995), implicit

Table 1
Sample proﬁle.

Annual sales
<HKD$10M
HKD$10M $20M
>HKD$20M $50M
>HKD$50M $100M
>HKD$100M

Number of employees

1e10
11e50
51e100
101e500
>500

Percentage
52.9
22.9
7.6
9.4
7.1

56.5
22.4
11.8
6.5
2.9

control (Lusch and Brown, 1996), supplier commitment (Aragon-
Correa, 1998; Buysse and Verbeke, 2003; Siguaw et al., 1998), and
environmental performance (Montabon et al., 2007). A ﬁve point
Likert-scale was used for assessment, where a higher value in-
dicates a higher detail level of contract, higher level of implicit
control, higher
supplier commitment, and better
performance.

level of

Following Gerbing and Anderson (1988), we performed conﬁr-
matory factor analysis (CFA) to assess the psychometric properties
of the measurement scales using the maximum likelihood esti-
mation of AMOS 20.0. The CFA results of the measurement scales
are summarized in Table 2. The goodness-of-ﬁt indices, namely
comparative ﬁt index (CFI),
incremental ﬁt index (IFI), Tuck-
ereLewis coefﬁcient (TLI), of all the constructs are above the rec-
ommended cut-off value of .90. The root mean square residual
(RMR) of all the constructs are also below the recommended
threshold of .08 (Hu and Bentler, 1999). The reliability of all the
constructs surpasses the recommended .70 threshold of Cronbach's
alpha and composite reliability, suggesting that the measurement
scales have adequate reliability (Nunnally, 1984). We evaluated the
convergent validity by assessing the loadings and signiﬁcant level
of each measurement item on their respective construct. As shown
in Table 2, all the measurement items load signiﬁcantly on their
respective constructs with factor loadings ranging from .58 to .97,
suggesting convergent validity of the theoretical constructs. The
average variance extracted (AVE) of each construct also exceeds the
recommended value of .50 (Fornell and Larcker, 1981), providing
further evidence of strong convergent validity. As depicted in
Table 3, the bivariate correlations between explicit contract, im-
plicit control, supplier commitment, product complexity, relation-
ship
environmental
performance range from .20 to .60 at p < 0.05, indicating acceptable
criterion validity (Nunnally, 1984).

adaptability,

relational

stability,

and

We tested the discriminant validity of the constructs by con-
ducting a series of chi-square difference tests to assess the differ-
ences between each pair of constructs. The chi-square difference
test between each pair of constructs are conducted by comparing
the chi-square between the unconstrained model where the two
constructs vary freely, with the constrained model where the path
between the two constructs are constrained. The results are sum-
marized in Table 3. The chi-square difference of each pair of
construct is found statistically signiﬁcant, suggesting discriminant
validity of constructs (Bagozzi et al., 1991).

4. Hypotheses testing

4.1. Structural model testing

To test the hypotheses, we established a structural equation
model using maximum likelihood estimation of AMOS 20.0. The
goodness-of-ﬁt indices indicate that the structural model provides


C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

1855

Table 2
Measurement scales.

Construct & indicators (goodness of ﬁt indices)
Explicit contract (CFI ¼ 0.92; IFI ¼ 0.92; TLI ¼ 0.75; RMR ¼ 0.05;

Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.94; Composite reliability ¼ 0.94; AVE ¼ 0.79)
.97

1. Specifying our environmental requirements in our contract with

Loadings

major supplier.

Table 2 (continued )

Construct & indicators (goodness of ﬁt indices)

Loadings

In order to fulﬁll our environmental requirements,
1. The frequency of our major supplier to alter the merchandises'

.76

features is

2. The frequency of our major supplier to train their personnel is
3. The frequency of our major supplier to alter their inventory and

.65
.82

2. Listing the technical environmental requirements of our company

.94

distribution is

in our contract with major supplier.

3. Listing the conditions of termination due to failure to meet

environmental requirements in our contract with major supplier.

4. Listing disputes and arbitration about our environmental

.84

.79

requirements in our contract with major supplier.

4. The frequency of our major supplier to change their marketing is .80
5. The frequency of our major supplier to change their capital
.80

equipment is

Questionnaire items (Likert scale: 1 ¼ very low, 5 ¼ very high).

Implicit control (CFI ¼ 0.95; IFI ¼ 0.95; TLI ¼ 0.90; RMR ¼ 0.04;

Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.94; Composite reliability ¼ 0.94; AVE ¼ 0.75)
.75

1. The mutual understanding of the role of both parties with our

supplier in environmental protection is

2. The mutual understanding of how both parties perform with our

.84

major supplier in environmental protection is

3. The mutual understanding of how to carry out solutions for

failure with our major supplier in environmental protection is
4. The mutual understanding of how to settle down conﬂicts with

.89

.91

our major supplier in environmental protection is

5. The mutual understanding of actions to be carried out when there

.92

are accidents that damage the environment is

Supplier commitment (CFI ¼ 0.98; IFI ¼ 0.98; TLI ¼ 0.95; RMR ¼ 0.02;
Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.90; Composite reliability ¼ 0.90; AVE ¼ 0.69)
.77

1. Our major supplier keeps evaluating and improving their services
and products supplied to us to comply with our environmental
requirements.

2. Our major supplier keeps evaluating and improving their

business operation to fulﬁll our environmental requirements.

3. Our major supplier keeps managing environmentally related data
and information to facilitate quality enhancement to comply with
our environmental requirements.

.87

.86

4. Our major supplier designs a set of procedures to ensure the

.83

reliability, consistency and access efﬁciency of environmentally
related data and information to comply with our environmental
requirements.

Environmental performance (CFI ¼ 0.98; IFI ¼ 0.99; TLI ¼ 0.99; RMR ¼ 0.01;

Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.87; Composite reliability ¼ 0.86; AVE ¼ 0.60)
.65
.70
.86
.87

1. Reduction in the use of electricity
2. Reduction in total packaging materials used
3. Reduction in air emissions
4. Reduction in solid waste disposal
Product complexity (CFI ¼ 1.00; IFI ¼ 1.00; TLI ¼ 1.00; RMR ¼ 0.01;
Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.86; Composite reliability ¼ 0.86; AVE ¼ 0.53)
.58
.84
.87
.58

1. The sophisticated level of the items from our major supplier is
2. The technical level of the items from our major supplier is
3. The complicated level of the items from our major supplier is
4. The environmentally responsible level of the items from our

major supplier is

Relationship stability (CFI ¼ 0.93; IFI ¼ 0.93; TLI ¼ 0.90; RMR ¼ 0.03;
Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.93; Composite reliability ¼ 0.93; AVE ¼ 0.73)
.83

1. The determination level of our major supplier to maintain a

harmonious relationship with us by complying with our
environmental requirements is

2. The frequency of our communication with major supplier about

.83

our environmental requirements reduces most of the
misunderstandings is

3. The willingness of our major supplier to maintain a harmonious

.91

relationship with us for future cooperation in environmental
protection is

4. The willingness of our major supplier maintains a harmonious

.88

relationship with us for goodwill in environmental protection is

5. The willingness of our major supplier maintains a harmonious

.83

relationship with us for smooth arrangements of contract in
environmental protection is

Relational adaptation (CFI ¼ 0.97; IFI ¼ 0.97; TLI ¼ 0.94; RMR ¼ 0.03;
Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.90; Composite reliability ¼ 0.90; AVE ¼ 0.58)

acceptable ﬁt to the survey data (c2 ¼ 270.99, df ¼ 115, IFI ¼ .94,
TLI ¼ .92; CFI ¼ .93, RMR ¼ .05). The results indicate that both
explicit contract (b ¼ .22, p < 0.05) and implicit control (b ¼ .43,
p < 0.001) are positively related to supplier commitment, which
subsequently is positively associated with environmental perfor-
mance (b ¼ .29, p < 0.001). These results provide support to Hy-
potheses 1, 2 and 3 respectively, and show that both explicit
contract and implicit control are signiﬁcantly and positively asso-
ciated to supplier commitment, while supplier commitment in turn
is
environmental
performance.

signiﬁcantly

positively

related

and

to

4.2. Moderated structural model testing

To examine the contingencies of the relationship between
explicit contract and supplier commitment, and implicit control and
supplier commitment, we used the multi-group analysis in AMOS
20.0 for a number of reasons. First, multi-group analysis allows us to
compare different conditions, e.g., highly complex products vs. less
complex products, that are beneﬁcial or detrimental in nurturing
supplier commitment. Such discovery can provide insights into the
situations where it is beneﬁcial to apply explicit contract or implicit
control in order to obtain supplier commitment. Second, multi-
group analysis has been shown as a more appropriate approach to
assess the moderating effects of contingencies than positing them as
direct interactive effects, which are short of details about the
structural associations between the independent and dependent
variables under different conditions of the contingencies.

Following the guidelines of Marsh and Hocevar (1985) and prior
studies (e.g., Doll et al., 2004), we conducted the multi-group anal-
ysis in four steps for each contingency factor,
i.e., product
complexity, relationship stability, and relational adaptability. First,
we split the sample and classiﬁed them into high and low groups
based on the mean of the composite score of each contingency factor.
Second, we established a baseline model where all the structural
parameters varied freely across the two groups. Third, we formed a
constrained model by constraining the parameters to be equal across
the two groups. Fourth, the chi-square difference test was conducted
to assess the equality of the paths between the baseline and con-
strained model. An insigniﬁcant or small chi-square difference
suggests structural invariance, indicating that the same pattern of
structural relationships exists between the high and low groups.
Following this procedure, we created a high product complexity
group (n ¼ 92) and low product complexity group (n ¼ 78). We
conducted multi-group analyses using AMOS 20.0. We tested the
inﬂuence of high and low product complexity on the relationship
between explicit contract and supplier commitment, and between
implicit control and supplier commitment, while constraining the
path between supplier commitment and environmental perfor-
mance. Panel A in Table 4 summarizes the ﬁndings of the multi-
group analysis. The signiﬁcant chi-square difference of the base-
line and constrained models (Dc2 ¼ 75.57, Ddf ¼ 37, p < 0.05)


1856

C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

Table 3
Mean, standard deviations, correlations, and chi-square differences.

Construct

1. Explicit contract
2. Implicit control

3. Product complexity

4. Relationship stability

5. Relational adaptation

6. Supplier commitment

7. Environmental performance

Mean

2.26
2.72

2.69

3.09

2.70

2.98

3.31

SD

.92
.83

.63

.80

.69

.81

.66

1

2

3

4

5

6

a55**
b38.5***
.49**
77.6***
.20**
72.2***
.41**
62.9***
.43**
49.1***
.03
114.5***

.39**
34.1***
.60**
25.9***
.48**
51.2***
.54**
29.3***
.15
103.8

.20*
86.0***
.46**
39.2***
.25**
73.7***
.18*
76.4***

.45**
10.4***
.53**
8.1***
.18*
70.5**

.49**
7.9**
.11
31.7***

.28**
34.5***

a **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05 (2-tailed).
b Chi-square difference with df ¼ 1; ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05.

provides support to proceed with the equality test of the paths
between high and low product complexity groups. The ﬁndings
indicate that product complexity moderates the relationship be-
tween explicit contract and supplier commitment, and the rela-
tionship is positive and signiﬁcant (b ¼ .37, t ¼ 2.80) when the level
of product complexity is high. On the other hand, the relationship
between implicit control and supplier commitment is positively
signiﬁcant in the less complex product group (b ¼ .61, t ¼ 4.38).
These results show that product complexity moderates the re-
lationships between both types of governance mechanisms (i.e.,
explicit contract and implicit control), but do not support our hy-
potheses (H1a and H2a). Opposite to what we have hypothesized,
the results suggest that the use of explicit contract can nurture
supplier commitment when the buyers and suppliers work with
high complex products. Also, contrary to what we hypothesized in
H2a, the use of implicit control brings supplier commitment when
less complex products are developed.

Table 4
Multi-group analysis results.

and constrained models

The associations between explicit contract and supplier
commitment, and between implicit control and supplier commit-
ment under different levels of relationship stability are tested
following the same procedure. The total sample ﬁrms are divided
into a high (n ¼ 86) and low (n ¼ 84) relationship stability groups
based on mean split. The signiﬁcant change in chi-square values
between the baseline
found
(Dc2 ¼ 75.57, Ddf ¼ 37, p < 0.05), suggesting the contingent role of
relationship stability. The relationship between explicit contract
and supplier commitment in the high group is positive and sig-
niﬁcant (b ¼ .38, t ¼ 2.79), but in the low group is insigniﬁcant
(b ¼ .24, t ¼ 1.32). These results provide support to Hypothesis 1b
and indicate that explicit contract is beneﬁcial to cultivate supplier
commitment under a highly stable relationship in a supply chain.
The chi-square difference test for the relationship between implicit
control and supplier commitment is insigniﬁcant (Dc2 ¼ 1.14,
Ddf ¼ 1, p > 0.05). The relationship in the high group (b ¼ .16,

is

Panel A: invariance tests across different levels of product complexity

Models

c2

df

RMR

IFI

CFI

Dc2

Ddf

p

Highly complex
product

Less complex
product

Hypothesis

Baseline model
Constrained model
Constrained path:
Explicit contract / supplier commitment
Implicit control / supplier commitment

468.34
543.91

473.17
472.12

231
268

232
232

.06
.08

.07
.07

.90
.88

.90
.90

.90
.88

.90
.90

75.57

37

4.83
3.78

1
1

<.05

<.05
<.05

.37**a (2.80)b
.24 (1.84)

.02 (.167)
.61*** (4.38)

H1a not supported
H2a not supported

Panel B: invariance tests across different levels of relationship stability

Models

c2

df

RMR

IFI

CFI

D c2

Ddf

p

Highly stable
relationship

Less stable
relationship

Hypothesis

Baseline model
Constrained model
Constrained path:
Explicit contract / supplier commitment
Implicit control / supplier commitment

454.96
561.95

503.20
456.10

231
268

232
232

.06
.15

.06
.06

.90
.87

.90
.90

.90
.87

.90
.90

106.99

31

48.24
1.14

1
1

<.05

<.05
>.05

.38** (2.79)
.16 (1.99)

.24 (1.32)
.34 (1.88)

H1b supported
H2b not supported

Panel C: invariance tests across different levels of relationship adaptation

Models

c2

df

RMR

IFI

CFI

D c2

Ddf

p

Baseline model
Constrained model
Constrained path:
Explicit contract / supplier commitment
Implicit control / supplier commitment

454.51
539.82

459.32
459.17

231
268

232
232

.06
.13

.06
.07

.90
.88

.90
.90

.90
.87

.90
.90

85.31

37

4.81
4.26

1
1

<.05

<.05
<.05

High relational
adaptation

Low relational
adaptation

Hypothesis

.30* (2.50)
.38** (3.04)

.04 (.30)
.44** (2.91)

H1c supported
H2c not supported

a Standardized coefﬁcient.
b t-Value.


C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

1857

t ¼ 1.99) and low group (b ¼ .34, t ¼ 1.88) are both insigniﬁcant.
These results suggest that supplier stability does not moderate the
relationship between implicit control and supplier commitment,
thus, not supporting Hypothesis 2b.
Lastly, we test the inﬂuence of relational adaptation by classi-
fying the ﬁrms into high (n ¼ 97) and low (n ¼ 73) groups of
relational adaptation based on mean split. The chi-square differ-
ence test shows that the associations between explicit contract and
supplier commitment, and between implicit control and supplier
commitment, are contingent on the level of relational adaptation
(Dc2 ¼ 85.31, Ddf ¼ 37, p < 0.05). Explicit contract is found ad-
vantageous to nurture supplier commitment on environmental
protection when suppliers are highly adaptive to fulﬁll environ-
mental requirements (b ¼ .30, t ¼ 2.50), but such relationship is
insigniﬁcant if suppliers exhibit low level of relational adaptation
(b ¼ .40, t ¼ .30). These results support Hypothesis 1c. On the other
hand, the relationship between implicit control and supplier
commitment in the high group (b ¼ .38, t ¼ 3.04) and low group
(b ¼ .44, t ¼ 2.91) of relational adaptation are both positive and
signiﬁcant, with a signiﬁcant change of chi-square values. The fact
that the coefﬁcient for the low group is higher suggests, contrary to
what we hypothesized, that implicit control encourages supplier
commitment when the relationship exhibits less relational adap-
tation in comparison to high relational adaptation. This provides no
support for Hypothesis 2c.

5. Discussion

As

suggested in the literature,

supplier environmental
commitment is crucial for buying ﬁrms to achieve environmental
performance. The research question of this study concerns the
impact of transactional and relational governance mechanisms on
supplier commitment on environmental protection, and subse-
quently, its impact on environmental performance. In addition, we
examine the operational and relational conditions under which
these governance mechanisms can improve supplier commitment.
We found that both explicit contract and implicit control have
positive impact on supplier commitment. In line with prior studies,
our ﬁndings indicate the importance of both transactional and rela-
tional governance mechanisms to nurture supplier commitment in
buying ﬁrms' environmental requirements. While explicit contract
provides clear speciﬁcations of environmental expectations and re-
quirements for suppliers to oblige due to legal sanction, implicit con-
trol helps develop long-term orientations of suppliers by having
mutual understanding between the exchange parties in a supply
chain. Consistent with our theorization, the study results also show
that supplier environmental commitment is important for buying
ﬁrms to improve environmental performance. Suppliers' commitment
and willingness to fulﬁll the buying ﬁrm's environmental re-
quirements (i.e., use of recycled packaging, avoidance of hazardous
and/or toxic materials) implies that the buying ﬁrm will receive more
environmentally friendly raw materials to be used in the production
process.

As we have already mentioned, both explicit contract and implicit
control will help buying ﬁrms achieve suppliers' environmental
commitment. However, these mechanisms might not be effective in
all kind of contexts. In that sense, we examined the operational and
relational conditions between buyers and suppliers in inﬂuencing
the effectiveness of these governance mechanisms. More speciﬁcally,
we examined the role of product complexity, relational stability and
relational adaptation. Regarding product complexity, we expected
explicit contract to be more effective when product complexity is low.
On the contrary, we expected implicit control to be more effective
when product complexity is high. Our results, however, show the
opposite. When partner ﬁrms are in a relationship to develop a highly

complex product, the suppliers tend to be more committed to the
buying ﬁrm's environmental requirements with the use of an explicit
contract. On the other hand, implicit control can engender supplier
commitment when the product complexity is low. These unexpected
results can be explained as follows.
In case of high product
complexity, there is a higher likelihood that an environmental
problem or incident may occur, as there are more components, more
processes, and more suppliers involved. Under these circumstances,
contracts are perceived to be more effective, as the probability to use
the contract (as a result of an environmental incident) is higher. The
contract can provide speciﬁc guidelines about how the suppliers may
manage environmental issues related to component sourcing and
production. However, in the case of low product complexity, the
probability of an environmental incident is lower (due to the fact of
having fewer components and fewer suppliers involved). In this case,
the need to revisit the contract for guidelines about environmental
management is lower and therefore, the contract is perceived to be
less effective. Contracts, although not being able to account for all the
different dimensions that product complexity may require, have the
characteristic of being able to provide clear speciﬁcations and
guidelines about the environmental requirements in case of an
incident.

This study also investigated the impact of relationship stability on
supplier commitment of the transactional and relational governance
mechanisms. In line with our theorization, the ﬁndings indicate that
explicit contract increases supplier commitment under a highly
stable relationship. The supplier will have higher commitment to
fulﬁll the buyer's environmental requirements if the relationship is
meant to be a long-term and harmonious one. If the relationship
between buyer and supplier is understood as a punctual exchange,
the explicit contract will be less effective on achieving suppliers'
commitment since the supplier will have no incentive to realize long-
term beneﬁts for the relationship. However, contrary to what we
expected, the relationship between implicit control and supplier
commitment is not inﬂuenced by relationship stability. Buying ﬁrms
are able to gain supplier commitments in meeting their environ-
mental requirements by using implicit control as a governance
mechanism regardless the level of relationship stability. This sug-
gests that while mutual understanding between suppliers and
buying ﬁrms are well established by having implicit control gover-
nance mechanism in place, the importance of how the suppliers
perceived the duration of the relationship diminish.

When buyers and suppliers are in a highly adaptive relationship,
such that suppliers are ﬂexible in changing their operations or
making investments to buying ﬁrms' expectations, the impact of
explicit control on supplier commitment is higher than when the
relationship is low adaptive. If a supplier is willing to make in-
vestments and commit resources for the beneﬁt of the relationship,
then the effectiveness of explicit contracts on suppliers' commit-
ment will be higher since the supplier will be willing to fulﬁll all the
different requirements (i.e., those requirements that need product
or processes adaptations). However, opposite to what we expected,
the impact of implicit control and mutual understanding on sup-
plier commitment is higher when there is low adaptation (low
frequency of change in the suppliers' system to adapt to the buying
ﬁrm's requirements). This unexpected ﬁnding can be explained as
follows: in case of low adaptability (low frequency of changes),
there is lower probability of having an environmental accident,
making implicit control and mutual understanding more effective
than in the case of high adaptability.

5.1. Theoretical implications

In this study, we examine the impact of two key environmental
governance mechanisms, namely explicit contract and implicit


1858

C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

contract nurtures

control, on supplier commitment, and in turn its impact on buying
ﬁrms' environmental performance. Representing the transactional
governance mechanism, explicit
supplier
commitment to buying ﬁrms' environmental requirements by de-
tailing economic exchange conditions and liability limitations, and
specifying environmental requirements in the agreement. It pro-
vides environmental guidelines for suppliers to comply and follow
that enable them to monitor, assess, and improve their environ-
mental performance in meeting buying ﬁrms expectations. The
ﬁndings also highlight the importance for ﬁrms of developing
mutual understanding between buyers and suppliers in gaining
supplier commitment.

This study advances the knowledge of environmental gover-
nance by revealing the operational and relational contingencies
that can facilitate buying ﬁrms to increase supplier commitment
with the use of explicit contract and implicit control as environ-
mental governance mechanisms. As summarized in Table 5, rela-
tionship stability has no moderation effect on the relationship
between implicit control and supplier commitment, suggesting
that implicit control exerts an impact on supplier commitment that
is not affected by the level of relationship stability. However, rela-
tionship stability is important in the case of explicit contracts, as
high relationship stability strengthens the impact of explicit con-
tracts on supplier commitment.

Interestingly, as shown in Table 5, product complexity and
relationship adaptability affects the relationship between gover-
nance mechanisms (implicit control and explicit contracts) and
supplier commitment in the same way. This is due to the fact that
both high product complexity and high adaptability imply a higher
probability of having an environmental incident, as there are more
components and more changes in suppliers' processes. Explicit
contracts have a higher impact on supplier commitment in the case
of high complexity (high product complexity and/or high frequency
of changes in the suppliers' systems) with respect to contexts of low
complexity (low product complexity and/or low frequency of
changes in the suppliers' systems), whereas implicit control has a
higher impact on supplier commitment in the case of
low
complexity.

This study provides empirical evidence to extend the TCE and
social exchange theory: The effectiveness of transactional and
relational governance mechanisms to achieve supplier commit-
ment depends on the operational and relational conditions of a BSR.

5.2. Managerial implications

This study has several managerial implications that are useful
for buying ﬁrms to organize their exchange arrangements to ach-
ieve supplier commitments towards their environmental re-
quirements. First, it is important for buying ﬁrms to gain supplier
commitment as it is critical in achieving the environmental per-
formance. Second, in addition to contractual agreements, buying
ﬁrms should establish mutual understanding with suppliers to

Table 5
Summary: governance mechanisms, supplier commitment and context.

secure their commitment to environmental protection. Third, the
effectiveness of explicit contracts and implicit control on achieving
supplier commitment depends on the operational and relational
conditions of the BSR. Speciﬁcally, whereas contracts are more
effective in relationships with high stability, implicit control im-
pacts supplier commitment regardless of the level of relationship
stability. Additionally, explicit contracts work better when context
is complex (high product complexity and/or high relationship
adaptability) whereas mutual understanding works better in sim-
ple contexts (low product complexity and/or low relationship
adaptability).

6. Conclusions

requirements of

the buying ﬁrm. However,

The objective of this paper was to analyze the effectiveness of
transactional and relational mechanisms in managing BSR with
respect to environmental issues. As we have seen, both mecha-
nisms are effective on driving suppliers to comply with the envi-
ronmental
the
effectiveness of these mechanisms can be leveraged if they are
applied under speciﬁc conditions. Explicit contract shows higher
effectiveness in situations of high product complexity, high rela-
tionship stability and high relationship adaptability. In other words,
the use of explicit control in order to achieve suppliers' commit-
ment towards environmental issues will be more effective in situ-
ations in which products are characterized by being sophisticated,
technical and/or complicated. In the same line, explicit contracts
are preferable when the relationship between buyer and supplier is
deﬁned as a harmonious one and when the supplier is willing to
make the necessary changes and adjustments. On the other hand,
the effectiveness of implicit control is higher if they are used in the
context of low product complexity and low relationship adapt-
ability. These results provide valuable knowledge for managers
who are willing to improve their suppliers' commitment towards
environmental issues in an effort to improve their own environ-
mental performance. They need to be aware that the above-
mentioned mechanisms will be more effective depending on the
characteristics of their products and/or the type of relationship they
have developed with their suppliers. In addition, our study has
contributed to the GSCM literature by analyzing the neglected role
of contracts, which have shown to be an effective tool in managing
BSR with respect to environmental issues.

Besides these contributions, our paper has some limitations that
need to be acknowledged. In the literature of BSR, there is an
existing debate on whether transactional and relational mecha-
nisms are substitutes or complements. Further studies should
incorporate the interaction effect between these two mechanisms
to add to this debate. In addition, we have narrowed the studied
contingencies to operational and relational ones. Further studies
should examine the effectiveness of these mechanisms under other
different contingencies (e.g., environmental uncertainty). Finally,
our study is limited to the Hong Kong garment industry setting. By

Explicit contract

Implicit control

Relationship stability

Product complexity

Relationship adaptability

HIGH
The impact of explicit contracts on supplier commitment is higher
when relationship stability is HIGH with respect to low
HIGH
The impact of explicit contracts on supplier commitment is higher
when product complexity is HIGH with respect to low
HIGH
The impact of explicit contracts on supplier commitment is higher
when relationship adaptability is HIGH with respect to low

NO MODERATION
Implicit control impacts supplier commitment regardless
of the level of relationship stability
LOW
The impact of implicit control on supplier commitment
is higher when product complexity is LOW with respect to high
LOW
The impact of implicit control on supplier commitment
is higher when relationship adaptability is LOW with respect to high


C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

1859

choosing this setting we have been able to ensure high internal
validity, however we are aware that results may differ in different
settings (i.e., country and economic sector). Countries with
different cultural values (e.g., trust as a key element) may prefer the
use of implicit control mechanisms to the use of explicit contracts.
Differences in results may also appear when looking at different
economic sectors. Sectors with a high impact on the environment
(e.g., chemical sector) might be already highly regulated in terms of
environmental
issues and therefore the establishment of the
buying ﬁrm's environmental requirements in a contract (i.e.,
explicit contract) might be enough for the supplier to comply with
them. Because of this, in terms of generalizability, it would be useful
that further research tries to explore if these results also hold for
different countries and/or economic sectors.

Acknowledgment

The authors would like to acknowledge the Guest Editors and
three anonymous reviewers for the constructive and insightful
suggestions provided to improve the earlier versions of this paper.
This research is supported in part by the Research Grants Council of
the Hong Kong Special Administration Region (PolyU 5017-PPR-12),
and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (G-YZ48).The authors
also acknowledge ﬁnancial support from research grant ECO2010-
16840 from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation and
from research grant ECO/155/2012 (ref. 2014FI_B1 00203) from the
Research and Universities Secretary, Economic Department, Gen-
erality of Catalonia.

References

Anderson, E., Weitz, B., 1992. The use of pledges to build and sustain commitment in

distribution channels. J. Mark. Res. 29, 18e34.

Aragon-Correa, J.A., 1998. Strategic proactivity and ﬁrm approach to the natural

environment. Acad. Manag. J. 41 (5), 556e567.

Armstrong, J.S., Overton, R.S., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys.

J. Mark. Res. 14 (4), 396e402.

Aulakh, P.S., Kotabe, M., Sahay, A., 1996. Trust and performance in cross-border
Int. Bus. Stud. 27 (5),

marketing partnerships: a behavioral approach.
1005e1033.

J.

Bagozzi, R.P., Yi, Y., Phillips, L.W., 1991. Assessing construct validity in organizational

research. Adm. Sci. Q. 36, 421e458.

Barboza, D., 2011. Apple Cited as Adding to Pollution in China. The New York Times,

New York.

Birnberg, J.G., 1998. Control in interﬁrm co-operative relationships. J. Manag. Stud.

35 (4), 421e428.

Brown, J.R., Lusch, R.F., Nicholson, C.Y., 1995. Power and relationship commitment:
their impact on marketing channel member performance. J. Retail. 71 (4),
363e392.

Buysse, K., Verbeke, A., 2003. Proactive environmental strategies: a stakeholder

management perspective. Strateg. Manag. J. 24 (5), 453e470.

Campbell, N.C.G., 1985. The Psychology of the Chinese Mind. Oxford University

Press, London.

Cani€els, M.J.C., Gelderman, C.J., Vermeulen, N.P., 2012. The interplay of governance
mechanisms in complex procurement projects. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 18 (2),
113e121.

Cani€els, M.J.C., Gehrsitz, M.H., Semeijn,

J., 2013. Participation of suppliers in
greening supply chains: an empirical analysis of German automotive suppliers.
J. Purch. Supply Manag. 19 (3), 134e143.

Cannon, J.P., Perreault, W.D., 1999. Buyereseller relationships in business markets.

J. Mark. Res. 36 (4), 439e460.

Cannon, J.P., Achrol, R.S., Gundlach, G.T., 2000. Contracts, norms, and plural form

governance. Acad. Mark. Sci. 28 (2), 180e194.

Carson, S.J., Madhok, A., Wu, T., 2006. Uncertainty, opportunism, and governance:
the effects of volatility and ambiguity on formal and relational contracting.
Acad. Manag. J. 49 (5), 1058e1077.

Cavusgil, S.T., Deligonul, S., Zhang, C., 2004. Curbing foreign distributor oppor-
tunism: an examination of trust, contracts, and the legal environment in in-
ternational channel relationships. J. Int. Mark. 12 (2), 7e27.

China Research and Intelligence Co. Ltd., 2012. Research Report on China's Textile

Industry 2012.

Chorn, N.H., 1991. The “alignment” theory: creating strategic ﬁt. Manag. Decis. 29

(1), 20e24.

Coase, R.H., 1937. The nature of the ﬁrm. Economica 16 (4), 386e405.

Doll, W.J., Deng, X., Raghunathan, T.S., Torkzadeh, G., Xia, W., 2004. The meaning
and measurement of user satisfaction: a multigroup invariance analysis of the
end-user computing satisfaction instrument.
Inf. Syst. 21 (1),
227e262.

J. Manag.

Dyer, J.H., 1997. Effective inter-ﬁrm collaboration: how ﬁrms minimize transaction

costs and maximize transaction value. Strateg. Manag. J. 18 (7), 535e556.

Dwyer, F.R., Schurr, P.H., Oh, S., 1987. Developing buyeresupplier relationships.

J. Mark. 51, 11e27.

Faruk, A., Lamming, R., Cousing, P., Bowen, F., 2002. Analyzing, mapping and
managing environmental impacts along supply chains. J. Purch. Supply Manag.
16 (2), 1180e1230.

Ford, D., 1981. Stability factors in industrial marketing channels. Ind. Mark. Manag.

7, 410e422.

Fornell, C., Larcker, D.F., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unob-

served variables and measurement errors. J. Mark. Res. 18 (1), 39e50.

Gerbing, D.W., Anderson, J.C., 1988. An updated paradigm for scale development
J. Mark. Res. 25 (2),

incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment.
186e192.

Gibbs, J.P., 1981. Norms, Deviance and Social Control: Conceptual Matters. Elsevier,

New York.

Granovetter, M., 1985. Economic action and social structure: the problem of

embeddedness. Am. J. Sociol. 91 (3), 481e510.

Gu, Q., 2011. The Chinese Market for Clothing. International Trade Centre.
Hallen, L., Johanson, J., Seyed-Mohamed, N., 1991. Interﬁrm adaptation in business

relationships. J. Mark. 55, 29e37.

Heide, J.B., John, G., 1992. Do norms matter in marketing relationships? J. Mark. 56

(2), 32e44.

Heide, J.B., 1994. Interorganizational governance in marketing channels. J. Mark. 58

(1), 71e85.

Heide, J.B., Stump, R., 1995. Performance implications of buyeresupplier relation-
ships in industrial-markets e a transaction cost explanation. J. Bus. Res. 32 (1),
57e66.

Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department, 2013. In: Department CaS (Ed.), Hong

Kong Annual Digest of Statistics.

Hu, L.T., Bentler, P.M., 1999. Cutoff criteria for ﬁt indices in covariance structure
analysis: conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Struct. Equ. Model. 6 (1),
1e55.

Jap, S.D., Ganesan, S., 2000. Control mechanisms and the relationship life cycle:
implications for safeguarding speciﬁc investments and developing commit-
ment. J. Mark. Res. 37 (2), 227e245.

Johnson, J.T., 2006. The role of explicit contracts and cooperative norms on fairness

in buyereseller relationships. Acad. Mark. Stud. J. 10 (2).

Kauffman, L., Carter, C.R., 2006. International supply relationships and non-ﬁnancial
performance: a comparison of US and German practices. J. Oper. Manag. 24,
653e675.

Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., Yeung, A.C.L., 2005. Relationship stability and supplier

commitment to quality. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 96 (3), 397e410.

Lee, C.K.M., Lam, J.S.L., 2012. Managing reverse logistics to enhance sustainability of

industrial marketing. Ind. Market. Manag. 41 (4), 589e598.

Li, Y., Xie, E., Teo, H.H., Peng, M.W., 2010. Formal control and social control in do-
mestic and international buyeresupplier relationships. J. Oper. Manag. 28 (4),
333e344.

Lindell, M.K., Whitney, D.J., 2001. Accounting for common method variance in cross-

sectional designs. J. Appl. Psychol. 86 (1), 114e121.

Liu, Y., Luo, Y., Liu, T., 2009. Governing buyeresupplier relationships through
transactional and relational mechanisms: evidence from China. J. Oper. Manag.
27 (4), 294e309.

Lumineau, F., Henderson, J.E., 2012. The inﬂuence of relational experience and
contractual governance on the negotiation strategy in buyeresupplier disputes.
J. Oper. Manag. 30 (5), 382e395.

Lusch, R.F., Brown, J.R., 1996. Interdependency, contracting, and relational behavior

in marketing channels. J. Mark. 60 (4), 19e38.

Macneil, I.R., 1980. The New Social Contract: an Inquiry into Modern Contractual

Relations. Yale University Press, New Haven and London.

Mahapatra, S.K., Narasimhan, R., Barbieri, P., 2010. Strategic interdependence,
governance effectiveness and supplier performance: a dyadic case study
investigation and theory development. J. Oper. Manag. 28 (6), 537e552.

Marsh, H., Hocevar, D., 1985. A new, more powerful approach to multitrait-
multimethod analysis: application of second-order conﬁrmatory factory anal-
ysis. J. Appl. Psychol. 73 (1), 107e117.

Metcalf, L.E., Frear, C.R., Krishnan, R., 1990. Buyereseller relationships: an applica-

tion of the IMP interaction model. Eur. J. Mark. 26, 267e346.

Morberg, C.R., Speh, T.W., 2003. Evaluating the relationship between questionable
business practices and the strength of supply chain relationships. J. Bus. Logist.
24 (2), 1e19.

Mohr, J., Spekman, R., 1994. Characteristics of partnership success: partnership at-
tributes, communication behavior, and conﬂict resolution techniques. Strateg.
Manag. J. 15 (2), 135e142.

Moorman, C., Zaltman, G., Deshpande, R., 1992. Relationships between providers
and users of market research: the dynamics of trust within and between or-
ganizations. J. Mark. Res. 29, 314e328.

Montabon, F., Sroufe, R., Narasimhan, R., 2007. An examination of corporate
reporting, environmental management practices and ﬁrm performance. J. Oper.
Manag. 25 (4), 998e1014.


1860

C. Sancha et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 112 (2016) 1849e1860

Morgan, R.M., Hunt, S.D., 1994. The commitmentetrust theory of relationship

Simpson, D., Power, D., Samson, D., 2007. Greening the automotive supply chain: a

marketing. J. Mark. 58, 20e38.

Noordewier, T.G., John, G., Nevin, J.R., 1990. Performance outcomes of purchasing
arrangements in industrial buyerevendor relationships. J. Mark. 54 (4), 80e93.

Nunnally, J., 1984. Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Nyaga, G.N., Whipple, J.M., Lynch, D.F., 2010. Examining supply chain relationships:
do buyer and supplier perspectives on collaborative relationships differ? J. Oper.
Manag. 28 (2), 101e114.

Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J.-Y., Podsakoff, N.P., 2003. Common method
biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and recom-
mended remedies. J. Appl. Psychol. 88 (5), 879e903.

Podsakoff, P.M., Organ, D.M., 1986. Self-reports in organizational research: problems

and prospects. J. Manag. 12 (4), 531e544.

Poppo, I., Zenger, T., 2002. Do formal contracts and relational governance function

as substitutes or complements? Strateg. Manag. J. 23 (8), 707e725.

Prahinski, C., Benton, W.C., 2004. Supplier evaluations: communication strategies to

improve supplier performance. J. Oper. Manag. 22, 39e62.

Rao, P., Holt, D., 2005. Do green supply chains lead to competitiveness and eco-

nomic performance? Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 25 (9), 898e916.

Reuer, J., Ari~no, A., 2007. Strategic alliance contracts: dimensions and determinants

of contractual complexity. Strateg. Manag. J. 28 (3), 313e330.

Reve, T., 1986. Organization for distribution. Res. Mark. 8, 1e26.
Ring, P.S., Van de Ven, A.H., 1994. Developmental processes of cooperative inter-

organizational relationships. Acad. Manag. Rev. 19 (1), 90e118.

Schoenherr, T., Hilpert, D., Soni, A.K., Venkataramanan, M.A., Mabert, V.A., 2010.
Enterprise systems complexity and its antecedents: a grounded-theory
approach. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 30 (6), 639e668.

Seabright, M.A., Levinthal, D.A., Fichman, M., 1992. Role of individual attachments in
the dissolution of interorganizational relationships. Acad. Manag. J. 35 (1),
122e150.

Siguaw, J.A., Simpson, P.M., Baker, T.L., 1998. Effects of supplier market orientation
on distributor market orientation and the channel relationship: the distributor
perspective. J. Mark. 62 (2), 99e111.

relationship perspective. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 27 (1), 28e48.

Stinchcombe, A.L., 1985. In: Stinchcombe, Arthur L., Heimer, Carol A. (Eds.), Con-
tracts as Hierarchical Documents in Organization Theory and Project Manage-
ment Administering Uncertainty in Norwegian Offshore Oil. Norwegian
University Press, Bergen, Norway, pp. 121e171.

Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and strategic manage-

ment. Strateg. Manag. J. 18 (7), 509e524.

Trochim, W., 2002. The Research Methods Knowledge Base. Atomic Dog Publishing,

Cincinnati.

Watts, J., 2011. Western Firms Linked to China Pollution. The Guardian, Beijing.
Wiengarten, F., Pagell, M., Fynes, B., 2013. ISO 14001 certiﬁcation and investments
in environmental supply chain management practices: identifying differences
in motivation and adoption levels between Western European and North
American companies. J. Clean. Prod. 56, 18e28.

Williamson, O.E., 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. Free Press, New

York.

Wong, C.W.Y., 2013. Leveraging environmental information integration to enable
environmental management capabilities and performance. J. Supply Chain
Manag. 49 (2), 114e136.

Williamson, O.E., 1991. Strategizing, economizing and economic organization.

Strateg. Manag. J. 12, 75e94.

Yang, Jie, Wang, Jinjun, Wong, Christina W.Y., Lai, Kee-Hung, 2008. Relational sta-

bility and alliance performance in supply chain. Omega 36, 600e608.

Yang, Jie, Wong, Christina W.Y., Lai, Kee-Hung, Ntoko, Alfred Ngome, 2009. The
antecedents of dyadic quality of performance and its effect on buyer-supplier
relationship improvement. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 102, 243e251.

Yu, C.M.J., Liao, T.J., Lin, Z.D., 2006. Formal governance mechanisms, relational
governance mechanisms, and transaction-speciﬁc investments in suppli-
eremanufacturer relationships. Ind. Mark. Manag. 35, 128e139.

Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J., 2004. Relationships between operational programs and perfor-
mance among early adopters of green supply chain management programs in
Chinese manufacturing enterprises. J. Oper. Manag. 22 (3), 265e289.

