娀 Academy of Management Journal
2009, Vol. 52, No. 2, 294–313.

SEARCHING FOR THE OPTIMAL LEVEL OF EMPLOYEE

TURNOVER: A STUDY OF A LARGE U.K.

RETAIL ORGANIZATION

W. STANLEY SIEBERT

University of Birmingham

NIKOLAY ZUBANOV

CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis

We study the relationship between sales assistant turnover and labor productivity in
325 stores of a large U.K. clothing retailer tracked over 1995–99. We find that the
turnover-productivity relationship is contingent on type of work system. For a large
group of part-timers, managed under a “secondary” work system, the relationship
clearly has an inverted U-shape, but for the smaller group of full-timers, managed
under a “commitment” system, the relationship is the conventional negative one.
Implications for the contingency view of the link between turnover and productivity
are discussed.

Research on the link between employee turnover
and organizational performance has long been a
battlefield of conflicting views. Thus, Dess and
Shaw (2001) contrasted “human capital” theory,
predicting losses in performance as turnover erodes
firm-specific human capital, with cost-benefit ap-
proaches predicting an optimal level of turnover
maximizing the difference between its benefits and
costs. A particular benefit of turnover is replace-
ment of poorly performing workers with better job
matches (Ableson & Baysinger, 1984)—indeed, the
Big Four accountancy firms have recently been re-
ported as wanting to “keep the performance bar
high” by maintaining a turnover rate of 10 –12 per-
cent (Economist, 2007: 74). Some turnover is re-
quired under economic theories of job matching
(Jovanovic, 1979). Worker productivity can only be
known imperfectly at the time of hiring. Therefore,

We wish to thank the executives and staff at the study
company for providing us with the data and assisting us
with management insights. We also wish to thank the
editor (Peter Bamberger) and three anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments and their patience during the
review process. Arnaud Chevalier and Tarja Viitanen
performed early work on the data set, and thanks are due
to them as well. Finally, we are grateful for valuable
suggestions from participants at the University of Aarhus
Low Wage Employment Network (LOWER) Conference,
and at Birmingham University Economics Department’s
seminar, and also Erling Barth, Mary Gregory, Maura
Sheehan, Peter Sinclair, and Niels Westergaard-Nielsen.
Because the data used in this study are proprietary, the
authors will only be able to release them with prior
permission from the company.

some positive turnover must be beneficial, since it
is rational for both employers and workers to con-
tinue an employment contract only if the workers’
productivity is matched by their pay, while mis-
matches should separate.

Yet Dess and Shaw (2001: 448) noted that no
organization-level studies have yet supported the
curvilinear, inverted U-shaped, cost-benefit pre-
diction. Much more common is the finding of a
negative link between turnover and performance.
The position is little different today, with only
Glebbeek and Bax (2004) having found signs, al-
beit not statistically significant ones, of an inverted
U-shaped relationship. Harris, Tang, and Tseng
(2006) found a curvilinear relationship, but at an
aggregate level in a cross-firm study using Aus-
tralian data. Studies by Shaw, Gupta, and Delery
(2005) and Shaw, Duffy, Johnson, and Lockhart
(2005) have confirmed the usual negative relation-
ship. However, the difficulty of testing these theo-
ries empirically is that “unobservables,” such as
management ability, affect performance and con-
found the true turnover-performance link. Our
study brings forward new organization-level data
with which to test the cost-benefit prediction.

As Glebbeek and Bax (2004: 279) noted, the
methodology of using different units from within
the same organization—rather than comparing or-
ganizations— offers the advantage of more control.
By making an organization-level study, we aimed
to control for some of the factors affecting the link
between performance and turnover that are not eas-
ily observed and thus are difficult to capture in a
multiorganization study. Examples include man-

Copyright of the Academy of Management, all rights reserved. Contents may not be copied, emailed, posted to a listserv, or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder’s express
written permission. Users may print, download or email articles for individual use only.

294


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

295

agement practices, the nature of operations, and
economic conditions facing the industry or region
in question. Also, our methodology could be di-
rectly used to assist central management calcula-
tions in any large organization with multiple sub-
sidiary plants. The single-firm literature is growing
(see Lin [2005] for the industrial relations litera-
ture), with noteworthy studies by Bartel (2004), of
branches of a Canadian bank; by Kacmar, Andrews,
Van Rooy, Steilberg, and Cerrone (2006), of restau-
rants in the Burger King chain; by Morrow and
McElroy (2007), of bank branches; and by Shaw,
Duffy et al. (2005), also of restaurants. Admittedly,
there is the disadvantage that a single organization
is not representative. Nevertheless, lessons can be
learned, so long as its relevant characteristics are
made clear. Basically, we believe that our results
will apply to most situations requiring manage-
ment of many unskilled workers over dispersed
sites.

We conducted our analysis in the context of the
work systems for sales assistants in a large U.K.
retail organization, whose stores we tracked over
1995–99. We leave aside the more skilled store and
central management groups, as well as central ad-
ministration and warehousing. For these groups,
the inverted U-shaped turnover-performance asso-
ciation is likely to be ruled out because substantial
human capital is lost with turnover; a considerable
literature on such losses exists (Arthur, 1994; Batt,
2002; Huselid, 1995; Shaw, Duffy, et al., 2005;
Shaw, Gupta et al., 2005). But for sales assistants
the position may be different. Their turnover is
high, with an average headcount separation rate of
about 25 percent a year in our organization. The
job might be thought of as low skilled, with low
involvement, and so some level of employee
turnover, and perhaps quite a lot, may be appro-
priate. Therefore, here we would expect to find
an inverted U-shaped turnover-performance
relationship.

But even within a seemingly homogeneous em-
ployee group such as sales assistants, different
work systems may be necessary. We needed to be
alert to this possibility, following Lepak and Snell’s
(1999: 42) questioning of the “one-size-fits-all” ap-
proach to analyzing work systems. In fact, as we
will show below, two work systems appear to co-
exist for sales assistants within our organization: a
“commitment” system for the core full-time group
(20 percent of the workforce), and a “secondary”
system for the many part-timers. For the core work-
ers, we expected a straight negative turnover-
performance link, and we expected the inverted U
to apply only to the secondary group. Some evi-
dence for this contingency view exists, in that

both Arthur (1994: 683) and Guthrie (2001: 186)
found that
turnover-performance relationships
were negative only for organizations using “high-
involvement” work systems (the commitment sys-
tem in our terms) and were positive for organiza-
tions with low-involvement work systems (our
secondary work system) (but see Shaw, Gupta et al.
[2005: 64] for a no-contingency finding). The cited
studies were conducted in multiple organizations;
ours was within one organization. We thus carry
the contingency debate further (see Datta, Guthrie,
& Wright, 2005; Lepak, Taylor, Tekleab, Marrone, &
Cohen, 2007; Youndt, Snell, Dean, & Lepak, 1996),
allowing for heterogeneity within our organization.
Following this line of argument, we propose a con-
tingency model in which the turnover-performance
relationship is contingent on the nature of work
systems within an organization and differentiate
between commitment and secondary sales assistant
groups.

The possible coexistence of two different work
systems for rank-and-file workers has implications
both for central management and for the wider
strategic human resource management (HRM) re-
search effort concerned with “high-performance”
work systems. For management, the problem will
be to allow for the work systems to differ between
groups within their organization and to try to
achieve the correspondingly different optimal lev-
els of turnover. Our findings should assist manag-
ers in making such decisions. For strategic HRM
research, the problem will be how to characterize
the work system of an organization if some of its
operatives are optimally managed with high-perfor-
mance practices (commitment), and others with
low-performance practices (secondary). More dif-
ferentiation is needed, as Becker and Huselid
(2006: 905) called for, and as is indeed beginning to
emerge with Lepak et al.’s (2007) distinction be-
tween “core” and “support” workers. Our findings
below further examine differentiation.

Our approach also offers two measurement inno-
vations. The first is more accurate measurement of
employee turnover. For each of our organization’s
325 stores, we had daily data on when a worker was
hired or separated (in fact, most separations are
quits, and dismissals are few; see below for man-
agement methods for inducing “voluntary” separa-
tions), and on his/her contracted hours. These data
allowed us to analyze turnover not simply in terms
of headcount, as is the norm, but with adjustment
for full-time equivalents—that is, hours gained or
lost from hirings or separations. In fact, as emerges
below, most turnover occurred among the short-
hours, part-time workers. There are many part-tim-
ers in our studied organization, but not many hours


296

Academy of Management Journal

April

are lost when one leaves. Thus, the adjusted turn-
over rates are below the headcount measures. We
show that the performance-turnover link is much
clearer when turnover rates are measured in their
full-time equivalents, a reasonable convention
given that output primarily depends on worker
hours, not headcounts.

The second innovation our approach offers was
derived from taking advantage of the panel struc-
ture of our data, which allowed every store to be
tracked over five years. Having five annual obser-
vations for each store meant that we could include
in the regression equation a term representing
store-specific unobservables, or “omitted vari-
ables” (Becker & Huselid, 2006), that affect sales—
such as management ability and store location.
This approach would constitute a fixed-effects
analysis if the store-specific unobservables were
correlated with the regression variables, or random-
effects analysis if they were not. By allowing for
these unobservables we can obtain true “average”
(see Capelli & Neumark, 2001: 744) turnover-per-
formance relationships.

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND FOR THE

TURNOVER-PERFORMANCE LINK

Turnover in Commitment versus Secondary
Work Systems

Employee turnover has benefits and costs for or-
ganizational performance (Ableson & Baysinger,
1984), and an inverted U-shaped relationship be-
tween employee turnover and performance may be
the net result of these, depending upon the work
system in question. Following Bamberger and Me-
shoulam (2000), we contrast two archetypical work
systems, the commitment and the control, or sec-
ondary, systems. The difference is based on the
nature of the production process. On the one hand,
the commitment system can be said to arise when
managers are unable to monitor or fully evaluate
employee behavior. On the other hand, the second-
ary system arises when operations are routinized
and low-cost. In relation to staffing and training, in
the commitment context (Bamberger & Meshoulam,
2000: 67) careful selection is paramount, as are
career development and dependence on the inter-
nal labor market of the organization in question. In
contrast, the secondary system calls for little reli-
ance on selection and for little career development,
and it depends on the external labor market.

Within this framework, let us look in turn at the
benefits and costs of turnover. On the benefits side
are two major components: First, the benefits of
improved job matching can be seen—revitalizing a

workforce by weeding out the bad workers and
preventing Dalton and Todor’s (1979: 226) “trained
incapacity.” Turnover here is “involuntary,” in-
volving dismissals (though, as Dalton and Todor
noted, dismissal rates are a poor guide, since “vol-
untary separation may be viewed merely as a con-
venient substitute for termination” [1979: 331]). Al-
though a worker’s productivity can only be known
imperfectly at the time of her or his hiring, the costs
of mistakes are higher in the commitment system,
so there must be fewer “false positives,” and thus
less (involuntary) turnover from this source. In a
secondary labor market, on the other hand, where
the costs of selection errors are relatively small,
there are likely to be more such mistakes, which
will require more turnover to clear. Second, there is
the benefit of keeping labor costs variable where
sales are variable—“greasing the wheels”—which
our studied organization does by keeping pay rates
low (dismissals are thus less needed, since volun-
tary turnover is high). Such flexibility benefits also
imply marked turnover in the secondary system. In
the commitment system, where there is careful se-
lection and training, labor hoarding will dampen
employee turnover. It must be emphasized that
both these benefits reach a limit beyond which
further turnover from this source does not help.

The costs side also has two main components.
The first is the loss of specific human capital (or
unique human capital, in Lepak and Snell’s [1999]
terminology), which will become increasingly
onerous as turnover increases and is a problem
likely to be associated particularly with voluntary
turnover (quits). This factor, above all, will make
high turnover detrimental. Specific human capital
includes both formal training and “tacit knowl-
edge” (Kacmar et al., 2006: 135) acquired through
practice. It is clear that high turnover leads to loss
of formal training because new hires have to be
trained up. Indeed, reduced worker productivity
during the learning period has even been catego-
rized as the highest cost of turnover (Cascio, 1998).
Turnover also reduces tacit knowledge of, for ex-
ample, service values and norms, the transmission
of which to new employees is disrupted (for a sur-
vey, see Morrow and McElroy [2007: 830]). Again,
there is likely to be a distinction between the two
systems simply because specific human capital is
so much more important in the commitment work
system.

The second component of turnover’s costs are the
costs of losing particularly productive, “star” work-
ers through dysfunctional turnover. As Shaw, Del-
ery, Jenkins, and Gupta (1998) showed in their
study of voluntary and involuntary turnover in
trucking, this type of dysfunctional voluntary turn-


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

297

over depends more upon pay-for-performance
practices rewarding good workers than on careful
selection practices (see Harrison, Virick, and Wil-
liam [1996] for the effects of pay for performance).
In the commitment system, where pay is more tai-
lored to the individual, dysfunctional turnover is
less likely than in the secondary system, where it is
simply derived from surveys of the external labor
market (Bamberger & Meshoulam, 2000: 129). This
said, dysfunctional turnover is likely to be more
costly per quit in the commitment system, where
able workers are more valuable, and these costs
will also work to reduce turnover.

Summing the benefits and costs gives the overall
turnover-performance relationship, which is likely
to be contingent on the type of work system in
force. Under the commitment work system, selec-
tion is careful, so not much involuntary turnover
(dismissal) is required to weed out the bad workers.
At the same time, the costs of dysfunctional turn-
over in the form of voluntary turnover (quits) and
the losses of human capital owing to turnover rise
quickly. The net effect is that the range of turnover
that is beneficial for performance is likely to be
very small, if it exists. In general, under this sce-
nario, we then expect to find a negative turnover-
performance relationship.

Under the secondary work system, careful selec-
tion is not as profitable, so accordingly more turn-
over is required to weed out bad workers. In fact,
within the secondary model there is “the presump-
tion of considerable interfirm movement” (Oster-
man, 1987: 51). The costs of dysfunctional turnover
per separation are lower, and human capital losses
are clearly less important. In the secondary system,
therefore, all these factors point to a wider range of
turnover values over which the effect of turnover
on performance is positive than that for the com-
mitment system. This context was applicable to
most of the sales assistants in our case, and we
therefore expected an inverted U-shaped relation-
ship here. A particular further point in our case, as
noted above, is variability of demand, which was
expected to drive the optimum point of the in-
verted U further outward.

Coexistence of Work Systems

Although the commitment and control (second-
ary) work systems have different implications for
the turnover-performance link, the two systems
may coexist
Indeed,
Lepak and Snell (1999: 32) questioned the appro-
priateness of taking a single HR architecture as
optimal for managing all employees. Clearly, differ-
ent work systems will apply to managers and rank-

in the same organization.

and-file employees, requiring a distinction between
“core” and “support” employees (Lepak et al.,
2007), or concentration simply on nonmanagerial
employees (Batt, 2002). But even within a seem-
ingly homogeneous rank-and-file group, such as
the sales assistants in our organization, different
work systems may be necessary. Sales assistants
may seem to be all alike, but they are not. Although
all of them perform some basic, easy-to-monitor
functions, such as assisting customers in their
choices, shelving, stock taking, and cleaning, their
levels of commitment and responsibility differ, and
with these differences come extra tasks that are less
easily monitored and require more managerial
insight.

In the organization studied here, at one end of the
commitment spectrum are part-timers, some of
whom are extremely part-time, filling in particular
shifts for example on busy Saturdays; 17 percent
worked fewer than five hours a week. Their career
aspirations lie elsewhere, which is why their head-
count turnover rate is much higher than that of the
sales force as a whole (21 percent per year). Natu-
rally, this group receives less responsibility, less
specialist training, and fewer promotion opportu-
nities. Their pay is flat and is determined by salary
surveys of similar occupations in the county (that
is, by the external labor market). Although not for-
mally on temporary contracts— only 5 percent of
this organization’s employees are on such con-
tracts—they are temporary workers in all but name.
Thus,
following Bamberger and Meshoulam’s
(2000) categorization, we identify this group as
managed under a secondary work system. Given
the part-time nature of employment in our organi-
zation, we propose that sales assistants working
fewer than 30 hours per week belong to this group.
These part-timers constitute 80 percent of all the
firm’s sales assistants.

At the other end of the spectrum, our organiza-
tion contains sales assistants working regular full-
time hours (30 or more per week). These workers
form the core of every store. They are the most
responsible and committed and are less likely to
separate than the part-timers. In addition to per-
forming the basic functions outlined above, they
open and close the stores in which they work,
reconcile cash with receipts (“cash up”), help in-
duct and train newcomers, and generally act as
communication nodes, for example sometimes con-
ducting team briefings instead of the manager.
They receive specialist training in administration,
wage control, and health and safety. The process
through which they are selected is tougher: the
yearly intake of full-timers is lower than that of
part-timers and, of part-timers with a given tenure,


298

Academy of Management Journal

April

some, but not all, become full-timers. It is this
group that forms the pool from which future store
managers are generally drawn, particularly for the
smaller stores (65 percent of store managers derive
from internal promotions, according to our inter-
views). This possibility of promotion provides an
implicit link of pay to performance. Therefore, this
group fits the description of being managed under a
commitment work system.

Our allocation of sales assistants into two differ-
ent work systems—the basis of our contingency
view of the turnover-performance link—is testable.
It may be objected that sales assistants, even the
most committed ones, are not sufficiently skilled to
be managed under a true commitment system (they
are far from Lepak and Snell’s [1999: 36] Intel en-
gineers). Yet differentiation makes sense if the full-
timers’ job is more strategic, thereby requiring
disproportionately greater investment (Becker &
Huselid, 2006: 919). Our description above pro-
vides good grounds on which to propose such dif-
ferentiation for turnover-performance links, and
below we present results of regression analyses
both with and without the differentiation. Thus,
readers can see for themselves whether the differ-
entiation that accords with our theoretical priors
also achieves a better fit with the data.

Hypotheses

We have suggested that some level of sales assis-
tant turnover is beneficial for performance in a
secondary work system, while accepting that there
can be too much turnover. We have assumed that
the part-timers working fewer than 30 hours per
week are managed under a secondary work system.
Therefore, with respect to these workers we pro-
pose our first hypothesis:

Hypothesis 1. Under a secondary work system,
there is an inverted U-shaped relationship be-
tween employee turnover and performance.

Given their job description, the full-timers (30⫹
hours per week) are managed under a commitment
work system. Accordingly,
this group we
propose:

for

Hypothesis 2. Under a commitment work sys-
tem, there will be less of an inverted U-shaped
relationship between employee turnover and
performance than under a secondary system,
and more of a straight, negative turnover-per-
formance relationship.

Although the two systems have different out-
comes, we must also allow for their interdepen-
in one workplace.
dence where they coexist

Increased turnover among one group might exac-
erbate the negative effects of turnover among the
other (see also Broschak and Davis-Blake’s [2006]
study of the way work systems for part-timers affect
full-timers’ behavior, and conversely). In fact, the
social capital theory of turnover and performance
(Shaw, Duffy et al., 2005: 595–596) provides good
grounds for expecting interdependence. Thus, the
costs of secondary turnover will depend on how
quickly new hires are trained, which requires input
from the full-timers who are supposed to commu-
nicate tacit knowledge to them. But the higher the
full-time turnover, the rougher the transfer of this
knowledge, increasing the costs of secondary turn-
over without affecting its benefits. A lower inverted
U-shaped curve with an optimum closer to zero
will be the result.

Equally, higher part-time turnover may exacer-
bate the negative effects of full-time turnover on
productivity. This effect in turn may be attributed
to an argument of human capital theory that turn-
over depletes “organizational skill banks” (Shaw,
Duffy et al., 2005: 594). Thus, when part-time turn-
over is high, less will be known about the abilities
of the part-timers in an organization’s pool of work-
ers, and there will be fewer to choose from for
promotion to the core full-timer group. Since it will
be more difficult to find replacements, the costs of
full-time turnover will rise. Although we do not
propose a separate hypothesis for the interaction
effect between part- and full-time turnover, we do
control for it by allowing for a cross-product term
of the two turnover rates, as is outlined in our
next section, on measures and regression analysis
specification.

METHODS

Organization

The organization from which we derive our data
offered an opportunity for testing both of our hy-
potheses. As discussed above, most of its employ-
ees are managed according to the principles of the
secondary work system, a situation that was appro-
priate for testing Hypothesis 1. At the same time,
the management of a sizeable minority of employ-
ees according to elements of a commitment work
system provided a set-up for testing Hypothesis 2.
We now describe the features of our organization
that were relevant
in a
greater detail.

to the hypotheses

Given that our units of observation were the
stores of a large company, it is necessary to under-
stand the centralized management system under
which these stores operate. Our sample is 325 of


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

FIGURE 1

Hires and Separations in an Average Store by Month and Headcount

299

Person s   

1. 4    

1. 2    

1 

0. 8    

0. 6    

0. 4    

0. 2    

0 

1.25 

1.05 

Hires 
Separations 

0.53 

0.46 

0.50 

0.28 

0.47 

0.38 

0.42 

0.30 

0.65  0.60  0.60 

0.59 

0.51  0.52 

0.76 

0.70 

0.70 

0.52 

0.50 

0.40 

0.36 
0.28 

Jan.

Feb. Mar. Apr. May 

June

July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov . Dec.

Months 

the company’s more than 500 stores chosen be-
cause they had continuous data available for our
period, 1995–99, and were wholly owned rather
than franchised. The stores are spread all over the
United Kingdom; they are quite small (containing
on average about seven full-time-equivalent work-
ers); and they sell a similar range of goods distrib-
uted from the company’s warehouses. In these cir-
cumstances, the company has naturally adopted
centralized management.

The wage policy is quite simple. Central manage-
ment sets out a standard hourly wage schedule for
sales assistants, determined every year,
for all
stores. During our period of study, this schedule set
wages that differed by region and age. Four region
groups (rural, town, city, and central London) and
two age groups (18 or younger, and older than 18)
are specified. There are no wage increments for
seniority and no immediate pecuniary rewards for
performance for sales assistants. Training varies by
group (see above) but is basic for the majority of
sales assistants.

The company’s management rule, “right people,
right time,” is a good summary of its personnel
policies with respect to both part- and full-timers.
Within the constraints of central policies, store
managers select workers, negotiate hours, and reg-
ulate turnover. By hiring workers to make up for
separations, store managers match the workforce to
the seasonal pattern in demand and also to yearly
fluctuations, which are quite marked (see below).
In addition, the managers negotiate contract hours,
maintaining a pool of part-timers to be employed at
the “right time,” and can if necessary pressure a
worker to leave by reducing hours—a useful alter-
native to terminating contracts, which is difficult
under U.K. employment law. Most separations are
In these circumstances,
“voluntary,” therefore.

high employee turnover among part-timers is to be
expected (Batt, Colvin, & Keefe, 2002; Shaw et al.,
1998), particularly if wages are set relatively low, as
is the case. This strategy is required by the turbu-
lence of the retail environment, which we delineate
in the next subsection. On the other hand, core
workers whom managers particularly want to keep
are given longer hours and more training. A com-
mitment approach is required for managing this
group of “right people” to ensure coherent commu-
nications and a supply of management talent.

The retail environment leads to both seasonal
and year-to-year fluctuations in sales, employment,
hirings, and separation that are worth illustrating.
Figure 1 illustrates the seasonal turbulence affect-
ing the average store (though we emphasise that we
used only annual data for our empirical work). We
see a relatively steady headcount separation rate of
around half a person per month. However, peaks in
the hiring rate occur at the beginning of summer,
and then in September-October, which is the sea-
son for children’s clothing sales. Store managers
have to try to even out labor productivity over the
year, so as to avoid having idle staff on the one
hand, and overlong customer queues on the other.
Store managers also have to meet year-to-year
fluctuations in demand. Figure 2 shows how diffi-
cult this problem can be, graphing large changes in
labor input and in sales for many stores during
1995–99. In fact, around one-fifth of the stores ex-
panded or contracted hours worked by more than
50 percent over our study period. Sales were almost
as changeable. Further, the link between changes in
labor inputs 1995–99 and changes in sales is weak,
correlated at only .26. Therefore, labor productivity
was difficult to predict, and store managers had to
work hard to provide the appropriate labor inputs
to service their customers. In such a turbulent en-


300

Academy of Management Journal

April

Changes in Store Employment and Sales, 1995–99a

FIGURE 2

1

.5

Proportionate Change
in Store Annual Sales,
1995–99

0

 –.5

–1

–1

–.5

0

.5

1

Proportionate Change in Store Annual Hours, 1995–99

a r ⫽ .26, p ⬍ .001, 325 stores.

vironment, it is as important to downsize as upsize,
so a certain amount of employee turnover, at least
among part-timers, has clear advantages. The ques-
tion is, What
is the optimum level of such
turnover?

Data

Our data set contains detailed information on
employee turnover and personnel characteristics. It
consists of three parts. The first part is based on
personnel records of all the employees who worked
at any time between 1995 and 1999. Altogether,
there are 72,669 records of 32,546 individuals. In-
dividual records include age, gender, date hired,
date left employment, and weekly contract hours,
our measure of hours worked. We thus could ob-
serve job matches as short as one day and accu-
rately adjust our measures of turnover to their full-
time equivalents. Since individual productivity
data were not available, we derived employee av-
erage data for each store in order to compute store
annual average productivity.

Then, to the employee information we matched
the second part of our data, which contains store
information, including the output variable, real an-
nual sales per store, store square footage (our cap-
ital variable), and other potentially relevant char-
acteristics (see below). The third part of the data
consists of areawide wage and unemployment data

for the county in which each store was situated.
These data were obtained from the UK Labour
Force Survey, which is based on samples of indi-
viduals 16 to 65 years of age in 63 U.K. counties. To
avoid dealing with store entry and exit events,
which might present special effects of downsizing
on performance (see McElroy, Morrow, & Rude,
2001), we excluded stores that opened or closed
down during 1995–99 and,
for the remaining
stores, controlled for those having more than a 20
percent hours reduction in any year. The resulting
data set
includes 1,625 observations from 325
stores for 1995–99.

Measures

Dependent variable. Our measure of store per-
formance is labor productivity. We measured this
variable as annual sales per store, adjusted for in-
flation, divided by total annual hours worked in
the store. An alternative measure of performance
would be store profitability, but the company could
not reveal this information. Nevertheless, labor
productivity is an important variable in its own
right, and it has been widely used in studies of
organizational performance (e.g., Glebbeek & Bax,
2004; Shaw, Gupta et al., 2005).

Turnover variables. Our measure of turnover is
the separation rate, as is common (see, for example,
Glebbeek and Bax [2004] and Shaw, Duffy et al.


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

301

Turnover Calculations: Full-Time Equivalents versus Headcount Measuresa

TABLE 1

Scenario

Full-timer leaves, and another hired
December 1, so 160 hours gained
and lost in the year:

Half-timer leaves and another hired

December 1, so 80 hours gained
and lost:

Full-timer leaves and another hired
January 1, so 2,000 hours gained
and lost:

Half-timer leaves and another hired
January 1, so 1,000 hours gained
and lost:

Changes in Workforce due to

Separations

Reduction
in Hours

Reduction in
Headcount

160 hours

One person

80 hours

One person

2,000 hours

One person

1,000 hours

One person

Separation Rate per Year

Full-Time
Equivalents

160

14,000

⫽ 0.01

80

14,000

⫽ 0.005

2,000
14,000

⫽ 0.145

1,000
14,000

⫽ 0.07

Headcount

1/8 ⫽ 0.125

1/8 ⫽ 0.125

1/8 ⫽ 0.125

1/8 ⫽ 0.125

a Several assumptions underline our example. (1) There are eight people in the store initially, six full-time (40 hrs/week), and two
half-time (20 hrs/week), which makes seven full-time equivalents (FTEs): 6 staff ⫻ 40 hrs/week ⫻ 50 weeks ⫹ 2 staff ⫻ 20 hrs/week ⫻ 50
weeks ⫽ 6 ⫻ 2000 hrs/year ⫹ 2 ⫻ 1,000 hrs/year ⫽ 14,000 hrs/year. (2) Separations are instantly replaced by equivalent hires, so the
headcount and FTE employment stays the same throughout the year. (3) The FTE-adjusted separation rate is calculated as the number of
hours that leavers would have worked had they not left, divided by the total hours worked during the year. (4) The headcount separation
rate is calculated as the number of leavers divided by the average number of workers employed in the store during the year (eight).

[2005b]; see Morrow and McElroy [2007] and
Shaw, Gupta et al. [2005] for studies using the quit
rate alone). We calculated separations from em-
ployee records for the sales assistants working
fewer than 30 hours per week (defined as part-time
separations) and 30 or more hours per week (de-
fined as full-time separations), as described in the
Theory section above. (We also conducted a sensi-
tivity test, using 20 hours a week as the cut-off; see
below.) Although the records do not reveal the
reason for worker separation, our measure of sepa-
rations included few terminations because it is
company policy not to terminate.

We calculated the full-time equivalent separation
rate as the number of hours that leavers would have
worked had they not left, relative to annual total
hours worked. (Here we used our daily data on
when workers left and were hired; but we must
emphasize that all our variables are in annual
terms, so seasonality is not an issue.) Hence, if
someone separated at the very end of a year, the
impact of his/her leaving on labor productivity in
that year would be zero, and the converse would
apply if he or she left at the beginning of the year.
Table 1 gives an example of our calculation. Thus,
our measure of separations allows both for their
real impact in terms of hours, and for their timing.
The squares of the part-time and full-time separa-

tion rates, as well as their cross-product, were in-
cluded in the regression equations testing our
hypotheses.

Table 1 shows how our full-time equivalent mea-
sure of separations differs from the usual head-
count measure of separations—that is, the number
of leavers during the year divided by the average
number employed (e.g., Glebbeek & Bax, 2004;
Shaw, Gupta et al., 2005). For example, if a full-
timer leaves at the end of the year on the December
1, only 160 hours are lost, which represents a turn-
over rate of about 1 percent for the average store
using 14,000 hours (seven full-time equivalent
workers) of labor. In headcount terms, however, the
turnover rate would be one-eighth, or 12.5 percent.
The main point is that the same headcount separa-
tion rate will be observed under quite different
scenarios of full-time-equivalent turnover. This er-
ror in measuring turnover by headcount separation
rate may result in a large standard error of its esti-
mate in a regression equation, which will lower
statistical significance. We show below that the
headcount measure of separations indeed proves to
be insignificant.

In calculating both full- and part-time separation
rates, we preferred to use total annual hours
worked in the store as the denominator. This pro-
cedure ensures that separation rates are bounded


302

Academy of Management Journal

April

between zero and one. An alternative would be to
express full-time separations as a percentage of
full-time hours worked, and equivalently for part-
time, but then separation rates are much more vari-
able. We discuss results using these alternative
measures below and show that they are consistent
with our preferred specification.

We also had information on hires, which we used
to check the robustness of our results. In particular,
we calculated the rate of full-time-equivalent hires
as the ratio of the hours worked by employees hired
in a given year to the total hours worked. Although
little research has addressed the effect of hires on
performance (see Bingley and Westergaard-Nielsen
[2004] for an exception), it is worth including hires
as a possible confound for the effect of separations.
Because hires are normally closely connected with
separations, separations might be picking up the
possible effect of hires—that is, the benefits from
invigorating the workforce and the costs of training
and integrating new workers. However, we found
that the inclusion of hires along with separations in
equations had little consequence for the regression
results for separations, as is shown by the robust-
ness checks we report below.

Controls. Labor productivity is fundamentally
determined by capital and labor inputs. We mea-
sured capital input as store size in square feet, and
labor input, as the sum of hours worked by every
sales assistant employed in a given store in a given
year. In addition, we included a number of vari-
ables relating to store environment and employee
characteristics that might also affect productivity.
The store environment variables were store loca-
tion (eight dummies, including “city center” and
“retail park”), type of product (three dummies in-
dicating more or less expensive goods), share of
children’s goods, number of floors, and area wealth
and unemployment. By including these variables,
we aimed to control for the fact that it is easier to
sell in prime locations, and sales volumes may vary
with type of product, store configuration, and cus-
tomer target group.

As regards employee characteristics, we include
sales assistants’ weekly hours (shares of employees
working 0 – 4, 5–14, 15–29, and 30⫹ hours per
week), which determine labor flexibility, important
in the retail environment. We also included the
relative wage (sales assistants’ pay relative to
county average), and sales assistants’ average age
and tenure, which helped control for workforce
quality. We used full-time equivalents for average
age and tenure as well as employee turnover. (This
adjustment is important since it is younger workers
with shorter tenures who are more likely to sepa-
rate.) Finally, we included 20 regional manager

dummy variables to control for possible effects of
regional management on store productivity.

Estimation Issues

We tested our hypotheses by regressing our mea-
sure of store performance (labor productivity) on
part- and full-time separation rates, their squares
and cross-product, and the control variables out-
lined above. At the same time, the consistency of
our estimation results, and thus our judgment of
Hypotheses 1 and 2, could be compromised by the
presence of store-specific unmeasured factors, such
as management ability and store location. These
factors are hard to measure and, in any case, the
data were not available to us. Such store-specific
“unobservables” would cause omitted variable bias
if correlated with the regression variables (see
Halaby [2004] on these “problematic” error struc-
tures). For example, simple economic reasoning
implies (e.g., Lucas, 1978) that better managers are
likely to run bigger stores and employ more labor.
Thus, not controlling for management ability will
give an overestimate of the effect of labor input on
sales. Furthermore, if labor input is correlated with
turnover, not controlling for store management
would bias the estimates for turnover as well. In-
deed, as we show in the next subsection, even
simple correlations between pairs of our regression
variables differ depending on whether we calculate
them within-store (thus excluding the unobserv-
ables) or between-store; this variation underlines
the need to control for the unobservables.

Fortunately, the problem of unobservables, com-
mon to all studies of employee turnover using
cross-sectional data, can largely be overcome by
using within-store variation in productivity and
turnover available from our panel data, as we now
explain. Our regression equation could be written
as follows:
Labor productivityit ⫽ regression variablesit

⫻ regression coefficients ⫹

store-specific errori ⫹ ordinary errorit .
冏
冏

冏

the total error term

Here, i is the index for the store and t for the year.
In our data, i ranges from 1 to 325, and t from 1995
to 1999. Note that the store-specific error (caused
by the unobservables) has only index i, because we
assumed that the unobservables vary by store but
not by year. Both the total and the ordinary error
terms are meant to follow the standard assumption


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

303

of no correlation with the regression variables,
which is required for regression identification.

Estimating the productivity equation correctly
required separate identification of the unobserv-
ables and the ordinary error term. The ordinary
least squares (OLS) estimator treats the two sepa-
rate error terms as one, and thus it might produce
inconsistent estimates if the store-specific unob-
servable were correlated with any of the regressors
(see above). A practical solution to this potential
problem was to apply a fixed-effects estimator,
which works by taking store averages from all vari-
ables in the regression equation and applying OLS
to the transformed equation. As a result of this
transformation, the regression equation loses the
store-specific error term (as well as other time-in-
variant variables) while giving the same estimates
to the remaining (time-varying) variables as they
would have in the true regression model. (For an
example, see Capelli and Neumark’s [2001: 256]
comparison of OLS and fixed-effects estimates; also
relevant is Guest, Michie, Conway, and Sheehan’s
[2003] finding that the link between high-perfor-
mance HRM practices and firm productivity disap-
pears when longitudinal rather than cross-sectional
regression techniques are applied.) Another way of
looking at the fixed-effects procedure is that it pro-
duces the “within-store” effects, relying only on
within-store variation in the regression variables
over time. Thus, fixed-effects results should be in-
terpreted as pertaining to the “average” store.

The fixed-effects estimates were suitable for
testing our hypotheses regardless of whether
there were unobservables or not. However, fixed
effects might not always be the most efficient
estimator. Lacking unobservables, OLS would be
more efficient, since it would not require the
estimation of 325 store averages. Moreover, even
given unobservables, so long as they were not
correlated with the regressors, the random-effects
estimator was preferred. Random-effects estima-
tion, which treats unobservables and the ordinary
error term separately but requires that neither be
correlated with the regressors, would allow use
of the between-store regression, through the 325
store averages, to estimate the variance of store-
specific error (Wooldridge, 2002: 261). In fact, the
random-effects estimates are a type of average of
the fixed-effects and between-store estimates.
Thus, random-effects had an advantage over OLS
when unobservables were not correlated with re-
gressors. Furthermore, random effects had advan-
tages over fixed effects since random effects did
not require the estimation of 325 store averages,
and it also returned estimates of the time-invari-
ant variables, such as store space.

The question therefore arose: How do we
choose between OLS, random-effects, and fixed-
effects estimation? A sequence of statistical tests
clarified this choice. The first test compared the
goodness of fit of OLS and random-effects regres-
sions. If OLS was preferred, it was the best esti-
mator of the three. However, if (as was the case),
OLS was rejected in favor of random effects, the
next test was the standard Hausman (1978) test
between random effects and fixed effects. The
acceptance of the former would then indicate that
the unobservables, although present, were not
correlated with the regressors. However, if—as
was the case—fixed-effects estimation was pre-
ferred, the conclusion is that the unobservables
are correlated with the regressors, and therefore
fixed effects is the only reliable estimator of the
turnover-performance relationship.

RESULTS

Basic Statistics

Table 2 reports key descriptive statistics for the
main variables. We present simple correlations
both between and within stores. Between-store cor-
relations are the correlations between store aver-
ages. Within-store correlations,
like the fixed-
effects estimator, are derived from the “demeaned”
variables so that they show correlations within an
average store. Although our study required a mul-
tivariate analysis to produce conclusive results, the
simple between- and within-store correlations are
instructive as a first step.

Figure 3 illustrates why the within-store and be-
tween-store correlations can differ, using an exam-
ple of productivity and full-time separations for
two stores. The scatter of points for stores 1 and 2
are illustrated as both sloping upward. A within-
store regression is designed to go through both scat-
ters and is consequently positive, corresponding to
a positive within-store correlation, as is actually
the case, .08. (The shift in the regression line inter-
cept between stores 1 and 2 is the fixed effect.)
However, a between-store regression would simply
go through the means for each store (the heavy
circles), and is negative as drawn— corresponding
to a negative correlation, again as is actually the
case, ⫺.24. It seems that some unobservable such as
poor management is causing store 2 to have both
persistently low productivity and high full-time
separations. An OLS regression is a mixture of
within and between effects, and ends up quite flat
(heavy dashed line), corresponding to the approxi-
mately zero overall correlation between productiv-
ity and full-time separations. This flat line is mis-


304

Academy of Management Journal

April

Means, Standard Deviations, and Pairwise Correlationsa

TABLE 2

Mean

s.d.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Between store (n ⫽ 325)
1. Sales per hour worked
2. Total hours worked
3. Separation rate, full-timersb
4. Separation rate, part-timersb
5. Average age in years
6. Average tenure in years
7. Store wage relative to county

average wage for sales
assistants

8. County unemployment rate (%)
9. Store employees working less

than five hours weekly (%)

52.8

14,642

0.05
0.08
31.0
5.30
0.82

6.8
17.0

14.2

11,160

⫺.30
0.08 ⫺.24
0.07 ⫺.02
7.1
.22
.15
2.70
0.08
.18

2.5
16.0

10. Space in square feet

1,600.0

878.0

Within store (n ⫽ 1,625)
2. Total hours worked
3. Separation rate, full-timersb
4. Separation rate, part-timersb
5. Average age in years
6. Average tenure in years
7. Store wage relative to county

average wage for sales
assistants

8. County unemployment rate (%)
9. Store employees working more

than five hours weekly (%)

.37
.07
⫺.55
⫺.30
.01

.17
.05

.80

⫺.08
⫺.28
⫺.24
⫺.14
.01

.09
⫺.50
⫺.44
⫺.17

⫺.28
⫺.34
⫺.08

.63
.15

.21

.04
⫺.14

⫺.13
.12

⫺.09
.00

.05
⫺.01

.21

.10

⫺.38

⫺.20

.31
.04

.01

⫺.17

.07

.16

.03
.01
⫺.01
⫺.01

.01
.05
.01

.44
.01

.02

⫺.02
.06

⫺.12

⫺.73
.08
.30
.30
.34
.01

⫺.39
.27

.04
⫺.06

⫺.08
⫺.02

⫺.15
.11

⫺.19
.16

⫺.39
.20

⫺.04
.06

⫺.33

a Means and standard deviations (s.d.) are for the overall sample (all store-years, n ⫽ 1,625).
b The separation rate was calculated as the full-time-equivalent value. Full-timers, defined as working 30⫹ hours per week, comprised
20 percent of the workforce. The average headcount separation rate for full-timers was 0.03 (s.d. ⫽ 0.05), and it was 0.21 for part-timers
(s.d. ⫽ 0.12). The total headcount separation rate is the weighted sum of the two: 0.03 ⫻ 0.2 ⫹ 0.21 ⫻ 0.8 ⫽ 0.174. For comparison, the
average headcount hiring rate for full-timers is 0.03 (s.d. ⫽ 0.05), and 0.23 for part-timers (s.d. ⫽ 0.14).

leading. Thus, we argue that it was within-store
statistics, which are not affected by unobserved
factors such as management ability, that we should
best use for testing our hypotheses.

Table 2 shows differences for several variables in
the within- and between-store correlations. A fur-
ther example is the correlation between productiv-
ity and part-time separations, which is close to zero
in the between-store matrix, yet positive (.30) in the
within-store array. We do not intend to stress these
particular values, since they are only simple corre-
lations. But they show the conflicting signals with
which central management planners in a large or-
ganization have to deal. Again, the lesson is that
care needs to be taken when comparing stores dif-
fering in many unmeasured ways, and hence it is
safest to build on what is happening within stores,
which requires controlling for the unobservables.
Noteworthy features that emerge from the aver-
ages in Table 2 are, first, that the full-time-equiva-
lent turnover rates are quite low: the average store
loses only 13 percent of hours yearly as a result of

separations (5% full-timers ⫹ 8% part-timers ⫽
13%). The headcount separation rate is higher, at
24 percent (3% full-timers ⫹ 21% part-timers). Sec-
ond, the company’s pay schedule gives a relatively
low wage on average, only 82 percent of the pre-
vailing wage for sales assistants in the county. Also,
as a result of the company’s simple pay structure,
the wage is quite uniform across the country, and
not very well matched to local rates, causing con-
siderable variability in relative wages (the relative
wage in some stores goes down to 60 percent). As
noted above, relatively low pay rates push the sep-
aration rate upward, which is to some extent there-
fore a company choice. Finally, the proportion of
very part-time workers, those working fewer than
five hours a week, is high, 17 percent. Such ex-
treme part-time work shows the unskilled nature of
the job, and the turbulence of the retail environ-
ment, since alert managers will rely on such part-
timers to meet the “right people, right time” com-
pany management rule. On the other hand, this
flexible workforce is combined with a sizeable core


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

FIGURE 3

305

Illustration of Between-Store and Within-Store Correlations for Labor Productivity and Separation Rate

Store 1 scatter of points 
over five years 

Labor 
Productivity 

Within-store 
regressions 

Fixed 
Effect 

Store 2 scatter of points 
over five years 

Overall regression 
 (OLS) 

Between-store 
regression 

Full-Time Separation Rate

of full-timers, 20 percent. This full-time core is
quite stable, with an only 5 percent a year separa-
tion rate. We therefore expected turnover among
the full-timers to have a qualitatively different ef-
fect on store performance.

Regression Analyses

Table 3 shows the results of our regression anal-
ysis for labor productivity. The first column gives
the simple OLS specification and provides a
starting point. The immediate point to note is the
overall lack of significance of the coefficients on
our measures of turnover. Only the separation rate
for part-timers is significant at the 10 percent
level (0.26), and this counterintuitive estimate sim-
ply suggests that higher turnover brings higher per-
formance. If we were to stop here, Hypothesis 1,
concerning the inverted U-shaped effect of turn-
over for secondary workers (as measured by part-
timers) would not be confirmed. Nor would Hy-
pothesis 2, concerning core workers (as measured
by full-timers) receive any backing.

However, the random-effects specification in the
second column tells quite a different story. It shows
a definite inverted U-shaped turnover-performance
relationship for the part-timers. As can be seen, the
part-timer separation rate is now significantly pos-
itive (0.23), and the squared term significantly neg-
ative (⫺0.59). The results also show a negative
effect for the full-timers operating through the

cross-product term, ⫺0.81. Therefore, both our hy-
potheses begin to receive support as we account for
the store-specific unobservables by applying the
random-effects method. Indeed, as the first of the
diagnostic tests in Table 3 shows, we have to allow
for store-specific unobservables. With the share of
variance of unobservables accounting for 0.79 of
total error variance in the random-effects specifica-
tion (last row of Table 3), controlling for unobserv-
ables improves regression fit dramatically.

We still have to further investigate the role of
these important store-specific unobservables. For
this we turn to the fixed-effects results in the third
column of Table 3. These estimates for the turnover
rates are similar to the random-effects estimates.
The positive (and significant) coefficients on part-
time separations (0.19) and negative part-time sep-
arations squared (⫺0.65) give rise to a clear in-
verted U-shape for part-timers. At the same time,
insignificant full-time separations and the same
squared plus a significant negative cross-product
term (⫺0.71) give the conventional negative
turnover-performance link for full-timers. More-
over, as noted in the estimation issues subsection,
the fixed-effects (within-store) technique is not bi-
ased by any correlation between unobservables and
the regressors. As the second of our diagnostic tests
(Table 3, test 2, reported in the footnote) showed,
unobservables were certainly correlated with some
of the regressors. Hence, we were compelled to
reject random effects in favor of fixed effects, de-


306

Academy of Management Journal

April

Results of Regression Analyses for Labor Productivity

TABLE 3

Estimatora

Variablesb

Ordinary Least

Squares

Random Effects

Fixed Effects

Time-varying

Total hours workedb
Separation rate, full-timers
Separation rate, full-timers, squared
Separation rate, part-timers
Separation rate, part-timers, squared
Separation rate, full-timers, ⫻ separation rate, part-timers
Average age
Average tenure
Average tenure squared
Share of male employees
Share of employees working less than 5 hours weekly
Share of employees working less than 15 hours weekly
Share of employees working less than 30 hours weekly

(compared to 30⫹)

Hours reduction 20% in year over
Relative wage
County average pay
County unemployment rate
Year dummies (compared to 1999)

Time-invariant

Space
Type of product (3 dummies)
Location (8 dummies)
Share of children’s goods
Number of floors (compared to one)
Regional manager (20 dummies)

R2 (within)
R2 (between)
R2 (overall)
Fraction of error variance due to store-specific unobservables

⫺0.34**

0.06
0.37
0.26†
⫺0.43
⫺1.11
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.30**
0.30**
0.13*

0.03†
0.09†
⫺0.15*
⫺0.78**
Up to ⫺0.16**

0.23**
Insignificant
⫺0.18** to 0.22**

⫺0.39**
Up to ⫺0.17**
⫺0.09* to 0.25**

0.43

Not applicable

⫺0.70**

0.06
0.13
0.23**
⫺0.59**
⫺0.81†
0.00
0.02**
⫺0.001**

0.04
0.05
0.08
⫺0.01

0.03**

⫺0.01
⫺0.14
⫺0.18

Up to ⫺0.17**

⫺0.82**

0.05
0.08
0.19**
⫺0.65**
⫺0.71†
0.00
0.02**
⫺0.001**

0.05
0.04
0.07
0.03

0.02*
⫺0.02
⫺0.19*
0.01

Up to ⫺0.17**

0.45**

Up to ⫺0.12**
⫺0.32** to 0.52**

⫺0.47**

Up to ⫺0.24**
⫺0.13† to 0.24**

0.77
0.26
0.39
0.79

0.77
0.09
0.13
0.98

a (1) Comparing random effects with OLS, we obtained a likelihood-ratio test statistic equal to 1,444.1 distributed as chi-square with 1
degree of freedom, and the 1% significance level is 6.63, much smaller than 1,444.1, implying that random effects has significantly more
explanatory power than OLS. In fact, unobservables have a large variance equal to 0.79 of the total variance. (2) Comparing random effects
with fixed effects, we obtained a Hausman (1978) specification test result of 178.7 distributed as chi-square with 21 degrees of freedom,
and the 1% significance level is 38.9, much smaller than 178.68, implying that the unobservables are correlated with the regressors. Thus,
random effects was inconsistent and we based our conclusions on fixed effects. Stata was used to generate estimates.

b Total hours worked, relative wage, county average pay, and space were logged. Separation rates were calculated as full-time-equivalent

values.

† p ⬍ .10
* p ⬍ .05
** P ⬍ .01

spite the convenience of the random-effects esti-
mates of the time-invariant variables. Note that un-
observables account for 0.98 of total error variance
in the fixed-effects specification (last row of Table
3), an increase over the random-effects model. This
increase was expected, since the variance ex-
plained by the time-invariant variables (e.g., store
space) no longer contributed to our equation’s ex-
planatory power but instead was subsumed in the
fixed effects.

The Unobservables

Turning back to the OLS estimates, why are they
so different from both the random- and fixed-effects
ones? The reason is that the effects of store-specific
unobservables on performance are caught up by the
store-specific error term and swept out by the fixed-
effects technique, whereas the OLS method does no
such sweeping out. Let us briefly compare the OLS
and fixed-effects estimates to explain better how


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

TABLE 4

307

Results of Regression Analyses for Full-Time-Equivalent and Headcount Measures of Turnover

Explaining Labor Productivity

Full-Time Equivalent Measures

Headcount Measures

Variables

and Part-Timers

Separations

Separations,
Full-Timers

Total

Total

Separations
and Hires

Separations,
Full-Timers

Total

and Part-Timers

Separations

Total

Separations
and Hires

Separations, full-timers
Separations, part-timers
Separations, full-timers, squared
Separations, part-timers, squared
Separations, full-timers, ⫻
separations, part-timers

Separations, total
Separations, total, squared
Hires, total
Hires total, squared
Separations, total, ⫻ hires, total

Optimum levels

Separations, full-timers
Separations, part-timers
Total separations
Total hires

0.05
0.19**
0.08

⫺0.65**
⫺0.71†

0.00
0.15

0.14**
⫺0.36**

0.11†

⫺0.35**

0.10
⫺0.47*
0.22

⫺0.12
⫺0.01
0.98†
0.01
⫺0.15

Not defined
Not defined

⫺0.02
0.01

⫺0.03
⫺0.11
⫺0.02
⫺0.16
0.33*

0.20

0.21
0.16

Not defined

Not defined
Not defined

a All these equations use the same fixed-effects specification as in the last column of Table 3, only varying the measure of separations

and hires. Optimum values of separations and hires are the values that maximixe labor productivity.

† p ⬍ .10
* p ⬍ .05
** p ⬍ .01

unobservables can confound inferences from re-
gression results.

In Table 3, we see that labor input has a coeffi-
cient of ⫺0.34 in the OLS equation, but a much
larger negative coefficient in the fixed-effects equa-
tion, ⫺0.82. The latter shows the diminishing re-
turns that an average store manager faces when
employing more labor. The OLS coefficient, on the
other hand, picks up the between-store estimate for
labor input, which shows returns diminishing less
because some unobservable factor, such as abler
management, is boosting sales in bigger stores.

Several variables are significant in the OLS equa-
tion but not in the fixed-effects one. Thus, the
hours composition variables are significant in the
OLS equation (0.30 for the share of employees
working fewer than 15 hours per week, 0.13 for
those working 15–29 hours), but are small and in-
significant in the fixed-effects equation. The OLS
coefficient is picking up the fact that only stores
with a high unobservable (presumably those having
a good manager) can maintain an effective pool of
part-timers and fine-tune their working hours to
achieve the best returns to labor. Another example
is the county unemployment rate: stores located in
(OLS estimate,
areas with high unemployment

⫺0.78) find it harder to sell. Here, the fixed-effects
estimate is again insignificant, this time probably
because we did not have enough within-store vari-
ation in unemployment over time to establish its
relationship with labor productivity.

To return to our focus on the turnover-per-
formance link, the insignificance of the OLS co-
efficients on separations indicates that the store-
specific unobservables are working against
the
inverted U-shaped relationship. It might be that
stores with good unobserved management or loca-
tion have both higher turnover and higher labor
productivity than stores with bad.

Sensitivity Tests

We now investigate the sensitivity of our results
to alternative definitions of turnover, and also the
causality of the turnover-performance relationship.
Table 4 reports the results for various measures of
turnover. The first column repeats the fixed-effects
results from Table 3 for convenience and gives our
estimated optimum separation rates for full-timers
(0), and part-timers (0.15). The next two columns
use full-time-equivalent
total separations (part-
time and full-time together), and then both total


308

Academy of Management Journal

April

separations and hires. In the final three columns,
we give parallel results using headcount measures
of turnover.

The first column gives results for the turnover-
productivity relationship contingent on type of
work system, which we can compare with the re-
sults in the second column obtained under a no-
contingency assumption. The contingency model
fares better. If we restrict the separation rate and
its square to be equal for the part- and full-timers,
the test result (not shown) allows rejection of the
restriction at
the 5 percent significance level,
thus empirically justifying our contingency view of
the turnover-performance link. Moreover, the in-
verted U-shaped relation shown in the second
(no-contingency) column has smaller coefficients
(0.14 for total separations and ⫺0.36 for the
squared term): it is flattened. This result is also
reasonable, since the second column runs together
full-timers, for whom there is no inverted U, with
part-timers for whom there is, thus blurring the
results. A similar blurring (not shown) emerges
when we identify the core group as workers work-
ing more than 20 hours, rather than 30 hours. Thus,
our preferred 30-hour definition for the core group
of full-timers, in conjunction with treating those
working fewer hours as part-time/secondary, pro-
vides good differentiation, and the data support our
contingency model.

Turning to the third column, which includes
hires, we see a negative and significant effect of the
full-time-equivalent hiring rate squared in the third
column (⫺0.47). This result is consistent with the
earlier finding on the negative effect of hires re-
ported in Bingley and Westergaard-Nielsen (2004:
561), and it shows how recruitment and training
costs rise as hiring rates increase. We experimented
(results not shown) with making the hires-perfor-
mance relationship also contingent on the core/
secondary distinction, and the coefficients on sep-
arations did not change much.

The next columns show how the situation with
the inverted U-shaped association and the contin-
gency model changes dramatically if we use head-
count turnover. The estimates lose significance,
and we are no longer able to establish either the
inverted U or the contingency model, since the
only significant results suggest a spurious positive,
and increasing, effect of full-timer separations on
productivity (0.98). These difficulties persist for all
three specifications, a consequence of measure-
ment error in the headcount rates. Our results thus
suggest that the turnover-performance relationship
requires careful measurement of turnover.

Another measure of separations is also possible,
as we noted above—that is, hours lost because of

separations of part-timers relative to total part-time
hours (rather than total full-time plus part-time
hours), with the corresponding definition for full-
timers. We tested for changes using this measure
and found results to be largely unaffected. Specifi-
cally, we estimated the optimum separation rate for
part-timers to be 0.25 as a proportion of part-time
hours worked, which when measured in terms of
total hours worked is 0.20 (⫽ 0.25 ⫻ 0.80, where
0.8 is the proportion of part-timers). This optimum
is statistically indistinguishable from the optimum
of 0.15 in our preferred model shown in Table 4.
Finally, there is the issue of causality. We used a
procedure resembling a Granger causality test (the
proper test could not be applied because of the short
panel time series of only five years). In this test, we
compared the explanatory power of lagged separa-
tions on productivity (i.e., separations cause produc-
tivity being our preferred concept), with a reverse
set-up, in which lagged productivity is on the right-
hand side of the equation, explaining separations.
Glebbeek and Bax (2004) used a similar approach. We
found that our preferred set-up, with separations
causing productivity, performed much better than the
reverse. Thus, lags of part- and full-time separations,
their squares, and the cross-product term affect pro-
ductivity in a significant way: their estimates are
0.26, 0.21, ⫺0.94, ⫺0.25, and 1.26, respectively. On
the other hand, lagged productivity, although signif-
icant statistically, had a very minor economic impact
on separations. Our estimates imply that a large, 10
percent change in the last year’s productivity is cor-
related with only 0.3 and 0.4 percent reductions in
the current year’s part- and full-time separations, re-
spectively. Thus, like Glebbeek and Bax (2004), we
concluded that turnover indeed influences labor pro-
ductivity, and not the other way around.

DISCUSSION

The Straight Negative and the Inverted U-Shape

We have obtained two sets of regression results
for the turnover-performance link: one—negative—
for full-timers, who we maintain are managed un-
der a commitment work system, and the other—an
inverted U-shape—for part-timers, managed under
a secondary system. The two work systems appear
to coexist for rank-and-file workers in our organi-
zation. Let us discuss the consequences of em-
ployee turnover for labor productivity under each
system in turn. We will then look at the way the
two systems interact. Finally, we provide some cal-
culations of the magnitude of the effects.

For workers managed under a secondary work
system, we find a clear inverted U-shaped relation-


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

309

Linked Effects of Core and Secondary Worker Turnover on Performancea

FIGURE 4

(Panel A)  Full-Time Workers: Straight Negative  

Percent
Addition to 
Productivity

0

–1

–2

–3

–4

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

Separation Rate, Full-Timers

(Panel B) Part-Time Workers: The Inverted U-Shape

Percent
Addition to 
Productivity

2

1

0

–1

–2

–3

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

Separation Rate, Part-Timers

a Separation rates were calculated as full-time-equivalent values.

Part-time 
separations
low (10%)
Part-time
separations
high (17%)

Full-time 
separations
low (0%)
Full-time 
separations 
high (15%)

ship between turnover and performance. Figure 4,
panel B, which is based on the part-timer’s coeffi-
cients from Table 3’s fixed-effects column, illus-
trates this result. The inverted-U finding supports
Abelson and Baysinger’s (1984) theory that turn-
over has benefits and costs to firms and that ini-
tially the benefits of turnover outweigh the costs.
This theory has also received some support in
Arthur
(1994: 683), Guthrie (2001: 186), and
Glebbeek and Bax (2004: 285), but we now provide
a more solid empirical foundation. The initial pos-
itive impact of part-time separations on productiv-
ity implies that less productive workers are more

likely to separate (consistently with findings re-
ported in McEvoy and Cascio [1987] and Williams
and Livingstone [1994]). Another benefit of turn-
over is particularly important for our organization:
labor flexibility in a turbulent retail environment
(Figure 2). However, there comes a point at which
the benefits of improved job-worker match and
workforce flexibility become offset by dysfunc-
tional turnover and the loss of firm-specific human
capital. So, our Hypothesis 1 receives empirical
support.

As for employees managed under a commitment
work system, the link is purely negative. Figure 4’s


310

Academy of Management Journal

April

turnover

panel A illustrates. Although according to our the-
ory, there must be an optimum nonzero level of
turnover for each work system, this level is likely to
be small here, so taking zero as optimum is an
acceptable simplification. A number of the earlier
across-organization studies cited in the introduc-
tion have found this type of link, although they
have not allowed for differentiation in work sys-
tems within an organization. The economywide
studies of
(Bingley & Westergaard-
Nielsen, 2004; Harris et al., 2006) face even more
difficulty in providing for contingency. As Table 3
shows, although the estimates for the full-time sep-
aration term and its quadratic term are insignifi-
cant,
is manifested
through a cross-product term. Thus, as we theo-
rized earlier, the costs of core worker turnover ap-
pear to be higher than the costs of secondary
worker turnover, with few benefits. Hence, the neg-
ative turnover-performance link fits, bearing out
our Hypothesis 2.

the negative effect

(⫺0.71)

Interactions

The way in which full-time separations affect labor
productivity merits further discussion. It appears that
the two work systems interact, one affecting the out-
comes of the other. The significant cross-product
term implies that the effect of full-time separations is
exacerbated by secondary turnover, and conversely.
We have given the theoretical grounds for expecting
this type of interaction above; for example, losing
full-timers at a high rate means that the new part-time
hires are trained less effectively, raising the costs of
part-time separations.

Figure 4 shows these effects. For example, in
panel A, holding part-time separations at 10 per-
cent, which is about average, the effect of the aver-
age full-time separation rate of 5 percent is to re-
duce productivity by about 0.35 percent (⫽ ⫺0.71
⫻ 0.1 ⫻ 0.05) on the dashed line. Increasing full-
time separations to 15 percent, which is about a one
standard deviation increase, would move us down
the dashed line to give a loss of around 1 percent.
However, losses from full-time separations would
be worse, about 1.5 percent, if part-time separations
themselves increased by one standard deviation to
17 percent, as shown by the solid line.

Analogously, panel B of Figure 4 illustrates how
the inverted U-shaped relationship depends on the
level of full-time turnover, giving two examples. If
full-time separations are zero (their optimum level),
we trace out the dashed top curve, with an optimum
secondary worker turnover of about 15 percent (more
than twice this figure in headcount, given that an
average worker works less than half time). As can be

seen, such a level of turnover increases productivity
by about 1.4 percent. However, if full-time separa-
tions are at a high level (15 percent is illustrated,
giving the solid line) the beneficial effects of second-
ary turnover are almost lost, though the curve still has
quite a long flat region, to about 10 percent, where
secondary worker turnover does not seriously dam-
age performance. Still, panel B illustrates that for
stores where core worker turnover is high, managers
must be careful not to allow secondary worker turn-
over to rise much as well.

Magnitude of Effects

Let us make some back-of-the-envelope calcula-
tions about the effects of turnover on productivity.
For full-time turnover, we find no benefits, only
losses to productivity—so that the optimum level
of full-time turnover is zero. We calculate that if all
the stores operated at the optimum level of full-
time turnover instead of at their observed levels,
the organization would gain 0.3 percent of total
sales over 1995–99, or £4.2 million.

As for part-time turnover, Figure 4’s panel B
shows that our organization can gain up to 1.4
percent in productivity from choosing the optimum
levels of full- and part-time turnover. This 1.4 per-
cent gain translates into £0.73 per each hour
worked per year, on average. For some stores, much
greater gains are possible from reducing part-time
turnover. For example, taking the store with the
highest secondary turnover rate (0.80), we calculate
that reducing it to optimal would result in a 27.8
percent gain in productivity. Finally, summing up
individual productivity gains from moving to opti-
mal part-time turnover for all stores and years, we
find that the overall gain for the organization would
be about 0.6 percent of total sales over the period
1995–99, or £7.5 million.

It is true that our estimated optimum rate of
part-time turnover of 15 percent is higher than its
observed average of 8 percent (Table 2), but this
difference can be explained by hiring and training
costs for the new hires who replace the separated
workers. Figure 5 illustrates this position. If profit
maximization is assumed, the marginal revenue
product and marginal costs of part-time separations
are equal at their observed average of 0.08. Using
our regression estimates, the fitted labor productiv-
ity quadratic curve has a slope of 0.086 (⫽ 0.19 ⫺
2 ⫻ 0.65 ⫻ 0.08) at a part-time separation (⫽ hire)
rate of 0.08. Then, assuming that the costs of hiring
and training are linear, the slopes of the hiring-
training costs and labor productivity curves will be
the same at this point. Hence, the slope of the
hiring-training costs curve will equal 0.086. There-


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

311

Calculation of Hiring and Training Costs for an Average Storea

FIGURE 5

Tangent slope 
 = 0.086 

Labor 
Productivity 

0.0069 

Total cost slope 
 = 0.086 

Fitted labor 
productivity quadratic

 

Total hiring/training 
costs per worker 

0.08 

0.15 

Part-Time Separation Rate 

a Labor productivity and total hiring and training costs were logged. We observed a part-time separation rate of 0.08. Our fitted labor
productivity quadratic curve has a slope at this point of 0.086. If the part-time separation rate (⫽ hiring rate) of 0.08 maximizes profits, then
the slopes of the (log) total hiring/training costs and labor productivity curves will be the same at this point. Hence the slope of the total
hiring/training costs curve will equal 0.086. Therefore, when the part-time separation rate is 0.08, total hiring/training costs per worker will
equal 0.0069 (⫽ 0.08 ⫻ 0.086), or 0.69% of annual output per worker.

fore, when the part-time separation rate is 0.08,
total hiring-training costs per worker will equal
0.08 times 0.086, or 0.69 percent of output per
worker.

The conclusion of this reasoning gives the plausi-
ble result that for an average store with sales of
£773,098 (⫽ 52.8 £/hour ⫻ 14,642 hours) per year
and hiring seven people, hiring-training costs per
newly hired sales assistant are £762 (⫽ £773098 ⫻
0.0069/7). Contemporary practitioner estimates (In-
stitute of Personnel and Development, 1997: Table 6)
of hiring/training costs for unskilled labor are similar,
£840. Thus, our estimate is reasonably close to an
alternative, independently derived estimate, which
gives confidence in the statistical results.

Conclusions

Our findings suggest that the turnover-perfor-
mance relationship is contingent on the nature of
an organization’s work system, and indeed that
commitment and secondary work systems can co-
exist within the rank-and-file workforce of an or-
ganization. Thus, our study provides empirical ev-
idence for a number of claims made by Lepak and
Snell: that not all employee groups are equally
unique and valuable to a company and that current
strategic HRM research may be “overly simplistic”
(1999: 45). Although researchers have generally ac-
cepted a distinction between work systems appro-

priate for management and for rank-and-file work-
ers, our results make it clear that in organizations
with many nonstandard (part-time or contract)
workers, there may well be considerable differ-
ences in work systems within the rank-and-file
workforce itself.

Our organization-level study in fact calls into
question the notion that an organization’s labor
management systems can be characterized in any
simple way as high-performance, because they
show that different sections of the workforce may
be best managed in different ways, with low-per-
formance strategies used simultaneously. Hence,
although some across-organization studies (Arthur,
1994; Guthrie, 2001) have supported the contin-
gency model, and others have not (Shaw, Gupta
et al., 2005), there are problems in attributing just
one HR system to an organization. (They have also
used simple cross-sections.) More differentiation is
needed, such as is indeed forthcoming in new lines
of strategic HRM research, for example in Lepak et
al.’s (2007) contingency approach to examining the
impact of high-investment HRM systems on core
versus support workers.

We identified core and secondary groups with-
in our organization’s sales assistant workforce
to which different
turnover-performance links
apply. For the core group of full-timers, and only
for this group, we found the negative turnover-
performance link that is conventionally accepted


312

Academy of Management Journal

April

(Huselid, 1995: 651). For the remainder, we found a
robust inverted U-shaped relationship, with an op-
timum turnover rate of 15 percent a year in full-
time-equivalent terms (the rate is more than twice
this size in headcount terms). We believe we are the
first study to uncover the inverted U-shaped asso-
ciation in retail, and certainly replication using our
accurate measurement methods—including panel
data—is needed in different sectors and different
time periods. Nevertheless, the inverted U-shape
finding is reasonable, given the unskilled nature of
most sales assistant jobs, and the concomitant low
hiring-training costs (as suggested by our £762 per
hire estimate) and low losses in productivity via
separations, at least over most of the observed sep-
aration range. Further, when we consider the large
seasonal variation in required retail labor, and also
the impact of the business cycle, which can cause
variations on the order of 50 percent in a store’s
labor input over a few years (Figure 2), we can
appreciate the advantage of a mobile workforce.

These are good reasons to allow for an inverted
U-shaped relationship. We therefore agree with
Glebbeek and Bax (2004: 285) that researchers and
textbook writers can no longer assume that a lower
rate of turnover is always preferable to a higher
rate. It is also necessary to allow for work systems
to differ between groups in an organization and to
have correspondingly different optimal levels of
turnover. We have calculated these levels for the
two major groups here (Figure 4) and shown that
they are in fact interdependent. Thus, as Arthur
(1994) concluded, management of the employee
turnover process must require careful practitioner
attention.

We have reached some quite clear-cut results, but
careful measurement has been needed to reveal the
true relationships. First, we had to compute turn-
over in full-time equivalents. The regression results
reported in Table 4 suggest that this adjustment is
likely to be important for any organization that
employs many part-timers or contract workers. Sec-
ondly, we have shown that the usual practice of
simply comparing production units within an or-
ganization runs into difficulties, because of the un-
observables problem. It is essential to track each
unit over time, build up a panel, and work out the
result for the average unit, by allowing each unit to
have its own term, fixed or random as the case may
be. Of course, in principle central management in a
large organization such as the one studied here has
such data at its fingertips, but it is tempting to cut
corners by making simple comparisons between
stores. Confusion will then result. A fundamental
lesson for management decision making from our
research is: Do not cut statistical corners, but me-

thodically use all the data available from produc-
tion operations.

REFERENCES

Abelson, M., & Baysinger, B. 1984. Optimal and dysfunc-
tional turnover: Towards an organizational level
model. Academy of Management Review, 9: 331–
341.

Arthur, J. B. 1994. Effects of human resource systems on
manufacturing performance and turnover. Academy
of Management Journal, 37: 670 – 687.

Bamberger, P., & Meshoulam, I. 2000. Human resource

strategy. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Bartel, A. P. 2004. Human resource management and
organizational performance: Evidence from retail
banking. Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
57: 181–203.

Batt, R. 2002. Managing customer services: Human re-
source practices, quit rates, and sales growth. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 45: 587–597.

Batt, R., Colvin, A. J. S., & Keefe, J. 2002. Employee voice,
human resource practices, and quit rates: Evidence
from the telecommunications industry. Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 55: 573–594.

Becker, B., & Huselid, M. 2006. Strategic human resource
management: Where do we go from here? Journal of
Management, 32: 898 –925.

Bingley, P., & Westergaard-Nielsen, N. 2004. Personnel
policy and profit. Journal of Business Research, 57:
557–563.

Broschak, J., & Davis-Blake, A. 2006. Mixing standard
work and nonstandard deals: The consequences of
heterogeneity in employment arrangements. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 49: 371–393.

Capelli, P., & Neumark, D. 2001. Do “high-performance”
work practices improve establishment-level out-
comes? Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54:
737–775.

Cascio, W. 1998. Managing human resources: Produc-
tivity, quality of work life, profits. Boston: Irwin
McGraw-Hill.

Dalton, D., & Todor, W. 1979. Turnover turned over: An
expanded and positive perspective. Academy of
Management Review, 4: 225–235.

Datta, D., Guthrie, J., & Wright, P. 2005. Human resource
management and productivity: Does industry mat-
ter? Academy of Management Journal, 48: 135–
145.

Dess, G. G., & Shaw, J. D. 2001. Voluntary turnover, social
capital, and organizational performance. Academy
of Management Review, 26: 446 – 456.

Economist. 2007. Accounting for good people. July 21:

73–75.

Glebbeek, A., & Bax, E. 2004. Is high employee turnover


2009

Siebert and Zubanov

313

really harmful? An empirical test using company
records. Academy of Management Journal, 47:
277–286.

Guest, D., Michie, J., Conway, N., & Sheehan, M. 2003.
Human resource management and corporate perfor-
mance in the UK. British Journal of Industrial Re-
lations, 41: 291–314.

Guthrie, J. P. 2001. High-involvement work practices,
turnover, and productivity: Evidence from New Zea-
land. Academy of Management Journal, 44: 180 –
190.

Halaby, C. 2004. Panel models in sociological research.
In K. Cook & J. Hagan (Eds.), Annual review of
sociology, vol. 30: 507–544. Palo Alto, CA: Annual
Reviews.

Harris, M., Tang, K.-K., & Tseng, Y.-P. 2006. Employee
turnover: Less is not necessarily more? In B. H. Bal-
tagi (Ed.), Panel data econometrics. Theoretical
contributions and empirical applications (Contri-
butions to economic analysis, vol. 274): 327–350.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Harrison, D., Virick, M., & William, S. 1996. Working
without a net: Time, performance, and turnover un-
der maximally contingent rewards. Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, 81: 331–345.

Hausman, J. A. 1978. Specification tests in econometrics.

Econometrica, 46: 1251–1271.

Huselid, M. A. 1995. The impact of human resource
management practices on turnover, productivity,
and corporate financial performance. Academy of
Management Journal, 38: 635– 672.

Institute of Personnel and Development. 1997. IPD La-
bour Turnover 1996 Survey results. London: IPD.
Jovanovic, B. 1979. Job matching and the theory of turn-

over. Journal of Political Economy, 87: 972–990.

Kacmar, M., Andrews, M., Van Rooy, D., Steilberg, C.,
& Cerrone, S. 2006. Sure everyone can be replaced
. . . but at what cost? Turnover as a predictor of
unit-level performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 49: 133–144.

Lepak, D. P., & Snell, S. A. 1999. The strategic man-
agement of human capital: Determinants and im-
plications of different relationships. Academy of
Management Review, 24: 1–18.

Lepak, D., Taylor, M., Tekleab, A., Marrone, J., & Cohen,
D. 2007. An examination of the use of high-invest-
ment human resource systems for core and support
employees. Human Resource Management, 48:
223–246.

Lin, M.-J. 2005. Opening the black box: The internal
labour markets of company X. Industrial Relations,
44: 659 –706.

Lucas, R. E. 1978. On the size distribution of business

firms. Bell Journal of Economics, 9: 508 –523.

McElroy, J. C., Morrow, P. C., & Rude, S. N. 2001. Turn-
over and organizational performance: A comparative
analysis of the effects of voluntary, involuntary and
Journal of Applied
reduction-in-force turnover.
Psychology, 86: 1294 –1299.

McEvoy, G., & Cascio, W. 1987. Do good or poor perform-
ers leave? A meta-analysis of the relationship be-
tween performance and turnover. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 30: 744 –762.

Morrow, P., & McElroy, J. 2007. Efficiency as a mediator
in turnover-organizational performance. Human Re-
lations, 60: 827– 849.

Osterman, P. 1987. Choice of employment systems in
internal labour markets. Industrial Relations, 26:
46 – 67.

Shaw, J. D., Delery, J. E., Jenkins, G. D., & Gupta, N. 1998.
An organization-level analysis of voluntary and in-
voluntary turnover. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 41: 511–525.

Shaw, J. D., Duffy, M., Johnson, J., & Lockhart, D. 2005.
Turnover, social capital losses and performance.
Academy of Management Journal, 48: 594 – 606.

Shaw, J. D., Gupta, N., & Delery, J. E. 2005. Alternative
conceptualizations of the relationship between vol-
untary turnover and organizational performance.
Academy of Management Journal, 48: 50 – 68.

Williams, C. R., & Livingstone, L. P. 1994. Another look
at the relationship between performance and volun-
tary turnover. Academy of Management Journal,
37: 269 –298.

Wooldridge, J. M. 2002. Econometric analysis of cross-
section and panel data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Youndt, M., Snell, S., Dean, J., & Lepak, D. 1996. Human
resource management, manufacturing strategy and
firm performance. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 39: 836 – 866.

W. Stanley Siebert (w.s.siebert@bham.ac.uk) is a profes-
sor of labor economics in the School of Business at the
University of Birmingham. He received his Ph.D. from
the London School of Economics. His research interests
include the microeconomics of labor management, as
well as wider issues, particularly labor regulation.

Nikolay Zubanov (n.zubanov@cpb.nl) is a researcher at
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis.
He received his Ph.D. from the University of Birmingham
for empirical work in labor economics. His current re-
search interests are management practices, human capi-
tal, innovation, and productivity.


