J PROD INNOV MANAG 2013;30(3):516–532
© 2013 Product Development & Management Association
DOI: 10.1111/jpim.12006

Two Sides of the Same Coin: How Do Different Dimensions of
Product Program Innovativeness Affect Customer Loyalty?*
Ruth Maria Stock and Nicolas A. Zacharias

Conventional wisdom holds that innovativeness has essentially positive performance implications. However, empirical
research reveals mixed ﬁndings regarding customer-related responses to innovation, as distinct dimensions—such as
product newness and meaningfulness—may generate responses in different manners. This study introduces a multidi-
mensional conceptualization of innovativeness at the program level, thereby enlarging the customary perspective by
considering both positive and negative customer responses to innovativeness. Drawing on information economics, this
study suggests that product program meaningfulness fosters customer loyalty, whereas product program newness
undermines customer loyalty. In addition, the study examines mechanisms that might buffer the negative newness–
loyalty relationship and explores enablers of the positive meaningfulness–loyalty effect by considering a brand’s
association with innovativeness and customer integration. Empirical support for the proposed effects comes from a
multi-industry sample with 180 triadic cases from business-to-business companies, which includes assessments from
marketing, and research and development managers as well as customers. Moderated regression analysis was applied
to test the hypotheses. The results indicate a negative effect of product program newness on customer loyalty and a
positive effect of product program meaningfulness. Further, a brand’s close association with innovativeness reduces the
negative effect of product newness, and integrating customers into the value-creating process fosters the loyalty effect
of product meaningfulness. This study offers a potential explanation for the ambiguity created by equivocal empirical
results regarding customer responses to innovativeness. The study also shows that offering more innovations does not
necessarily make customers loyal. Instead, managers should mitigate the negative effects of product program newness.

T he management of innovative products is par-

ticularly critical in business-to-business (B2B)
relationships. As these relationships are usually
long term in nature, companies’ success depends largely
on the ability to keep customers attracted. Innovations
appear to play a key role in this endeavor because they
offer several advantages to B2B customers. In particular,
new products provide value by helping customers
improve their own products (Subramanian and Nilakanta,
1996), by demonstrating that the supplier is capable of
keeping up with technological developments and trends
in the market, and by indicating the supplier’s ability to
stay competitive. These beneﬁts make the supplier an
attractive partner for B2B customers seeking to establish

Address correspondence to: Ruth Maria Stock, Department of Market-
ing and Human Resource Management, Technische Universität Darmstadt,
Hochschulstr. 1, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany. E-mail:
rsh@stock-
homburg.de. Tel: +49-6151-16-7322.

* The authors are grateful for the valuable feedback provided by Gisela
Bieling and Björn Six on an earlier version of this paper. The authors also
thank the editor, Anthony Di Benedetto, and the anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments and suggestions throughout the review process.
Financial support from the Vereinigung von Freunden der Technischen
Universität zu Darmstadt e.V. (the Association of Supporters of the Tech-
nische Universität Darmstadt) is gratefully acknowledged.

long-term relationships. Thus, a company’s innovative-
ness may be an important means of fostering customer
loyalty in B2B relationships.

Despite the critical role of new products in creating
strong B2B ties, half of all new products introduced never
fulﬁll this promise because they fail in the marketplace
(Morris, Abrams, de Moura, and Durlach, 2003). A pos-
sible reason for such failures may be companies’ errone-
ous evaluation of customer responses to innovations on
which the success of
innovations ultimately hinges
(Hauser, Tellis, and Grifﬁn, 2006). Anecdotal evidence
indicates that many companies tend to focus only on the
positive side of innovativeness—that is, positive cus-
tomer responses such as increased customer loyalty—and
ignore potential threats deriving from negative customer
responses to new products, such as relationship termina-
tion (Athanassopoulos, Gounaris, and Stathakopoulos,
2001).

These negative customer responses toward innovative-
ness may occur particularly in a B2B context, in which
adoption of an innovation may require major behavioral
changes on the part of customers. These changes include
alterations throughout
the customer’s value-creation
chain, as adopting new products may entail modiﬁcations


PRODUCT PROGRAM INNOVATIVENESS AND CUSTOMER LOYALTY

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

517

of manufacturing processes, require human resources
development activities for employees, or set new stan-
dards for quality control (McDade, Oliva, and Thomas,
2010). Thus, companies must recognize that several
reasons may underlie customers’ reluctance to adopt
innovations. To fully comprehend the opportunities and
threats associated with innovations, companies need
to understand both positive and negative customer
responses to innovativeness.

Empirical research concerning customer responses to
innovative products offers mixed ﬁndings (e.g., Henard
and Szymanski, 2001; Szymanski, Kroff, and Troy,
2007). Many studies report positive effects of innovative-
ness on customer-related outcomes such as customer
acceptance (e.g., Langerak, Hultink, and Robben, 2004;
Luo and Bhattacharya, 2006), but others ﬁnd negative
effects (e.g., Atuahene-Gima, 1996a; Tatikonda and
Montoya-Weiss, 2001). Obviously,
such equivocal
empirical results regarding customer responses to new
products create ambiguity as to whether the relationship
is positive or negative.

However, these mixed results may reﬂect the various
deﬁnitions and conceptualizations of innovativeness in
extant research. From a conceptual perspective, newness
(e.g., Garcia and Calantone, 2002) and meaningfulness
(e.g., Fang, 2008) of recently introduced products poten-
tially generate different customer responses. Meaningful-
ness may be associated with positive customer outcomes,
such as cost savings (Danneels and Kleinschmidt, 2001)
or better fulﬁllment of customer needs (Gatignon and
Xuereb, 1997). In contrast, product newness appears to
trigger negative associations for customers, such as

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES

Dr. Ruth Maria Stock is Professor of Marketing and Human Resource
Management at Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany. She holds
a PhD in marketing from the University of Mannheim, Germany, and a
habilitation degree from the University of the Federal Armed Forces
Hamburg, Germany. Her primary research areas are innovation manage-
ment, customer relationship management, and leadership. She has
published in various forums, including Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, Psychology & Marketing, and Journal of Business-
to-Business Marketing.

Dr. Nicolas A. Zacharias is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department
of Marketing and Human Resource Management at Technische Univer-
sität Darmstadt, Germany. He holds a master’s degree in industrial
engineering and a Ph.D. in marketing from the same institution. His
research interests include innovation management, business-to-business
marketing, and strategic management. He has published in various jour-
nals in the areas of marketing and innovation management, including
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science.

increased uncertainty resulting from a lack of standards
to evaluate the innovation (Schmidt and Calantone, 1998)
or greater learning effort resulting from required behav-
ioral changes. Both dimensions of innovativeness seem to
generate customer responses but in different ways reﬂect-
ing two sides of the same coin. A comprehensive under-
standing of customer-related outcomes of innovativeness
requires an investigation of the two dimensions of
innovativeness in parallel (e.g., Hauser et al., 2006;
Szymanski et al., 2007). The few studies that examine
the two dimensions of innovativeness do not investigate
customer
loyalty (e.g.,
Atuahene-Gima, 1996a; Calantone, Chan, and Cui,
2006). To the best of the authors’ knowledge, no extant
research systematically compares customer responses to
the different dimensions of innovativeness.

responses such as customer

In pursuit of an understanding of differential customer
responses, this investigation addresses several important
questions that are of great interest to both academics and
managers. The ﬁrst question is: How can innovativeness
be conceptualized to capture the phenomenon more com-
prehensively?

This study answers this question by introducing to
marketing research a multidimensional conceptualization
of innovativeness at
the program level. A review of
creativity and innovation literature leads to a clear dis-
tinction of product program newness (PPN) and mean-
ingfulness as two particularly important dimensions of
product program innovativeness.

The program level of innovativeness seems particu-
larly appropriate for analyzing customer relationships at
the company level because researchers have supposed its
study to be much more insightful than innovativeness of
a single product (Siguaw, Simpson, and Enz, 2006; Stock
and Zacharias, 2011). Managers’ program choices estab-
lish the shape of the business of the future (Cooper,
Edgett, and Kleinschmidt, 1999), thus determining the
long-term success of companies. Furthermore, product
program innovativeness offers an important signal to
B2B customers, which often procure multiple products
from the same company. Finally, innovativeness at the
program level remains underresearched, and innovation
research “must move from the micro [or product level] of
analysis to the company or macro level” (Cooper and
Kleinschmidt, 1995, p. 375).

These considerations point

to the importance of
knowing how different dimensions matter in terms of
customer responses toward the company. Therefore,
a second question arises: How do customers respond
to newness and meaningfulness of product program
innovativeness?


518

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

R. M. STOCK AND N. A. ZACHARIAS

In providing an answer,

this study contributes to
ongoing discussions about whether innovativeness is
always beneﬁcial (e.g., Henard and Szymanski, 2001).
The empirical results indicate that the two dimensions of
product program innovativeness have varying effects.
In addition to ﬁnding the frequently studied positive
response to innovativeness, this investigation also reveals
negative customer responses for another dimension of
innovativeness.
Information economics (e.g., Phlips,
1988; Stigler, 1961) offers a theoretical explanation of
both effects and their underlying mechanisms. Therefore,
this study responds to the call that innovation research
“might further beneﬁt from explicitly stating the theoreti-
cal underpinnings in its research design” (Durisin,
Calabretta, and Parmeggiani, 2010, p. 447).

This investigation explores B2B customers’ responses
to product innovativeness in terms of customer loyalty.
Because B2B relationships often entail long-term part-
nerships, customer
loyalty should be a particularly
relevant customer-related outcome of product innova-
tiveness. Surprisingly,
theory-based and empirically
grounded research on this link is scarce, and studies of
product innovativeness (e.g., Atuahene-Gima, Slater, and
Olson, 2005; Hauser et al., 2006) and customer loyalty
(e.g., Johnson, Herrmann, and Huber, 2006; Lam,
Shankar, Erramilli, and Murthy, 2004) mainly appear in
two separate research streams. Thus, studying the
innovativeness–loyalty link would contribute to both
research streams by expanding knowledge of whether
innovativeness supports the maintenance of long-term
relationships.

A contingency perspective holds

that customer
responses to PPN and meaningfulness depend on contin-
gencies. This viewpoint leads to a third research question:
Under which conditions is the innovativeness–loyalty
link stronger or weaker?

To elaborate on this issue, this study investigates con-
tingency factors that might alter the relationship between
product program innovativeness and customer loyalty.
This exploration contributes to the existing literature,
which mainly studies direct effects of the dimensions of
innovativeness on performance (e.g., Szymanski et al.,
2007). To increase understanding of the outcomes of
innovativeness, this examination tests two moderators—
the brand’s association with innovativeness and customer
integration.

From a managerial perspective, this study helps man-
agers understand how innovativeness might inﬂuence
customer metrics such as loyalty, which has important
implications for the development and marketing of inno-
vations. This study reveals that managerial practice

should be attentive to both the newness and the meaning-
fulness of the product program and also that positive
overall customer responses depend on different treat-
ments for the two dimensions. Speciﬁcally, the results not
only provide guidance on how managers might best deal
with both newness and meaningfulness but also demon-
strate how a strong brand association with innovativeness
and a high level of customer integration affect potential
customer resistance to innovations and foster customer
loyalty.

The subsequent sections have the following organiza-
tion. The next section develops the two-dimensional con-
ceptualization of innovativeness at the program level on
the basis of a review of extant literature. The following
part draws on information economics (e.g., Phlips, 1988;
Stigler, 1961) to present the conceptual background of
this study and describe the framework of the study and
the hypotheses related to main and moderating effects.
The methodology section explains the data collection, the
measurement procedure for the study’s constructs, and
the hypotheses testing procedure. The results section pre-
sents ﬁndings, and the ﬁnal section contains a discussion
of implications and suggestions for future research.

Two Dimensions of Product Program
Innovativeness

Prior research offers a vast number of conceptualizations
of innovativeness, often using the same label for different
constructs and diverse labels for similar constructs
(e.g., Danneels and Kleinschmidt, 2001; Henard and
Szymanski, 2001). To conceptualize product program
innovativeness, two research streams provide valuable
insights, namely, studies of creativity and research con-
cerning product innovativeness. Creativity refers to the
generation of ideas, which can be used to develop new
products, processes, or other organizational outcomes
(e.g., Amabile, 1988; Woodman, Sawyer, and Grifﬁn,
1993). An important merit of this stream is the distinction
between newness and meaningfulness of creativity.
While newness refers to the novelty, originality, or
uniqueness of ideas or their related outcomes within the
domain of interest (e.g., Im and Workman, 2004), mean-
ingfulness generally comprises the usefulness, value,
advantage, or appropriateness of the generated ideas to
the target group such as customers (e.g., Ford and Gioia,
2000; Sethi, Smith, and Park, 2001). Although the two
dimensions are conceptually distinct, both are part of the
overarching concept of creativity.

In contrast to creativity, which focuses on the genera-
tion of ideas, innovativeness refers to “the successful


PRODUCT PROGRAM INNOVATIVENESS AND CUSTOMER LOYALTY

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

519

development, adoption and implementation of creative
ideas” (Im and Workman, 2004, p. 115). Thus, creativity
is an antecedent of innovation, along with other necessary
antecedents (Amabile, 1988; Sethi et al., 2001). Main-
stream literature tends to conceptualize innovativeness as
the difference between new and previous offerings—that
is, in terms of the degree of newness (e.g., Garcia and
Calantone, 2002; Szymanski et al., 2007). However,
recent research indicates that both newness and meaning-
fulness are important to a more comprehensive under-
standing of the phenomenon of innovativeness (e.g.,
Henard and Szymanski, 2001; Szymanski et al., 2007).
Thus, a broader deﬁnition of innovativeness includes a
meaningfulness dimension, namely the degree to which
new products are superior in terms of their quality and
beneﬁts (Calantone et al., 2006; Hsieh, Tsai, and Wang,
2008). Table 1 illustrates both the common ground and
the differential
innovation and creativity
research, and provides an overview of selected deﬁnitions
from both ﬁelds.

focus of

Drawing on the similarities in the conceptualizations
of both streams outlined above, the argument of this study
is that capturing product innovativeness requires both
newness and meaningfulness. On the one hand, a com-
pany’s regular introduction of new products does not
ensure meaningfulness for customers, as the elevated
failure rates of newly introduced products may attest
(Sivadas and Dwyer, 2000). Although products with a
high degree of newness may offer no meaningful added
functionality, they must nevertheless compete with well-
established products that already satisfy customers’
needs. On the other hand, product meaningfulness is not
universally associated with newness, and customers may
ﬁnd incremental innovations to be very meaningful, even
though they offer very little newness. For example, a new
lubricating oil product may provide extensively improved
thermodynamic functionality for a production process
while not being substantially new. Thus, newness and
meaningfulness appear to be separate dimensions, which
if investigated together may generate richer insights into
the concept of product innovativeness (Sethi and Sethi,
2009; Szymanski et al., 2007).

Insights contained in the literature on creativity and
innovativeness suggest a distinction between PPN and
product program meaningfulness (PPM). This investiga-
tion focuses on innovativeness at
the program level,
which pertains to a company’s whole range of products
(e.g., Atuahene-Gima et al., 2005; Menguc and Auh,
2006; Stock, 2011). Accordingly, on the basis of prior
literature, PPN refers to the degree of difference between
a company’s product program and existing alternatives

(e.g., Garcia and Calantone, 2002; Szymanski et al.,
2007). PPM is the average superiority of the company’s
recently introduced products in terms of quality and ben-
eﬁts (Calantone et al., 2006).

The few existing studies that integrate the two dimen-
sions of innovativeness rely mainly on the product level
but indicate that newness and meaningfulness represent
separate dimensions of innovativeness. Calantone et al.
(2006) investigate newness and meaningfulness as part of
a larger model and ﬁnd no signiﬁcant effect of newness
on new product proﬁtability but positive performance
implications for meaningfulness.
Im and Workman
(2004) ﬁnd similar results in their study, which is rooted
in creativity research and which reveals no statistically
signiﬁcant effects of newness and positive effects of
meaningfulness on market and ﬁnancial performance.
Atuahene-Gima (1996a) employs both dimensions, as
well as other constructs, to identify mediating effects
between market orientation and performance outcomes.
That study reveals no effect of newness on market
success and a negative effect on project impact but posi-
tive effects of meaningfulness on market success and
project impact. The results of these three investigations
indicate differential effects of newness and meaningful-
ness on company performance and suggest
the
two dimensions of product program innovativeness may
also represent distinct dimensions. On the basis of prior
considerations and empirical research, the following is
proposed:

that

H1: The two dimensions of PPN and PPM are distinct in
the sense that they exhibit discriminant validity.

Conceptual Background

Information Economics

In developing hypotheses about the functional structure
of the relationship between product program innovative-
ness and customer loyalty, this study draws on informa-
tion economics (e.g., Phlips, 1988; Stigler, 1961),
following the theoretical logic from Stock (2011). Mar-
keting and innovation researchers increasingly employ
information economics to explain customer uncertainty
generated by innovativeness (e.g., Lauga and Ofek,
2009). The theory relies on two major premises.

First, exchange partners seek to maximize their utility
(Heide and Wathne, 2006). In the context of this study,
the concept of utility maximization applies to the rela-
tionship between a company and its customers. When
making decisions, customers are guided by expectations
about the utility they may derive from a speciﬁc exchange


520

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

R. M. STOCK AND N. A. ZACHARIAS

Table 1. Selected Deﬁnitions of Dimensions of Innovativeness and Creativity

Author(s)

Innovativeness research
Garcia and Calantone

(2002, p. 112)

Deﬁnition(s)

Label(s)

Focal Dimension(s)

“ ‘Innovativeness’ is most frequently used as a measure of

Innovativeness

Newness

the degree of ‘newness’ of an innovation. ‘Highly
innovative’ products are seen as having a high degree of
newness and ‘low innovative’ products sit at the opposite
extreme of the continuum.”

Langerak and Hultink

Product innovativeness “is deﬁned as the extent to which the

Product innovativeness

Newness

(2006, p. 206)

Calantone et al. (2006,

p. 410)

Fang (2008, p. 90)

Henard and Szymanski

(2001, p. 364)

new product is new to the target market and to the
developing ﬁrm.”

Product advantage “refers to a product’s superiority relative
to other products in the marketplace on dimensions such
as quality, beneﬁt, and function.”

“New product innovativeness refers to the extent to which
the product differs from competing alternatives in a way
that is meaningful to customers and therefore reﬂects
meaningful uniqueness.”

Product innovativeness is the “perceived newness/originality/
uniqueness/radicalness of the product.” Product advantage
is the “superiority and/or differentiation over competitive
offerings.”

Szymanski et al. (2007,

“While product innovativeness is deﬁned in the literature as

p. 44)

the degree of newness or difference from existing
alternatives, some researchers have extended the deﬁnition
of innovativeness to include the usefulness or
meaningfulness of the innovative feature.”

Product advantage

Meaningfulness

New product

innovativeness

Meaningfulness

Product innovativeness/

Newness,

product advantage

meaningfulness

Innovativeness
(newness and
meaningfulness)

Newness,

meaningfulness

Sethi and Sethi (2009,

Novelty “is deﬁned herein as the degree to which the new

New product

p. 209)

product is different from competing alternatives.
Appropriateness, on the other hand, is deﬁned as the
extent to which the product is useful, relevant, and
necessary for customers relative to competing
alternatives.”

innovativeness
(novelty and
appropriateness)

Newness,

meaningfulness

Creativity research

Woodman et al. (1993,

“Organizational creativity is the creation of a valuable,

p. 293)

Andrews and Smith

(1996, p. 179)

useful new product, service, idea, procedure, or process by
individuals working together in a complex social system.”

“First, novelty refers to the degree of difference between a

product’s most recent marketing program and the
competitors’ programs. Second, meaningfulness refers to
the extent to which the marketing initiatives are thought to
be attractive or valuable to the group for which they were
devised (e.g., consumers, retailers).”

Organizational

creativity

Meaningfulness

Marketing program
creativity (novelty
and meaningfulness)

Newness,

meaningfulness

Ford and Gioia (2000,

Novelty is deﬁned “as the extent to which a decision was

Creativity in decision

Newness,

p. 715)

Sethi et al. (2001, p. 74)

unusual within the context of their organizations, and [. . .]
value as the extent to which a decision accomplished the
objectives desired by the participating decision makers.”
“Novelty [. . .] refers to the extent to which a concept, idea,

or object differs from conventional practice within the
domain of interest. Appropriateness is the extent to which
a given output is viewed as useful or beneﬁcial to some
audience.”

making (novelty and
value)

meaningfulness

Novelty and

appropriateness

Newness,

meaningfulness

Im and Workman (2004,

New product and marketing program creativity is deﬁned as

New product/marketing

Newness,

p. 115)

“the degree to which new products and their associated
marketing programs are perceived as representing unique
differences from competitors’ products and programs in
ways that are meaningful to target customers. [. . .] Thus,
creativity, which involves the generation of novel and
meaningful ideas, is a necessary though not sufﬁcient
antecedent of innovation.”

program creativity
(novelty and
meaningfulness)

meaningfulness


PRODUCT PROGRAM INNOVATIVENESS AND CUSTOMER LOYALTY

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

521

relationship in the future. The greater the expected utility
from this relationship, the stronger the probability that
customers will remain loyal to a company. To alter cus-
tomers’ expectations in favor of companies, information
economics proposes signaling as an effective activity.
Signaling, which includes a signal of product program
innovativeness, allows companies to indicate that they
are able to meet customer needs (Fang, 2008). Hence,
product program innovativeness increases the utility cus-
tomers anticipate from a particular exchange relationship
(e.g., Jedidi and Zhang, 2002), and actually meeting cus-
tomers’ needs through product program innovativeness
then leads to customer loyalty (Lam et al., 2004).

Second, information economics supposes that the allo-
cation of information between exchange partners inﬂu-
ences the decisions of the two parties, i.e., the company
and its customers (Spence, 1973). A customer who lacks
information about a company’s products experiences
information asymmetry (Kirmani and Rao, 2000) and a
corresponding uncertainty about the products. Customer
uncertainty is particularly great when assessment of the
utility of the offered products is complicated (Heide,
2003; Hoefﬂer, 2003). The greater the uncertainty asso-
ciated with innovative products, the lower the customer’s
conﬁdence that the company can meet the customer’s
needs (Magnusson, Matthing, and Kristensson, 2003).
Thus, uncertainty has a negative effect on customer
loyalty.

In summary, information economics is an appropriate
basis for this study for two reasons. First, it explains why
product program innovativeness affects customer loyalty.
Information economics, with its emphasis on signaling,
seems particularly appropriate to explain customer-
related effects of the whole product program in longer
term relationships, in which individual products are less
important. That
is, product program innovativeness
serves as a signal for customers, enabling them to form
opinions about the competitiveness of future products
and the seller as a whole.

Second, information economics offers an explanation
for the mechanism between product program innovative-
ness and customer loyalty via two opposing effects
(Stock, 2011). As a positive effect, product program inno-
vativeness represents a signal demonstrating a company’s
ability to deliver according to customers’ expectations
and to meet customer needs, which leads to customer
loyalty. A negative effect of product program innovative-
ness results from rising information asymmetry corre-
sponding with an increasing level of innovativeness,
which ultimately lowers customer loyalty because it adds
to customers’ uncertainty with respect to a company’s

competence to meet their needs. In consequence, the two
aspects of innovativeness—PPN and PPM—may have
different effects on customer responses such as customer
loyalty.

Study Framework

The framework in Figure 1 depicts PPN and PPM as two
dimensions of product program innovativeness that inﬂu-
ence customer loyalty. Despite the importance of long-
term relationships in a B2B context, investigations have
largely neglected to compare the different dimensions
of product program innovativeness as they pertain to
customer loyalty (Danneels and Kleinschmidt, 2001;
Simpson, Siguaw, and Enz, 2006). This study’s frame-
work also includes the potential moderating effects of the
brand’s association with innovativeness and customer
integration. Both constructs are important in the context
of information economics because they inﬂuence infor-
mation asymmetries between exchange partners. For
example, a strong brand image can reduce the negative
inﬂuence of product newness on customer loyalty. In
addition, both constructs appear as important contingen-
cies in innovation research (Gatignon, Tushman, Smith,
and Anderson, 2002; Hauser et al., 2006).

In exploring the outcome of product program innova-
tiveness, this investigation considers customer loyalty.
Loyalty reﬂects the long-term performance of a relation-
ship (Daugherty, Stank, and Ellinger, 1998), which is
particularly important in B2B settings (Lam et al., 2004).
Customer loyalty is a customer’s intention to repeatedly
purchase products from the same company (Homburg
and Giering, 2001).

By considering potential moderators of

the link
between product program innovativeness and customer
loyalty, this study aims to determine the conditions in
which a negative effect of PPN might be buffered or a
positive effect of PPM might be enhanced with regard to
customer loyalty. For the newness–loyalty relationship,
in line with information economics theory, this study
considers a brand’s association with innovativeness to be
an important signal that may reduce customer uncer-
tainty. This association refers to an image of the brand
that customers hold (Keller, 1993). Accordingly, brand
association with innovativeness refers to the degree to
which customers associate an image of innovativeness
with the company (Aaker, 1996).

In relation to the meaningfulness–loyalty link,
customer integration may be a potential moderator.
Customer integration relates to “the degree to which cus-
tomers are involved into a company’s value-creating


522

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

R. M. STOCK AND N. A. ZACHARIAS

Customers’ 
Perspective 

Product Program 
Innovativeness 

Product Program  
Newness (PPN) 

H2: (–)  

Product Program 

Meaningfulness (PPM) 

H3: (+)  

Brand Association  
with Innovativeness 

H4: (+)  

H5: (+)  

Customer Integration 

Customer Loyalty 

Marketing Managers’ 
Perspective 

Marketing Managers’ 
Perspective 

Customers’ 
Perspective 

Figure 1. Framework

process” (Homburg and Stock, 2004, p. 148). The inte-
gration of customers is particularly important in B2B
settings (Stock, 2006) because it supports customer
acceptance of new products by increasing the value cus-
tomers receive from innovations (e.g., von Hippel, 1986).
Customer-related information also helps companies
better meet customer needs (Fang, 2008) and protects
against the high failure rates of newly introduced prod-
ucts (Link, 1987).

Main Effects Hypotheses

Drawing on information economics and previous empiri-
cal results, this study proposes that a company’s PPN
negatively affects customer
loyalty (e.g., Atuahene-
Gima, 1996a; Meyer and Roberts, 1986). From a theo-
retical perspective, a customer’s lack of information
about a company’s offering and the difﬁculty of assessing
its output
increase with the newness of the product
program (e.g., Ali, 2000; Heide, 2003). With its emphasis
on differentiation from products already in the market
(Atuahene-Gima, 1996a), PPN leads to information
asymmetry, which hinders customer judgments of the
product program (Ali, 2000) and thus increases custom-
ers’ perceived risk associated with the products (e.g.,
Danneels and Kleinschmidt, 2001). Perceived risk is par-

ticularly detrimental
in B2B relationships because
success largely hinges on customer willingness to estab-
lish long-term relationships. Thus, on the basis of theo-
retical considerations and previous empirical ﬁndings,
the following is hypothesized:

H2: PPN negatively affects customer loyalty.

In contrast, a company’s PPM is expected to positively
affect customer loyalty. Again, on the basis of informa-
tion economics and extant literature, this study considers
PPM to be a signal to customers that the new products
offer superior quality and beneﬁts (e.g., Atuahene-Gima,
1996b; Heil and Robertson, 1991). PPM demonstrates
that a company can keep up with technological develop-
ments and trends in the market, meet customer needs, and
provide unique advantages to customers (Hsieh et al.,
2008). Thus, PPM reduces customers’ uncertainty about
innovative products. In addition to meta-analyses that
strongly conﬁrm a positive relationship between PPM
and performance (e.g., Henard and Szymanski, 2001;
Szymanski et al., 2007), empirical studies support the
notion of positive customer responses to PPM (e.g.,
Langerak et al., 2004; Luo and Bhattacharya, 2006).
Therefore, the following is hypothesized:

H3: PPM positively affects customer loyalty.


PRODUCT PROGRAM INNOVATIVENESS AND CUSTOMER LOYALTY

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

523

Moderating Effects Hypotheses

Information economics and extant literature suggest that
a brand association with innovativeness should buffer the
negative effect of PPN on customer loyalty. Information
economists identify a company’s brand as one of the most
important signals for reducing customer uncertainty
(Erdem, Swait, and Valenzuela, 2006). An effective brand
serves as a signal to enhance awareness and create a
favorable image in terms of innovativeness (Klink and
Athaide, 2010), which lowers information asymmetry
as well as customers’ perceived risk associated with
the products (e.g., Danneels and Kleinschmidt, 2001;
Kirmani and Rao, 2000). The marketing literature also
emphasizes the effectiveness of branding as a signal to
customers of product quality (e.g., Heide, 2003; Keller,
1993). In particular, a brand’s association with innova-
tiveness enables customers to infer innovative product
quality (e.g., Kirmani and Rao, 2000) and thus reduce
their uncertainty with respect to new products (Aaker,
1996). Another advantage to a strong association of a
supplier’s brand with innovativeness relates to the
improvement of B2B customers’ reputation with end cus-
tomers (Henard and Dacin, 2010). For example, Dell
advertisements carry the logo of Intel, its innovative sup-
plier. Intel’s association with innovativeness not only
retains Dell as a customer but also increases Dell’s repu-
tation with end customers. In summary, the more strongly
a customer associates a brand with innovativeness, the
less likely the customer is to be swayed by innovative
offerings of competitive suppliers, thus increasing cus-
tomer loyalty (Henard and Dacin, 2010). Therefore, the
following is postulated:

H4: Brand association with innovativeness weakens the
negative impact of PPN on customer loyalty.

Further, customer integration should strengthen the
positive effect of PPM on customer loyalty. In the logic
of information economics, customer integration signals
that customers can anticipate increased utility from the
exchange relationship with a company (e.g., Jedidi and
Zhang, 2002). Customer integration sends customers an
important signal that the company is willing to coordi-
nate its innovations with customer needs and demon-
strates the company’s ability to deliver
long-term
beneﬁts to customers through their relationship with
that company. In this vein, extant literature is consistent;
customer integration increases the quality and beneﬁts
(i.e., meaningfulness) of new products that then better
meet customer needs (e.g., Fang, 2008; von Hippel,
1986).

In addition to this economic value, customer integra-
tion may provide relational value by developing an inter-
action between exchange partners (Chan, Yim, and Lam,
2010). This interaction may be particularly important in
B2B relationships because it enables suppliers to better
communicate the meaningfulness of their innovative
products (Vargo and Lusch, 2004), which keeps custom-
ers attracted. Thus, customer integration allows compa-
nies to strengthen the positive effect of PPM on customer
loyalty by integrating customers. On the basis of these
theoretical considerations and extant literature regarding
customer integration, the following is hypothesized:

H5: Customer integration strengthens the positive effect
of PPM on customer loyalty.

Methodology

Data Collection

This study relied on a speciﬁc dataset
to examine
innovativeness–loyalty relationships. The data collection
aimed to gather triadic data from marketing, and research
and development (R&D) managers of B2B companies as
well as their customers. Because an object’s ratings
cannot be divorced from its perceivers, the participants
selected were the most knowledgeable informants with
the greatest expertise in the relevant topic to report on
each construct. This design reduced the effects of
informant bias (e.g., Kumar, Stern, and Anderson, 1993)
and common method bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie,
Jeong-Yeon, and Podsakoff, 2003).

To increase the generalizability of this study’s ﬁnd-
ings, a large-scale survey solicited responses from com-
panies in ﬁve different industries, which were selected
for their macroeconomic importance. These industries
included electronics (17.0%), machinery (16.5%), ser-
vices (14.3%), software/information technology (32.4%),
and utilities (19.8%), and companies’ sales volumes
ranged from less than $10 million to more than $1 billion.
The data collection comprised several steps. The ﬁrst
step was random selection of 1000 marketing managers
of companies from a list maintained by a commercial
address provider who received personalized letters with
requests for participation. After follow-up telephone
calls, the marketing managers who indicated their will-
ingness to participate received a code for the Internet-
based survey. These marketing managers provided
information about PPN and PPM, as well as customer
integration into the value-creation process. Because of
their relative closeness to the market, they also assessed
competitive intensity and market-related dynamism,


524

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

R. M. STOCK AND N. A. ZACHARIAS

which serve as control variables in the study. In addition,
they were asked to identify an R&D manager in their
company and to provide ﬁve customer names and
addresses. As a reward for participation, the marketing
managers could receive individualized feedback about
their customers’ loyalty relative to that of customers of
other companies within the same or other industries. This
offer emphasized that the feedback and participation in
this study would make sense only if the managers hon-
estly provided data from customers with different levels
of loyalty.

turbulence because their

In a next step, the R&D managers assessed the control
jobs
variable technological
require them to possess knowledge about
technical
advances. In a last data-collection step, the customers
received personalized letters and follow-up telephone
calls with the goal of obtaining at least two customer
assessments per company. These contacts informed the
customers that they had been identiﬁed by the marketing
manager of the initial company and solicited their partici-
pation in the study. As candid responses were desirable,
these customers received assurances that their assess-
ments would be used exclusively for research purposes
and forwarded anonymously to the company afﬁliated
with the marketing manager. Those customers who par-
ticipated provided information about their loyalty with
the identifying company and their association of that
company’s brand with innovativeness. This effort yielded
an average of 2.24 usable customer
responses per
company with at least two customer responses for 68.9%
of the cases. Tests for any impact of the customer
response rate on customer loyalty revealed no effect
(b = .07; not signiﬁcant [n.s.]).

In total, the data collection procedure generated 180
triadic cases, with responses from marketing and R&D
managers and customers. A comparison of early and late
respondents (Armstrong and Overton, 1977) to assess
nonresponse bias revealed no signiﬁcant differences for
any of the constructs.

Measurement Procedure

The development of the questionnaire relied on a com-
prehensive literature review and ﬁeld interviews with 18
academics and practitioners. During these qualitative
interviews, participants expressed their opinions on the
role of innovativeness for customer relationships in
general, the management of product program innovative-
ness, and the relevance of different customers to innova-
tiveness. Discussions also focused on an initial draft of
the questionnaire, which was primarily based on previ-

ously used scales from existing literature. This pretest led
to reﬁnement of the questionnaire and adaptation of some
of the scales. The ﬁnal set of items, including the sources
used for scale development and speciﬁcation of respon-
dents, appears in Appendix A.

Exploratory and conﬁrmatory factor analyses ensured
the reliability and validity of the reﬂective multi-item
measures (Bagozzi and Baumgartner, 1994). For all con-
structs, Cronbach’s alpha clearly exceeded the recom-
mended minimum of .7 (Nunnally, 1978) signifying a
high degree of internal consistency among the corre-
sponding indicators. Composite reliability was greater
than the threshold value of .6 for all constructs, while the
values for the average variance extracted exceeded the
desired minimum of .5 (Bagozzi and Yi, 1988). Besides
emphasizing the reliability of the scales, composite reli-
ability and average variance extracted indicated conver-
gent validity in combination with statistically signiﬁcant
factor loadings. In the dataset, all factor loadings were
signiﬁcant at p < .01. Altogether, these results suggest
strong convergent validity of the employed constructs
(Bagozzi and Yi, 1988).

The index of within-group interrater reliability (rwg)
determined whether aggregation of the various custom-
ers’ assessments of each company was appropriate
(James, Demaree, and Wolf, 1984). For the customer
loyalty construct, the median rwg value exceeds the pro-
posed minimum of .7 (Burke, Finkelstein, and Dusig,
1999) in support of the data aggregation. The customer
responses for each company were therefore averaged into
a single composite value for the subsequent data analysis
(Van Bruggen, Lilien, and Kacker, 2002).

Two tests ensured discriminant validity. Chi-square
difference tests for each pair of constructs yielded signiﬁ-
cant values well above the recommended minimum of
3.84 at p < .05 (Anderson and Gerbing, 1988). In addi-
tion, Fornell and Larcker’s (1981) rigorous criterion
assessed discriminant validity. As Table 2 shows, the
diagonal elements representing the square roots of the
average variance were greater than the off-diagonal ele-
ments. Thus, discriminant validity was not a problem in
the study.

Hypotheses Testing Procedure of Study Framework

Hierarchical moderated regression analysis tested for
both direct and moderating effects (Aiken and West,
1991). Multiplicative interaction terms resulted from
multiplying the values for PPN with the values of brand
association with innovativeness and PPM with the values
of customer integration. Mean-centering the constituent


PRODUCT PROGRAM INNOVATIVENESS AND CUSTOMER LOYALTY

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

525

Table 2. Correlation Matrix and Descriptive Statistics

Variables

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Customer loyalty
Product program newness
Product program meaningfulness
Brand association with innovativeness
Customer integration
Firm size
Competitive intensity
Market-related dynamism
Technological turbulence

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Mean
Standard deviation

.86
-.14
.07
.46**
-.05
.01
-.11
-.29**
-.04
5.82
.89

.82
.60**
-.13
.19**
.00
.05
.15*
.06
4.26
1.36

.76
-.07
.21**
-.06
.05
.22**
.11
5.61
1.06

n/a

-.24**
.07
-.02
-.16*
-.03
4.06
1.38

.85
-.21**
.13
.22**
.18*
5.48
1.21

n/a
.19*
-.05
-.15
2.82
2.00

.71
.19*
.18*
6.12
.80

.72
.33**
4.19
1.14

.71
4.63
1.11

Notes: n = 180. Diagonal elements in bold are the square roots of the average variance extracted for constructs measured reﬂectively with multiple items.
* p < .05; ** p < .01.

variables facilitated interpretation (Cohen, Cohen, West,
and Aiken, 2003).

The testing procedure also acknowledged control vari-
ables and included industry and ﬁrm size as well as three
environmental variables, as the success of product inno-
vations also depends on the relative inﬂuence of market
forces that companies encounter (Gatignon and Xuereb,
1997; Zhou, Yim, and Tse, 2005). Previous studies
related to innovation management (e.g., Voss and Voss,
2000) suggested controlling for competitive intensity
(Jaworski and Kohli, 1993), market-related dynamism
(Homburg and Pﬂesser, 2000), and technological turbu-
lence (Jaworski and Kohli, 1993). These three character-
istics are fundamental as they represent inﬂuences of
competition, technology, and customers in the market (Li
and Calantone, 1998).

The initial

regression analysis included only the
control variables (Model 1). A second step added the
independent and moderator variables (Model 2), and
the full regression equation included the interaction
effects (Model 3).

Multiple procedures diagnosed the potential for mul-
ticollinearity (Echambadi and Hess, 2007). First, random
estimation of subsets of the data (Echambadi, Inigo
Arroniz, and Lee, 2006) showed stable coefﬁcients
across them. Second, while multicollinearity may exist
when the determinant of the correlation matrix is near
zero (Echambadi and Hess, 2007), examination showed
this not to be the case for these data. Third, assessment of
the variance inﬂation factors revealed that even the
largest value of 1.84 was well below the cutoff value of
10 (Mason and Perreault, 1991). Therefore, multicol-
linearity did not appear to be a problem for the data in
this study.

Results

The ﬁrst hypothesis suggests a distinction between the
constructs of PPN and PPM. Discriminant validity was
tested twice, drawing on Anderson and Gerbing (1988) as
well as Fornell and Larcker (1981). Regarding the ﬁrst
test, the chi-square difference value (c2 = 54.50; p < .01)
was substantially larger than the required minimum
(c2 = 3.84; p < .05). Because the correlation between the
constructs of PPN and PPM (r = .60) is less than the
square root of the average variance extracted of PPN (.82)
and PPM (.76), the requirements of the second test are
also satisﬁed (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). Thus, accord-
ing to the two tests employed, PPN and PPM demonstrate
discriminant validity in support of H1, and these con-
structs appear to be two distinct dimensions of product
program innovativeness.

The hierarchical regression analysis provides results
regarding the main and moderating effect hypotheses of
the framework. The stepwise development of the full
regression model can be traced in Table 3. While moving
from Model 1 to 3, the predictive power increases signiﬁ-
cantly with each step. This approach conﬁrmed that
adding interaction effects yields a signiﬁcantly superior
model (F-value for incremental R2 = 4.13; p < .05). The
full regression equation stated in Model 3, which includes
control, direct, and interaction effects, results in an
explanatory power that is fairly high (R2 = .44) given the
triadic nature of the data.

In support of H2, PPN has a negative effect on cus-
tomer loyalty (b = -.26; p < .01), a ﬁnding that conﬁrms
the detrimental effect of this particular dimension. In
opposition, H3 proposes a positive effect of the meaning-
fulness dimension, which the results conﬁrm as well.


526

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

R. M. STOCK AND N. A. ZACHARIAS

Table 3. Results of Regression Analysis on Customer Loyalty

Dependent Variable

Control variables

Industry

Services
Software/information technology
Machinery
Electronics

Firm size
Competitive intensity
Market-related dynamism
Technological turbulence

Independent variables

Product program newness
Product program meaningfulness

Moderator variables

Brand association with innovativeness
Customer integration

Interaction effects

Product program newness ¥ brand association with innovativeness
Product program meaningfulness ¥ customer integration

R2
Adjusted R2
F-value
Incremental R2
F-value for incremental R2
N

Notes: Standardized regression coefﬁcients are reported.
* p < .05; ** p < .01.

loyalty (b = .22;
PPM positively affects customer
p < .01). Both effects are signiﬁcant at the same level in
Models 2 and 3 in support of the stability of the results.
Taken together, PPN and PPM not only are distinct
dimensions of product program innovativeness but also
have contrasting effects on customer loyalty, which yields
interesting implications for the phenomenon of product
program innovativeness.

The moderated regression results also conﬁrm the
hypotheses. The regression parameter estimate associ-
ated with the interaction term between PPN and brand
association with innovativeness is positive and signiﬁ-
cant (b = .15; p < .05), which conﬁrms H4. This result
indicates that a brand’s association with innovativeness
reduces the negative effect of PPN on customer loyalty.
In support of H5, the interaction term between PPM and
customer integration has a signiﬁcant positive effect on
customer loyalty (b = .13; p < .05). That is, a company
that integrates customers into its innovation process can
strengthen the positive relationship between PPM and
customer loyalty. Regarding the direct effects of the
moderator variables, the study’s results show a signiﬁ-

Customer Loyalty

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

-.09
.10
-.29**
.19*
.03
-.07
-.31**
.09

.16
.12
3.98**
.16
3.98**

180

-.10
.09
-.33**
.23**
.04
-.08
-.27**
.06

-.24**
.26**

.46**
.12

.41
.37
9.77**
.26

18.16**
180

-.08
.11
-.33**
.19*
.07
-.08
-.26**
.04

-.26**
.22**

.43**
.11

.15*
.13*

.44
.39
9.28**
.03
4.13*

180

cant positive effect of brand association with innovative-
loyalty (b = .43; p < .01), while
ness on customer
customer integration is unrelated to loyalty (b = .11;
n.s.). This ﬁnding suggests that fostering brand associa-
tion with innovativeness increases customer loyalty both
directly and via a moderating effect, thus, offering a
strong lever.

Figure 2 displays both interaction effects. Panel A
reveals the signiﬁcant interaction between PPN and brand
association with innovativeness, emphasizing the poten-
tial to almost neutralize the negative effect of PPN on
customer loyalty in the case of a strong brand association
with innovativeness. Panel B depicts the signiﬁcant inter-
action between PPM and customer integration, which
reveals the loyalty-enhancing effect of customer integra-
tion via PPM. However, the panel also shows that low
levels of customer integration radically downgrade the
positive effect of PPM on customer loyalty. In addition,
Figure 2 explains the main effects of PPN and PPM on
customer loyalty, which relate to the effects of PPN and
PPM on customer loyalty at a medium level of the cor-
responding moderator variable (Cohen et al., 2003).


PRODUCT PROGRAM INNOVATIVENESS AND CUSTOMER LOYALTY

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

527

A

 

y
t
l
a
y
o
L
 
r
e
m
o
t
s
u
C

B

 

y
t
l
a
y
o
L
 
r
e
m
o
t
s
u
C

0.80

 

0.60 

0.40 

0.20 

0.00 

-0.20 

-0.40 

-0.60 

-0.80 

-1.00 

-1.20 

-1.40 

0.80 

0.60 

0.40 

0.20 

0.00 

-0.20 

-0.40 

-0.60 

-0.80 

low                      medium

high

Product Program Newness 

Brand Association 
with Innovativeness
as Moderator

low

medium

high

Customer Integration
as Moderator

low

medium

high

low  

medium

high

Product Program Meaningfulness

Figure 2. Moderating Effects. (A) Product Program Newness
and Customer Loyalty Moderated by Brand Association with
Innovativeness. (B) Product Program Meaningfulness and
Customer Loyalty Moderated by Customer Integration

Concerning control variables,

the ﬁndings overall
demonstrate very stable effects for Models 1 through 3. In
speciﬁc, industry effects exist with regard to the machin-
ery sector (b = -.33; p < .01) and the electronics sector
(b = .19; p < .05), where the average loyalty levels seem
to differ from the sample mean. In accordance with other
studies in the ﬁeld of customer relationship management,
results show that market-related dynamism exerts a nega-
tive effect on customer loyalty (b = -.26; p < .01). The
other two environmental variables, competitive intensity
and technological turbulence, are unrelated to customer
loyalty, as is ﬁrm size.

Discussion

Research Implications

As an important point of departure from previous inves-
tigations, this study notes that companies and academics
mostly emphasize the positive performance implications
of product innovativeness and ignore the ﬂip side of the
innovativeness coin. However, within the concept of
innovativeness,
two differential effects emerge: PPM

customer

loyalty, while

enhances
frequently
demanded characteristic of PPN actually undermines
customer loyalty. These ﬁndings expand the understand-
ing of innovativeness and its customer responses, and
offer several important implications for research.

the

First, this study introduces a two-dimensional concep-
tualization of product program innovativeness, which
creates synergies among several areas of prior research.
In speciﬁc, it merges accomplishments of creativity and
product innovativeness research, which scholars have
failed to capitalize on (Ford, 1996). Originating in the
creativity literature, the distinction between newness and
meaningfulness has been adapted to research on product
innovativeness, which still mainly relies on the newness
dimension. The results of this study indicate that because
they show discriminant validity, the two dimensions are
distinct not only conceptually but also empirically.
Another realized synergy relates to the level of innova-
tiveness. Although the creativity literature emerges from
studies of individuals’ innovative behaviors (Drazin,
Glynn, and Kazanjian, 1999; Woodman et al., 1993),
researchers have regularly applied the concept of creativ-
ity to groups or organizations (Amabile, 1988; Sethi
et al., 2001; Woodman et al., 1993). However, program-
level conceptualizations of innovativeness are scarce, and
the few notable exceptions do not draw on multiple
dimensions (e.g., Menguc and Auh, 2006). Thus, the
conceptualization introduced here reveals two conceptual
synergies and helps “innovation researchers and creativ-
ity researchers to be working hand in hand to solve the
mysteries surrounding these complex events” (Ford,
1996, p. 1112).

Second, this study offers a potential explanation for
the ambiguity created by equivocal empirical results
regarding customer responses to innovativeness (e.g.,
Henard and Szymanski, 2001; Szymanski et al., 2007).
Most previous studies rely on unidimensional conceptu-
alizations of innovativeness and identify positive, nega-
tive, or nonsigniﬁcant effects (e.g., Amabile, 1988;
Langerak et al., 2004). Because newness and meaning-
fulness evoke different customer responses, scholars
should always use measures capable of assessing mul-
tiple facets (Sullivan and Ford, 2010). In doing so,
researchers may be able to clear up some of the contrast-
ing results prior investigations attribute to unidimensional
conceptualizations and to provide more detailed explana-
tions with regard to the performance outcomes of inno-
vativeness.

Third, the conceptualization and the results of this
study have implications for research in terms of customer
loyalty. In the marketing literature, customer loyalty is a


528

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

R. M. STOCK AND N. A. ZACHARIAS

fundamental customer-related outcome because retaining
customers is much more cost-efﬁcient than winning new
customers (Reichheld and Sasser, 1990). While previous
literature has investigated various antecedents of loyalty,
such as customer
satisfaction (Lam et al., 2004),
researchers have scarcely considered antecedents related
to innovation (Durisin et al., 2010; Simpson et al., 2006).
By drawing on information economics, this investigation
provides insights into how customers derive their
expected utility from the relationship with a speciﬁc
company as well as how they react
in terms of
loyalty. From a content perspective, this examination
shows that more is not always better in terms of
innovativeness—offering more innovations does not nec-
essarily make customers loyal. Instead,
the decisive
factor is meaningfulness, the qualitative dimension of
product program innovativeness. In this ﬁnding,
this
research conﬁrms prior ﬁndings that
the creation of
loyalty requires the fulﬁllment of customer needs (e.g.,
Johnson et al., 2006).

Fourth, this study enhances understanding of the role
of product innovativeness in B2B relationships—an area
innovation researchers still widely neglect (e.g., LaPlaca
and Katrichis, 2009). Because B2B relationships usually
involve close buyer–seller relationships over a long time
(e.g., Stock, 2006), researchers investigating these rela-
tionships should employ constructs that correspond to
this character. Therefore, to provide insights into B2B
relationships, the results of this study argue for a multi-
dimensional conceptualization of innovativeness at the
program level because it reﬂects the long-term focus and
the complexity of these customer relationships. The
ﬁnding of both a positive and negative effect of innova-
tiveness reﬂect the often complex decision processes of
B2B customers, which frequently depend on professional
purchasing specialists or departments. In line with infor-
mation economics, the model in this study mirrors the
positive and negative signals of a company’s product
program, which B2B customers evaluate when they are
deciding whether to remain as customers or switch
suppliers.

Managerial Implications

This study also demonstrates that while handling product
program innovativeness is a challenge, companies can
manage it appropriately. The results indicate a possible
explanation for B2B customers’ reservations regarding
innovations. Managers responsible for introducing new
products cannot simply offer more and more innovations,
and assume that this volume will lead to ever-increasing

customer loyalty. Instead, managers must realize that
innovativeness evokes both positive and negative cus-
tomer responses. Although companies should certainly
not endeavor to become less innovative, they must be
particularly sensitive to the uncertainty innovativeness
evokes in their customers and conduct activities to reduce
that uncertainty, such as intensifying communication
with customers,
training
customer-contact employees. Further, companies should
make sure that product introductions are not only new but
also meaningful for customers. To ensure meaningfulness
of
their products, companies could conduct market
research or establish collaborations with lead users.

simplifying the offer, or

The results of this study do not imply that managers
should promote innovations less in order to maximize
loyalty. Rather, managers should act to mitigate the nega-
tive effects of PPN. Because this study shows that brand
association with innovativeness serves as a valuable lever,
fostering this association represents an adequate means of
buffering the negative effect of PPN. For example, Apple
has successfully established such an association with its
brand. Customers generally believe they are buying an
innovation when a new Apple product is brought into the
market, even though this belief may be ill-founded—for
example, several design changes in the iPod relate more
to newness than to meaningfulness. Thus, managerial
practice can compensate for
the negative effect of
newness and still focus on delivering innovative products
to keep customers loyal.

Along with reducing the negative effect of newness,
managers should thoroughly analyze customer needs to
push PPM and maximize customer loyalty (e.g., Urban
and Hauser, 2004). The positive effect of PPM should
be enhanced by integrating customers into the value-
creating process. Particularly in B2B relationships, this
integration involves an interaction between exchange
partners (Chan et al., 2010) that provides important
opportunities. Through the
companies
receive valuable information about customer needs and
have an opportunity to better communicate the meaning-
fulness of their innovative products to customers (Vargo
and Lusch, 2004). Hence, fostering PPM helps to over-
come the negative effects of newness and thus to retain
customers through an innovative product program.

interaction,

Limitations and Avenues for Further Research

Despite these contributions, this study has several limita-
tions that suggest directions for further research. First,
this investigation represents an initial step in the study of
the relationship between product program innovativeness


PRODUCT PROGRAM INNOVATIVENESS AND CUSTOMER LOYALTY

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

529

relationships, additional

and customer loyalty, with an emphasis on B2B relation-
ships. Because the long-term focus of B2B customer
relationships might differ from that of most business-to-
consumer
research should
examine the consumer side of product program innova-
tiveness. A promising avenue of inquiry would be to
identify differences or similarities in the signaling effects
of product program innovativeness between business cus-
tomers and consumers, an investigation that would be
particularly valuable for innovative companies that serve
both types of customers.

Second, this study does not offer a longitudinal per-
spective, which would increase understanding of the
changes of customer loyalty over time. A longitudinal
approach would allow researchers to investigate how spe-
ciﬁc changes in product program innovativeness lead to
positive customer responses, generating knowledge about
key success factors of dynamic changes in the innovation
strategy of companies.

Third, beyond the selected moderating variables this
study considers, further research should examine other
conditions to understand the relationships between
product
innovativeness and customer responses. For
example, product program characteristics such as com-
plexity or speciﬁcity might be interesting to study in this
context. Another approach could be to draw on informa-
tion economics to elaborate on additional moderators of
the relationship between product innovativeness and cus-
tomer responses.

Conclusion

The primary contribution of this study lies in its introduc-
tion and testing of a two-dimensional conceptualization
of product program innovativeness consisting of newness
and meaningfulness. This research creates several syner-
gies between product
innovativeness and creativity
research, and shows how the accomplishments of adja-
cent ﬁelds can be put together to contribute to innovation
research. The results, which are based on information
economics and a triadic dataset from B2B companies and
their customers, suggest both a positive and a negative
effect of the two different dimensions. The investigated
contingencies underline that both effects can be managed
adequately to increase customer loyalty. Overall,
the
study calls for more integrative research between related
ﬁelds to shed light on the mysteries that still surround
the phenomenon of innovativeness. Hopefully, the two-
dimensional conceptualization of product program inno-
vativeness will be widely useful and encourage marketing
and innovation scholars to undertake additional research.

References

Aaker, D. A. 1996. Measuring brand equity across products and markets.

California Management Review 38 (3): 102–20.

Aiken, L. S., and S. G. West. 1991. Multiple regression: Testing and

interpreting interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Ali, A. 2000. The impact of innovativeness and development time on new
product performance for small ﬁrms. Marketing Letters 11 (2): 151–63.
Amabile, T. M. 1988. A model of creativity and innovation in organizations.

Research in Organizational Behavior 10: 123–67.

Anderson, J. C., and D. W. Gerbing. 1988. Structural equation modeling in
practice: A review and recommended two-step approach. Psychological
Bulletin 103 (3): 411–23.

Andrews, J., and D. C. Smith. 1996. In search of the marketing imagination:
Factors affecting the creativity of marketing programs for mature prod-
ucts. Journal of Marketing Research 33 (2): 174–87.

Armstrong, J. S., and T. S. Overton. 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in

mail surveys. Journal of Marketing Research 14 (3): 396–402.

Athanassopoulos, A., S. Gounaris, and V. Stathakopoulos. 2001. Behav-
ioural responses to customer satisfaction: An empirical study. Euro-
pean Journal of Marketing 35 (5/6): 687–707.

Atuahene-Gima, K. 1996a. Market orientation and innovation. Journal of

Business Research 35 (2): 93–103.

Atuahene-Gima, K. 1996b. The inﬂuence of innovation orientation in
human resource management of new product development: The mod-
erating role of innovation type. Journal of Market-Focused Manage-
ment 1 (1): 87–107.

Atuahene-Gima, K., S. F. Slater, and E. M. Olson. 2005. The contingent
value of responsive and proactive market orientations for new product
program performance. Journal of Product Innovation Management 22
(6): 464–82.

Bagozzi, R. P., and H. Baumgartner. 1994. The evaluation of structural
equation models and hypothesis testing. In Principles of Marketing
Research, ed. R. P. Bagozzi, 386–422. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.

Bagozzi, R. P., and Y. Yi. 1988. On the evaluation of structural equation
models. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 16 (1): 74–94.
Burke, M. J., L. M. Finkelstein, and M. S. Dusig. 1999. On average
deviation indices for estimating interrater agreement. Organizational
Research Methods 2 (1): 49–68.

Calantone, R. J., K. Chan, and A. S. Cui. 2006. Decomposing product
innovativeness and its effects on new product success. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 23 (5): 408–21.

Chan, K. W., C. K. Yim, and S. S. K. Lam. 2010. Is customer participation
in value creation a double-edged sword? Evidence from professional
ﬁnancial services across cultures. Journal of Marketing 74 (3): 48–64.
Cohen, J., P. Cohen, S. G. West, and L. S. Aiken. 2003. Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Cooper, R. G. 1979. The dimensions of industrial new product success and

failure. Journal of Marketing 43 (3): 93–103.

Cooper, R. G., and U. de Brentani. 1991. New industrial ﬁnancial services:
What distinguishes the winners. Journal of Product Innovation Man-
agement 8 (2): 75–90.

Cooper, R. G., S. J. Edgett, and E. J. Kleinschmidt. 1999. New product
portfolio management: Practices and performance. Journal of Product
Innovation Management 16 (4): 333–50.

Cooper, R. G., and E. J. Kleinschmidt. 1995. Benchmarking the ﬁrm’s
critical success factors in new product development. Journal of Product
Innovation Management 12 (5): 374–91.

Danneels, E., and E. J. Kleinschmidt. 2001. Product innovativeness from
the ﬁrm’s perspective: Its dimensions and their relation with project
selection and performance. Journal of Product Innovation Manage-
ment 18 (6): 357–72.


530

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

R. M. STOCK AND N. A. ZACHARIAS

Daugherty, P. J., T. P. Stank, and A. E. Ellinger. 1998. Leveraging logistics/
distribution capabilities: The effect of logistics service on market share.
Journal of Business Logistics 19 (2): 35–51.

Drazin, R., M. A. Glynn, and R. K. Kazanjian. 1999. Multilevel theorizing
about creativity in organizations: A sensemaking perspective. Academy
of Management Review 24 (2): 286–307.

Durisin, B., G. Calabretta, and V. Parmeggiani. 2010. The intellectual
structure of product innovation research: A bibliometric study of the
Journal of Product Innovation Management, 1984–2004. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 27 (3): 437–51.

Echambadi, R., and J. D. Hess. 2007. Mean-centering does not alleviate
collinearity problems in moderated multiple regression models. Mar-
keting Science 26 (3): 438–45.

Echambadi, R., W. R. Inigo Arroniz, and J. Lee. 2006. Empirical generali-
zations from brand extension research: How sure are we? International
Journal of Research in Marketing 23 (3): 253–61.

Erdem, T., J. Swait, and A. Valenzuela. 2006. Brands as signals: A cross-

country validation study. Journal of Marketing 70 (1): 34–49.

Fang, E. 2008. Customer participation and the trade-off between new
product innovativeness and speed to market. Journal of Marketing 72
(4): 90–104.

Ford, C. M. 1996. A theory of individual creative action in multiple social

domains. Academy of Management Review 21 (4): 1112–42.

Ford, C. M., and D. A. Gioia. 2000. Factors inﬂuencing creativity in the
domain of managerial decision making. Journal of Management 26 (4):
705–32.

Fornell, C., and D. F. Larcker. 1981. Evaluating structural equation models
with unobservable variables and measurement error. Journal of Mar-
keting Research 18 (1): 39–50.

Garcia, R., and R. Calantone. 2002. A critical look at technological inno-
vation typology and innovativeness terminology: A literature review.
Journal of Product Innovation Management 19 (2): 110–32.

Gatignon, H., M. L. Tushman, W. Smith, and P. Anderson. 2002. A struc-
tural approach to assessing innovation: Construct development of inno-
vation locus, type, and characteristics. Management Science 48 (9):
1103–22.

Gatignon, H., and J.-M. Xuereb. 1997. Strategic orientation of the ﬁrm and
new product performance. Journal of Marketing Research 34 (1):
77–90.

Hauser, J., G. J. Tellis, and A. Grifﬁn. 2006. Research on innovation: A
review and agenda for marketing science. Marketing Science 25 (6):
687–717.

Heide, J. B. 2003. Plural governance in industrial purchasing. Journal of

Marketing 67 (4): 18–29.

Heide, J. B., and K. H. Wathne. 2006. Friends, businesspeople, and rela-
tionship roles: A conceptual framework and a research agenda. Journal
of Marketing 70 (3): 90–103.

Heil, O., and T. S. Robertson. 1991. Toward a theory of competitive market
signaling: A research agenda. Strategic Management Journal 12 (6):
403–18.

Henard, D. H., and P. A. Dacin. 2010. Reputation for product innovation: Its
impact on consumers. Journal of Product Innovation Management 27
(3): 321–35.

Henard, D. H., and D. M. Szymanski. 2001. Why some new products are
more successful than others. Journal of Marketing Research 38 (3):
362–75.

Hoefﬂer, S. 2003. Measuring preferences for really new products. Journal

of Marketing Research 40 (4): 406–20.

Homburg, C., and R. M. Stock. 2004. The link between salespeoples job
satisfaction and customer satisfaction in a business-to-business context:
A dyadic analysis. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 32 (2):
144–58.

Homburg, C., J. P. Workman, and H. Krohmer. 1999. Marketing’s inﬂuence

within the ﬁrm. Journal of Marketing 63 (2): 1–17.

Hsieh, M.-H., K.-H. Tsai, and J.-R. Wang. 2008. The moderating effects of
market orientation and launch proﬁciency on the product advantage-
performance relationship. Industrial Marketing Management 37 (5):
580–92.

Im, S., and J. P. Workman. 2004. Market orientation, creativity, and new
product performance in high-technology ﬁrms. Journal of Marketing
68 (2): 114–32.

James, L. R., R. G. Demaree, and G. Wolf. 1984. Estimating within-group
interrater reliability with and without response bias. Journal of Applied
Psychology 69 (1): 85–98.

Jaworski, B. J., and A. K. Kohli. 1993. Market orientation: Antecedents and

consequences. Journal of Marketing 57 (3): 53–70.

Jedidi, K., and Z. J. Zhang. 2002. Augmenting conjoint analysis to estimate

consumer reservation price. Management Science 48 (10): 1350–68.

Johnson, M. D., A. Herrmann, and F. Huber. 2006. The evolution of loyalty

intentions. Journal of Marketing 70 (2): 122–32.

Keller, K. L. 1993. Conceptualizing, measuring, managing customer-based

brand equity. Journal of Marketing 57 (1): 1–22.

Kirmani, A., and A. R. Rao. 2000. No pain, no gain: A critical review of the
literature on signaling unobservable product quality. Journal of Mar-
keting 64 (2): 66–79.

Klink, R. R., and G. A. Athaide. 2010. Consumer innovativeness and the
use of new versus extended brand names for new products. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 27 (1): 23–32.

Kumar, N., L. W. Stern, and J. C. Anderson. 1993. Conducting interorga-
nizational research using key informants. Academy of Management
Journal 36 (6): 1633–51.

Lam, S. Y., V. Shankar, M. K. Erramilli, and B. Murthy. 2004. Customer
value, satisfaction, loyalty, and switching costs: An illustration from a
business-to-business service context. Journal of the Academy of Mar-
keting Science 32 (3): 293–311.

Langerak, F., and E. J. Hultink. 2006. The impact of product innovativeness
on the link between development speed and new product proﬁtability.
Journal of Product Innovation Management 23 (3): 203–14.

Langerak, F., E. J. Hultink, and H. S. J. Robben. 2004. The impact of
market orientation, product advantage, and launch proﬁciency on new
product performance and organizational performance. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 21 (2): 79–94.

LaPlaca, P. J., and J. M. Katrichis. 2009. Relative presence of business-to-
business research in the marketing literature. Journal of Business-to-
Business Marketing 16 (1/2): 1–22.

Lauga, D. O., and E. Ofek. 2009. Market research and innovation strategy

in a duopoly. Marketing Science 28 (2): 373–96.

Li, T., and R. J. Calantone. 1998. The impact of market knowledge com-
petence on new product advantage: Conceptualization and empirical
examination. Journal of Marketing 62 (4): 13–29.

Link, P. L. 1987. Keys to new product success and failure. Industrial

Marketing Management 16 (2): 109–18.

Luo, X., and C. B. Bhattacharya. 2006. Corporate social responsibility,
customer satisfaction, and market value. Journal of Marketing 70 (4):
1–18.

Homburg, C., and A. Giering. 2001. Personal characteristics as moderators
of the relationship between customer satisfaction and loyalty—an
empirical analysis. Psychology & Marketing 18 (1): 43–66.

Magnusson, P. R., J. Matthing, and P. Kristensson. 2003. Managing user
involvement in service innovation. Journal of Service Research 6 (2):
111–24.

Homburg, C., and C. Pﬂesser. 2000. A multiple-layer model of market-
oriented organizational culture: Measurement issues and performance
outcomes. Journal of Marketing Research 37 (4): 449–62.

Mason, C. H., and W. D. Perreault. 1991. Collinearity, power, and interpre-
tation of multiple regression analysis. Journal of Marketing Research
28 (3): 268–80.


PRODUCT PROGRAM INNOVATIVENESS AND CUSTOMER LOYALTY

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

531

McDade, S., T. A. Oliva, and E. Thomas. 2010. Forecasting organizational
adoption of high-technology product innovations separated by impact:
Are traditional macro-level diffusion models appropriate? Industrial
Marketing Management 39 (2): 298–307.

Menguc, B., and S. Auh. 2006. Creating a ﬁrm-level dynamic capability
through capitalizing on market orientation and innovativeness. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science 34 (1): 63–73.

Meyer, M. H., and E. B. Roberts. 1986. New product strategy in small
technology-based ﬁrms: A pilot study. Management Science 32 (7):
806–21.

Mishra, S., D. Kim, and D. H. Lee. 1996. Factors affecting new product
success: Cross-country comparisons. Journal of Product Innovation
Management 13 (6): 530–50.

Morris, L., D. Abrams, G. R. de Moura, and P. Durlach. 2003. Delaying the
inevitable? The effects of “time to think” on responses to innovative
concepts. European Journal of Marketing 37 (10): 1440–56.

Nunnally, J. C. 1978. Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Olson, E. M., Jr., O. C. Walker, and R. W. Ruekert. 1995. Organizing for
effective new product development: The moderating role of product
innovativeness. Journal of Marketing 59 (1): 48–62.

Phlips, L. 1988. The economics of imperfect information. Cambridge, UK:

University Press.

Podsakoff, P. M., S. B. MacKenzie, L. Jeong-Yeon, and N. P. Podsakoff.
2003. Common method biases in behavioral research: A critical review
of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 88 (5): 879–903.

Reichheld, F. F., and W. E. Sasser. 1990. Zero defections: Quality comes to

services. Harvard Business Review 68 (5): 105–11.

Schmidt, J. B., and R. J. Calantone. 1998. Are really new product develop-
ment projects harder to shut down? Journal of Product Innovation
Management 15 (2): 111–23.

Sethi, R., and A. Sethi. 2009. Can quality-oriented ﬁrms develop innovative
new products? Journal of Product Innovation Management 26 (2):
206–21.

Sethi, R., D. C. Smith, and C. W. Park. 2001. Cross-functional product
development teams, creativity, and the innovativeness of new consumer
products. Journal of Marketing Research 38 (1): 73–85.

Siguaw, J. A., P. M. Simpson, and C. A. Enz. 2006. Conceptualizing
innovation orientation: A framework for study and integration of inno-
vation research. Journal of Product Innovation Management 23 (6):
556–74.

Simpson, P. M., J. A. Siguaw, and C. A. Enz. 2006. Innovation orientation
outcomes: The good and the bad. Journal of Business Research 59
(10/11): 1133–41.

Spence, M. 1973. Job market signaling. Quarterly Journal of Economics 87

(3): 355–74.

Stigler, G. J. 1961. The economics of information. Journal of Political

Economy 69 (3): 213–25.

Stock, R. M. 2006. Interorganizational

teams as boundary spanners
between supplier and customer companies. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 34 (4): 588–99.

Stock, R. M. 2011. How does product program innovativeness affect cus-
tomer satisfaction? A comparison of goods and services. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science 39 (6): 813–27.

Stock, R. M., and N. A. Zacharias. 2011. Patterns and performance out-
comes of innovation orientation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science 39 (6): 870–88.

Subramanian, A., and S. Nilakanta. 1996. Organizational innovativeness:
Exploring the relationship between organizational determinants of
innovation, types of innovations, and measures of organizational per-
formance. Omega 24 (6): 631–47.

Sullivan, D. M., and C. M. Ford. 2010. The alignment of measures and
constructs in organizational research: The case of testing measurement
models of creativity. Journal of Business and Psychology 25 (3): 505–
21.

Szymanski, D. M., M. W. Kroff, and L. C. Troy. 2007. Innovativeness and
new product success: Insights from the cumulative evidence. Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science 35 (1): 35–52.

Tatikonda, M. V., and M. M. Montoya-Weiss. 2001. Integrating operations
and marketing perspectives of product innovation: The inﬂuence of
organizational process factors and capabilities on development perfor-
mance. Management Science 47 (1): 151–72.

Urban, G. L., and J. R. Hauser. 2004. “Listening in” to ﬁnd and explore new
combinations of customer needs. Journal of Marketing 68 (2): 72–87.
Van Bruggen, G. H., G. L. Lilien, and M. Kacker. 2002. Informants in
organizational marketing research: Why use multiple informants and
how to aggregate responses. Journal of Marketing Research 39 (4):
469–78.

Vargo, S. L., and R. F. Lusch. 2004. The four service marketing myths:
Remnants of a goods-based, manufacturing model. Journal of Service
Research 6 (4): 324–35.

von Hippel, E. 1986. Lead users: A source of novel product concepts.

Management Science 32 (7): 791–805.

Voss, G. B., and Z. G. Voss. 2000. Strategic orientation and ﬁrm perfor-
mance in an artistic environment. Journal of Marketing 64 (1): 67–83.
Woodman, R. W., J. E. Sawyer, and R. W. Grifﬁn. 1993. Toward a theory of
organizational creativity. Academy of Management Review 18 (2): 293–
321.

Sivadas, E., and F. R. Dwyer. 2000. An examination of organizational
factors inﬂuencing new product success in internal and alliance-based
processes. Journal of Marketing 64 (1): 31–49.

Zhou, K. Z., C. K. Yim, and D. K. Tse. 2005. The effects of strategic
orientations on technology- and market-based breakthrough innova-
tions. Journal of Marketing 69 (2): 42–60.


532

J PROD INNOV MANAG
2013;30(3):516–532

R. M. STOCK AND N. A. ZACHARIAS

Appendix A: Scale Items for Construct Measures

Construct and Source

Items

Customer loyalty (respondents:

customers) (adapted from Homburg
and Giering, 2001)

Product program newness (respondents:

marketing managers) (adapted from
Cooper, 1979; Olson, Walker, and
Ruekert, 1995)

We intend to maintain a long-term relationship with this seller.
It is very likely that we will purchase products/services from this seller again.
We intend to stay loyal to this seller.
The products/services of our company . . .
. . . are novel.
. . . are inventive.
. . . differ signiﬁcantly in terms of their newness from existing products/services of

Product program meaningfulness

(respondents: marketing managers)
(adapted from Cooper and de Brentani,
1991; Mishra, Kim, and Lee, 1996)

Brand association with innovativeness

(respondents: customers)
(self-developed scale)

competitors.

. . . are exceptional.
. . . are not predictable.
The newly developed products/services of our company . . .
. . . offer unique advantages to our customers.
. . . offer higher quality than the products/services of our competitors.
. . . offer higher value than the products/services of our competitors.
. . . solve the problems of our customers.
. . . lead to signiﬁcant cost savings for our customers.
. . . are supportive of our customers’ efforts to simplify their processes.
. . . deliver high beneﬁts for our customers.
The seller’s brand is central to our buying decision.

We associate an image of innovativeness with the seller’s brand.

Customer integration (respondents:

Our products/services require the integration of the customer into the

marketing managers) (according to
Homburg and Stock, 2004)

value-creating process.

Our products/services are strongly inﬂuenced by customers during their

Firm size (respondents: marketing

managers)

Competitive intensity (respondents:

marketing managers) (according to
Jaworski and Kohli, 1993)

Market-related dynamism (respondents:

marketing managers) (adapted from
Homburg, Workman, and Krohmer,
1999)

Technological turbulence (respondents:

R&D managers) (according to
Jaworski and Kohli, 1993)

production.

Our products/services require regular discussions with customers during the

production process.

Our customers are involved in the value-creating process right from the start.
How large is the sales volume of your company?

In our market, competition is cutthroat.
In our market, price competition is very intense.
In our market, competitors are extremely active.
In our market, major customers are ﬁercely contested.
In our market, major changes occur frequently in the area of . . .
. . . products offered by our competitors.
. . . market development strategies of our competitors.
. . . customer preferences in product features.
. . . customer preferences in product quality/price relationship.
. . . new competitors.
The technology in our industry is changing rapidly.
Technological changes provide big opportunities in our industry.
It is very difﬁcult to forecast where the technology in our industry will be in the

next 2 to 3 years.

A large number of new product ideas have been made possible through

technological breakthroughs in our industry.

Technological developments in our industry are rather minor. (reversed item)

a/CR/AVE/rwg

.89/.89/.74/.91

.91/.91/.67/-

.90/.91/.58/-

.80/-/-/-

.91/.91/.72/-

-/-/-/-

.79/.80/.51/-

.83/.84/.52/-

.81/.83/.50/-

Notes: Items measured with seven-point rating scales with the anchors 1 = “strongly disagree” and 7 = “strongly agree.”
a, Cronbach’s alpha; CR, composite reliability; AVE, average variance extracted; rwg, within-group interrater reliability (median), only for customer data;
R&D, research and development.


This document is a scanned copy of a printed document.  No warranty is given about the accuracy of the copy.
Users should refer to the original published version of the material.

