 
 
 

ENVIRONMENTAL DISCLOSURE BY AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES: 

WHAT IS HAPPENING OUTSIDE THE ANNUAL REPORT? 

 

CAROL ANN TILT 

 
 

Senior Lecturer in Accounting 

School of Commerce 
Flinders University 

Email: Carol.Tilt@flinders.edu.au 

Phone: (08) 8201 3892 

 
 

SCHOOL OF COMMERCE 

RESEARCH PAPER SERIES: 02-5 

ISSN: 1441-3906 

 
 
 
 

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Asia Pacific Interdisciplinary Research 
in Accounting (APIRA) Conference, Adelaide South Australia, 2001 and the author thanks Dr 
Nola  Buhr  for  her  helpful  comments  at  that  event.    The  author  also  wishes  to  thank  Mr 
Matthew Tilling for his valuable comments on earlier drafts. 

 
 


ENVIRONMENTAL DISCLOSURE BY AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES: 

WHAT IS HAPPENING OUTSIDE THE ANNUAL REPORT? 

 

ABSTRACT 

The  annual  report  has  developed  as  one  of  the  most  common  places  to  find 
environmental reporting, however, as is pointed out by many authors, there is no 
evidence that the annual report is used because it is the most appropriate medium 
or  finds  the  relevant  audiences  for  this  type  of  material.    This  study  therefore 
investigates  a  variety  of  other  reporting  media  produced  by  Australian 
companies.  A  major  implication  of  the  findings  is  that  except  for  the  use  of 
separate environmental reports or the company web site, little use is made of any 
other  form  of  reporting  media  outside  the  annual  report.    The  findings  also 
suggest, however, that as the use of separate environmental reports increases, the 
predominance  of  disclosure  in  the  annual  report  for  environmental  disclosure 
may  diminish  (although  social  disclosures  may  remain  in  the  annual  report), 
indicating  a  need  for  change  in  the  direction  of  environmental  disclosure 
research. 

INTRODUCTION 

 
 

The concept of where organisations do or should report, is an interesting one.  While there is 

little debate about the appropriate place for financial information for use by owners, investors, 

and others, the reporting of social and environmental issues is more controversial.  Over the 

past twenty or so years interest in the relationship between business and the environment has 

grown  dramatically,  mirroring  the  increasing  importance  of  the  environment  to  broader 

society.  In researching the role of accounting and the environment, attention turns naturally 

companies’ annual report.  

 

The annual report has developed as one of the most common places to find environmental 

reporting evidenced by the early trend of increased information of this nature found in annual 

reports (Trotman & Bradldey, 1981; Gray et al, 1995a).  However, this is most likely because 

it was initially seen as an extension of financial reporting, or as a ‘public relations’ exercise. 

There is no evidence that the annual report is used because it is the most appropriate medium 

or finds the relevant audiences for this type of material.  In fact, a few recent studies suggest 

 

1


the  opposite  (see  O  ‘Dwyer,  2000).    Moreover,  the  plethora  of  research  conducted  on  the 

annual  report  as  a  medium  for  environmental  disclosures  may  have  itself  promoted  the 

perception  that  this  is  where  most  reporting  occurs  and/or  is  appropriate.    Interestingly, 

however, much research still refers to the annual report as being the “preferred” method of 

disclosing social and environmental information (for example Neu et al, 1998, p. 269) with 

little substantiation. 

 

Neu et al (1998, p. 269, emphasis added) talk about the “…relevant publics for environmental 

disclosures 

in 

the  annual  report”  as  being  financial  stakeholders,  regulators  and 

environmentalists.  However, there are other stakeholders of organisations who might have 

reason to examine environmental disclosures, such as the local community, customers and the 

general public.  These ‘relevant publics’ might look elsewhere for information, as the annual 

report  is  not  readily  available  to  them.    Most  likely  they  will  turn  to  advertisements  or 

brochures disseminated more widely than the annual report.  In addition, Neu et al’s (1998) 

relevant publics might also choose to consult specific environmental booklets/brochures for 

information  on  a  company’s  environmental  record,  particularly  now  that  many  companies 

produce a separate environmental report.  There is some evidence of this occurring (Deegan & 

Blomquist, 2000).  Moreover, those who require quick access to environmental information 

about a company may first turn to the Internet.  Most companies now develop their own web 

site and a number have been shown to include environmental information on their sites. 

 

While  the  majority  of  investigation  into environmental reporting centres around the annual 

report to shareholders, many authors are quick to point out that this is not the only medium 

that could be used and offer this as a limitation of their research.  Most of these studies cite 

Zéghal & Ahmed (1990) as the one prior study that investigated other possible media.  Since 

 

2


the Zéghal & Ahmed (1990) study, there has been little investigation conducted outside the 

annual  report.    It  is  the  constant  reference  to  other  possible  avenues  for  disclosure  found 

within the annual report studies, that provides the justification for the current study. 

 

In order to determine to what extent organisations are reporting outside the annual report, this 

study investigates a variety of other reporting media produced by Australian companies.  The 

results are considered in light of both the size and industry group of the companies, to make 

comparisons  to  the  findings  of  other  studies  on  annual  report  disclosures.    Most  previous 

studies  have  found  that  these  two  variables  have  a  significant  influence  on  the  level  of 

disclosure in annual reports (Cowen et al.,1987; Polonsky et al.,1992; Gray, 1994). 

 

PRIOR STUDIES 

Most  previous  studies  of  social  and  environmental  reporting  have  concentrated  on  the 

disclosure  of  social  information  in  the  annual  reports  of  large  corporations  (eg.  Teoh  & 

Thong, 1984; Freedman & Jaggi, 1986; Cowen et al., 1987; Guthrie & Parker, 1990; Harte & 

Owen, 1992; Roberts, 1992; Tilt, forthcoming).  The annual report is not, however, the only 

medium for the disclosure of social information as discussed above (Zéghal & Ahmed, 1990). 

 

The question that arises if one accepts that the annual report is not the only or even the major 

medium for communicating social and environmental information, is what other media should 

be examined?  Zéghal and Ahmed (1990) suggest that many other forms of reporting exist, 

such as environmental reports, advertising, employee reports, in-house magazines and press 

releases, and in their study analysed two of these – advertisements and company brochures – 

used by banks and petroleum companies.  They also compared the level of utilisation of these 

two media with the annual report. Zéghal and Ahmed (1990) concluded that advertisements 

 

3


“are  not  a  major  means  of  disclosing  social  information…”  (p.  46),  while  brochures  did 

“appear to be a widely used means of disclosing…” (p. 47).  In particular, they found that the 

environment was the most important disclosure category in brochures produced by petroleum 

companies. 

 

Zéghal  and  Ahmed’s  (1990)  study  was  conducted  on  1982/1983  data  and  to  date,  little 

additional  research  has  been  conducted  on  other  social  disclosure  media.    This  study  goes 

some  way  towards  addressing  this  dearth  of  research  by  re-examining  advertisements  and 

brochures (as well as some other media) and by comparing disclosures over time.  However 

the study is limited to consideration of only environmental disclosures. 

 

METHOD 

The  attempt  at  analysis  of  all  the  possible  media  used  for  disclosure  presents  a  practical 

problem  of  enormous  proportions  -  how  to  determine  whether  all  forms  of  communication 

have been identified (Gray et al., 1995b).  While most studies have overcome the problem by 

ignoring  all  but  the  annual  report,  this  study  attempts  to  go  some  way  in  addressing  the 

problem  by  limiting  the  analysis  to  all  company  initiated  communications  other  than  the 

annual report.  This overcomes the difficulty of identifying publicity that is initiated by parties 

outside the organisation, such as journalists and lobby groups. 

 

The  analysis  in  this  study  was  undertaken  in  two  phases.    First,  all  company-initiated 

disclosures  made  by  the  sample  companies  in  1994  were  analysed.    The  results  of  this 

analysis indicated that little use was made of a number of media types other than separate 

environmental  reports  (see  below).    Thus,  the  second  phase  of  the  analysis  (for  1999 

 

4


companies) was limited only to separate environmental reports to see whether their use had 

changed significantly. 

 

The first phase of the analysis was conducted on a sample of companies that were listed on 

the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX) in 1994, that were in the top 500 Australian companies 

by market capitalisation, and which stated that they have a formal, documented CEP in place.  

The  existence  of  a  CEP  was  determined  via  a  survey  (Tilt,  1997),  and  75  of  the  167 

companies that returned the questionnaire stated that they had one.  These respondents were 

then  contacted  and  asked  to  provide  any  items  that  they  use  to  disclose  environmental 

information other than their annual report (such as press releases, advertisements, employee 

magazines  or  newsletters,  separate  environmental  reports  or  other  internal  documents).    In 

total, 39 of the 75 responded to the request for other items of disclosure (52%). 

 

The second phase of the analysis took place on 1999 data.  As mentioned above, analysis of 

the 1994 data indicated the most common place for disclosure of environmental information 

outside  the  annual  report  was  clearly  a  separate  environmental  report  (see  results  section 

below).  Therefore, the eight companies that issued a separate company-wide environmental 

report in 1994 were contacted to determine whether they produced one for 1999 (or 1998/99 

depending  on  their  year  end)  either  in  hard  copy  or  electronically,  and  if  so,  a  copy  was 

obtained for comparison.  Six of the eight companies were still producing a report in 1999.  

Another  survey  was  also  conducted  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  companies  generally 

were utilising separate environmental reports in 1999.  From this survey, a further six reports 

from companies that have recently started reporting were obtained for analysis. 

 

 

5


The disclosure items were analysed using a content analysis instrument developed in previous 

research.    The  instrument  was  pilot  tested  and  reliability  coefficients  determined  between 

three coders (see Tilt, forthcoming, for details).  The categories used in the instrument were 

developed from prior literature and involved separating the single category ‘environment’ into 

a  series  of  sub-categories  that  have  been  determined  to  be  the  major  elements  of 

environmental disclosures by prior researchers (Cairncross, 1991; Shimell, 1991; Müller & 

Koechlin, 1992; Polonsky et al., 1992; Bansal, 1993; Gray et al., 1996; Tilt, 1997).  These are 

presented in Table 1. 

Table 1 here 

Due to the variety of disclosure media being analysed, two measures of analysis were chosen.  

For  press  items  and  other  miscellaneous  items,  sentences  were  determined  to  be  the  most 

appropriate unit of analysis as its use overcomes the problems associated with word or page 

counts arising due to differences in font, page size, inclusion of graphics and writing style 

(Milne  &  Adler,  1998;  Tilt,  forthcoming).    Sentences  were  considered  appropriate,  as  the 

disclosures were generally small amounts of text.  Each sentence in the items analysed was 

read and classified as either an environment-related, or a non-environment-related sentence.  

Those related to the environment were then classified into one of the sub-categories shown in 

Table 1. 

 

For the separate environmental reports, and other magazines and booklets, pages were used as 

the main measure of disclosure as these disclosure items were much larger in nature. As all 

sentences in environmental reports relate to the environment, and all (hard copy) reports were 

produced  as  A4  booklets  with  similar  font  size  this  treatment  was  considered  appropriate.  

Sentence  counts  in  booklets  dedicated  entirely  to  the  environment  provide  no  additional 

information  to  that  gained  if  pages  are  used  as  the  proportions  will  be  the  same.    These 

 

6


booklets were analysed for the proportion of each report dedicated to various aspects of the 

environment  such  as  targets,  performance,  policy,  etc.    Details  are  provided  in  the  results 

section. 

 

RESULTS 

The 1994 disclosure media used most by the organisations surveyed (other than the annual 

report)  included  inter  alia  press  releases  or  advertisements,  separate  environmental  reports 

(including  site  reports),  glossy  booklets/brochures  and  internal  magazines.    Specifically,  of 

the 30 organisations that sent other disclosure items, these included: nine organisations’ press 

releases,  media  articles  or  advertisements;  eight  general  company  environmental  reports  or 

brochures; seven site specific reports or brochures; five employee or shareholder newsletters 

or  magazines;  and  four  glossy  corporate  booklets  (total  is  greater  than  30  as  some 

organisations  sent  more  than  one  type  of  item).    Nine  organisations  also  sent  a  letter 

explaining that they do not disclose environmental information anywhere other than in their 

annual report. 

 

Of the eight companies that produced an environmental report in 1994, six produced one in 

1998/99.  Two of these were obtained in hard copy, two were available as downloadable pdf 

files  from  their  web  site  and  two  were  only  available  on-screen  via  the  web  site.    An 

additional six reports were obtained from companies that began reporting separately in 1998 

or 1999 (all hard copies).  Although eight of the 12 companies did provide their report in hard 

copy, seven were accessed via their web site (the exact same reports were available either on-

screen  or  as  a  downloadable  pdf  file).    The  other  company  did  have  environmental 

information on their web site but it was only in very summarised format with no data.  Details 

can be found in the Appendix. 

 

7


 

One  difficulty  in  analysing  these  items  is  the  varying  amounts  of  each  collected.    In  the 

discussion of the analysis that follows, the differences in items analysed are clearly indicated.  

Additionally, the analysis is limited to descriptive statistics and narrative discussion with few 

statistics  used  due  to  problems  with  comparability.    Although  a  limitation,  this  is  an 

applicable treatment as it is the first analysis of its kind to be undertaken.  The exploratory 

nature of the analysis leads to many further research questions, which are discussed later. 

 

Analysis – 1994 Data 

When considered in total, the other disclosure items analysed generally contain around 50% 

non-environment  related  disclosures  and  are  declarative/narrative  in  nature.    There  did  not 

appear  to  be  any  significant  differences  between  industries  as  to  the  amount  of  disclosure 

dedicated  to  each  characteristic,  indicating  that  industry  does  not  affect  what  is  disclosed 

other than in the annual report (determined using Kruskal Wallis Tests).  This contrasts with 

prior results found for annual reports using the same instrument, where industry was shown to 

be  a  major  factor  in  determining  disclosure  levels  (Tilt,  2001)  –  it  appears  that  while 

companies in the mining and petroleum industry disclose more than other companies in their 

annual reports, they are no more likely to disclose via other media. 

 

When the size groups were considered for each characteristic only one difference appeared – 

for the ‘general policies’ variable – with larger companies including fewer disclosures about 

their general environmental policies in their environment report than smaller ones.  Again, as 

found  by  Tilt  (2001),  this  suggests  that  larger  companies  utilise  the  annual  report  for 

disclosure rather than other avenues. 

 

 

8


The  individual  characteristics  (sub-categories  of  environment)  were  then  considered  by 

disclosure  item  type  (press  item  versus  separate  report  versus  magazine  etc.)  to  determine 

whether  any  pattern  emerged  regarding  where  particular  categories  of  disclosure  might 

appear.  Again, most characteristics showed no significant difference between the different 

items used for disclosure.  This indicates that in general the type of disclosure media used 

does not affect what is disclosed, however, tests did indicate that the disclosure item type does 

affect how much is disclosed.  The Kruskal Wallis Test for total disclosures showed that the 

items did not all come from the same population (p-value 0.001).  Not surprisingly, general 

environmental reports are larger in size and therefore contain more disclosures.  Corporate 

booklets and internal magazines contained the fewest number of disclosures.  The individual 

disclosure items are now considered. 

 

Press Items (unit of analysis – sentence) 

A variety of press releases, articles and advertisements were received from respondents.  The 

content analysis on these items showed that press items mostly contained disclosure that was 

declarative in nature (a mean of eight sentences per press item).  Very few sentences contain 

monetary  or  other  quantitative  material.    Interestingly,  most  items  contained  a  majority  of 

non-environmental disclosures with a mean number per press item of 43 sentences (the mean 

number of total sentences per press item was 52).  The reason of such a large amount of non-

environmental related sentences was usually because a number of paragraphs were devoted to 

introducing the organisation including its size, operations and other details.  Alternatively it 

was because the press item was a large press release covering many issues (often including 

financial results) of which the environment was only one.  

 

 

9


The majority of press releases were about the environmental activities of the companies, such 

as pollution levels (mean three sentences); activities that affect land, water and forests (mean 

four  sentences);  and  waste  and  recycling  (mean  three  sentences).    It  would  appear  that 

companies  generally  only  release  environmental  information  to  the  press  when  a  specific 

incident has occurred, a new product has been released, or a new technology or process has 

been introduced.  For example, mining companies will make a statement to the media when 

they  are  rehabilitating  a  mine  site,  or  an  industrial  company  will  release  details  of  its  new 

recycling plant.  

 

Internal Magazines, Newsletters and Corporate Booklets (unit of analysis – sentence) 

Internally  distributed  magazines  or  newsletters  for  employees  were  received  from  five 

organisations.  The magazines varied from four to 23 A4 pages, with the majority being eight 

to 10 pages.  The average number of total sentences found was 26.5, with 22 being declarative 

in  nature.    Almost  all  of  the  disclosures  concerned  pollution  levels,  with  a  few  on  other 

activities such as waste and land issues.  As these magazines are produced for employees it is 

surprising  that  very  few  contain  disclosures  regarding  policies.    Rather,  they  appear  to  be 

designed to inform employees about the company’s activities. 

 

The  following  summarises  the  five  magazines  analysed  with  a  brief  description  of  the 

disclosures in each: 

•  Newspaper style magazine from a large mining company: 

One  sentence  regarding  ‘green’  groups  in  an  article  about  marine 
research and an article about non-invasive techniques for monitoring and 
assessing large areas of vegetation. 

•  A 16 page magazine from a medium industrial company: 

 

10


One  sentence  about  the  company’s  beautification  program  and  a  small 
article about a land care program. 

•  A 24 page magazine from a medium mining company: 

Contained three articles of one to two pages each.  One on greenhouse 
emission  levels  including  targets  for  reduction  of  emissions;  one  on  a 
processing  site  clean-up;  and  one  on  the  rehabilitation  of  the  land  at  a 
mine site. 

•  An eight page magazine from a smaller mining company: 

Four  sentences  in  the  opening  statement  by  the  managing  director 
regarding environmental commitment and waste disposal.  A short article 
on  tree-planting  and  an  article  on  the  company’s  subscription  to  the 
‘Earthwatch’ environmental Charter. 

•  A four page magazine from a medium industrial company: 

An article on environmental auditing. 

 

It  appears  that  these  internal  magazines  are  employed  to  inform  employees  of  the 

environmental initiatives taken by the firm, perhaps as a way of ensuring employee support. 

 

Items  classified  as  corporate  booklets  included  all  glossy  publications  outlining  the 

organisation’s  profile.    These  are  not  annual  publications,  but  produced  to  provide  general 

information about the organisation and its operations, goals, ownership, etc. As for internal 

magazines,  the  non-environment  related  sentences  were  not  counted  as  the  booklets  were 

approximately 20 to 40 pages (A4) in length.  For each of the four companies, it was noted 

whether the environmental disclosures were found in a special ‘environment’ section or were 

located randomly throughout the document. 

 

 

11


Interestingly, the major issue covered in these corporate booklets was the company’s impact 

on  land,  water  and  forests  –  with  a  mean  number  of  sentences  in  this  category  of  22, 

compared to only one to three in any other category.  Since this may be a coincidence due to 

the  data  being  collected  from  such  a  small  sample,  or  be  due  to  industry  classification, 

conclusions  are  not  drawn  as  to  why  this  issue  dominated.    A  number  of  sentences  were 

classified  in  the  ‘other’  category  and  these  were  usually  general  statements  about  the 

environment.  For example, a smaller industrial company included rhetoric such as: 

The greatest challenge for the world today is to protect the environment while 
allowing industry to remain efficient and contribute to economic growth. 

 

One of the large mining companies dealt with its specific sites and the environmental aspects 

of  these,  while  the  large  chemical  company  in  the  sample  stated  all  of  its  environmental 

objectives. 

 

The average number of environmental sentences found in the corporate booklets was 12.75, 

with a range of one to 32.  Again, most were declarative (mean of 11.5 sentences).  Three of 

the companies had a separate section on the environment (sometimes including other things 

such as ethics or safety) and one had a single line on their environmental responsibility in the 

introduction.  It would appear that companies do not consider these corporate booklets the 

most appropriate place for environmental disclosures. 

 

Environmental Reports (unit of analysis – page) 

Eight companies sent an environmental report that they produce for their organisation as a 

whole  and  seven  companies  had  specific  environmental  reports  for  particular  sites  or 

operations.  The general reports were larger ranging from two to 40 A4 pages.  Approximately 

 

12


30% contained non-environmental disclosures that described the company and its operations 

as occurs in the press releases. 

These  reports  tend  to  be  divided  into  sections  on  various  environmental  issues  such  as 

recycling, rehabilitation and packaging; or they have sections for various sites or processes 

within the company.  They generally begin with an overall statement about the environment 

for example: 

[company  name]  have  had  a  long-standing  commitment  to  protect  the 

environment and conserve natural resources. 

or 

 

[company  name]  is  committed  to  continued  economic  and  industrial  growth 

essential to improve the living standards of all people, pursued in ways that 

are consistent with the long-term guardianship of the Earth’s environment and 

resources. 

Specifically, the variables investigated showed that there was little in the way of target setting 

or performance data.  Only two of the eight reports analysed had any form of performance 

information and both of these simply reported amounts of emissions, waste, recycling levels 

or  trees  planted.    None  were  related  to  previously  set  targets.    One  report  was  dedicated 

entirely to compliance issues, two contained purely ‘policy’ statements, and three provided 

detailed descriptions of their environment-related activities (ie. the extent of their recycling, 

site restoration procedures, procedures undertaken to minimise environmental impact, etc.).  

None of the reports were audited or verified in any way. 

 

 

13


Seven companies had specific environmental reports for particular sites or operations.  These 

were  between  two  and  eight  A4  pages  long.    An  average  of  45%  of  these  reports  did  not 

pertain to the environment.  As with the other items analysed, the majority of environment 

related disclosure was declarative. 

 

As expected, most of these specific reports deal with pollution, land, waste and products as 

they are site or process specific.  The other categories contain only one or two sentences on 

one page.  The disclosures were most often general statements of environmental commitment 

and descriptions of rehabilitation processes, pollution control measures or waste disposal or 

recycling methods.  A typical example follows from a large mining company’s site specific 

brochure on a particular river catchment area: 

The  Group  believe  that  with  community  participation  and  commitment,  in 
conjunction  with  a  close  government/community  working  relationship, 
effective  and  sustainable  management  of  the  …  catchment’s  resources  is 
possible. 

 

These site reports did contain a few monetary disclosures, detailing the expenditure levels of 

various  projects.  The  greatest  amount  of  disclosure  in  environmental  reports  dealt  with 

environmental  policies,  and  environmental  activities  such  as  pollution,  rehabilitation  and 

waste. 

 

Summary – 1994 Data 

While it would appear that in 1994 most companies did indeed use the annual report for the 

purpose  of  disclosing  environmental  information  (Tilt,  2001),  there  was  an  apparent  trend 

towards  the  use  of  separate  environmental  reports  by  minerals  and  chemical  companies.  

These  reports  however,  contained  little  detail  on  environmental  performance.    The  other 

 

14


media  analysed  found  limited  amounts  of  disclosure,  and  that  which  did  appear  was  very 

general in nature. 

 

Analysis – 1999 Data 

As separate environmental reports were the major medium used for environmental disclosure 

outside the annual report, and due to increased emphasis on separate environmental reports in 

the literature, the eight companies that produced one in 1994 were reconsidered in 1999 to 

determine whether such reporting had continued or increased.  A survey was also conducted 

to  determine  the  extent  to  which  Australian  companies  in  the  top  200  in  1999  utilised  a 

separate environmental report. 

 

Other  media  (apart  from  hard  copy  environmental  reports  and  web  based  environmental 

reports) were not considered in 1999 due to difficulties in accessing the data and because little 

evidence of their use for environmental disclosure was found in 1994. 

 

Extent of Utilisation of Environmental Reports 

The top 200 publicly listed companies (according to the BRW top 500 list) were surveyed to 

determine  whether  or  not  they  produce  a  separate  environmental  report.    Although  the 

response rate was relatively low (16.5%), 58% of these (19 companies) stated that they do 

produce a separate annual environmental report, with only 14 companies stating that they do 

not.    The  survey  was  anonymous,  however,  respondents  were  given  the  option  to  identify 

themselves and provide a copy of their environmental report.  Of the 19 respondents, 12 that 

produced  an  environmental  report  identified  themselves.    Of  these,  eight  sent  their 

environmental  report  with  the  survey  and  four  were  obtained  independently.    Two  of  the 

companies that produced a report in 1994 did not produce one in 1999.  This resulted in a 

 

15


final sample of 12 reports for 1999, six of which could be compared to the 1994 reports.  Ten 

of the 12 companies are from the mining industry, with one from the chemical industry.  One 

diversified company has operations that cover both mining and chemical production. 

 

The  evidence  presented  here,  along  with  other  research,  indicates  that  the  use  of 

environmental reports, particularly in the minerals industry, is growing (Deegan & Blomquist, 

2000).    This  may  in  part  be  due  to  the  Minerals  Industry  Code  for  Environmental 

Management developed by the Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) in 1996.  This Code had 

approximately  41  signatories  in  1999  and  includes  a  requirement  for  regular  reporting  on 

environmental performance.  An environmental report must be produced by Code signatories 

within two years of signing (Deegan & Blomquist, 2000). 

 

Analysis of Environmental Reports (unit of analysis – page) 

The  specific  content  of  Australian  companies’  environmental  reports  has  changed  over  the 

last five years.  The inclusion of targets and performance data, and the use of an independent 

verifier/auditor for the reports have become important issues. 

 

The 12 1999 environmental reports analysed ranged from 16 to 48 pages excluding the front 

and back covers.  The average number of pages (approximately 29) did not vary significantly 

between 1994 and 1999.  The only group that stood out, were the two companies that did not 

produce a separate annual report in either hard copy or as a downloadable file.  One of these 

had substantially smaller amounts of information available on-screen as part of their general 

web  site  –  the  equivalent  of  about  seven  pages  with  no  performance  data,  the  other  being 

more comprehensive (17 equivalent pages).   

 

 

16


Four of the reports (two that reported in both years and two that reported only in 1998/99) 

included  their  environmental  reporting  within  a  report  for  other  matters.    Either  a  ‘Health, 

Safety  and  Environment”  report  (two  companies),  or  a  “Social  and  Environmental”  report 

(two companies).  Of these combined reports, approximately two-thirds to three-quarters of 

each  report  was  dedicated  to  the  environment.    The  content  of  the  environmental  sections 

however,  did  not  differ  substantially  from  the  content  of  the  other  environmental  reports 

analysed. 

 

The  most  predominant  sections  of  environmental  reports  were  found  to  be  ‘environmental 

activities’ averaging six and a half pages, and ‘environmental performance data’ averaging six 

pages.  All of the reports included at least a page on their environmental policy, and on their 

environmental  management  system.    Most  included  targets  and  performance  data,  but  only 

three  mention  sustainability,  an  important  finding  for  future  research.    Seven  of  the  12 

companies included a verification statement from an external verifier/auditor (58%).  While in 

1994 30% of the reports contained non-environment related disclosures, in 1999, an average 

of  15%  (five  pages)  of  the  report  was  dedicated  to  non-environmental  issues.    These 

disclosures  included  company  profiles,  financial  results  summary,  feedback  forms,  contact 

details and letters from Directors/Chairpersons/CEOs.  Table 2 summarises the findings. 

Table 2 here 

 

Summary – 1999 Data 

The  trend  towards  the  use  of  separate  environmental  reports  by  minerals  and  chemical 

companies noted in 1994 continued in 1999.  While this study did not examine annual report 

disclosures in 1999, prior studies have shown a ‘levelling off’ in the amount of environmental 

disclosures  found  in  annual  reports  after  reporting  sharp  increases  since  the  early  1980s  .  

 

17


Environmental reports in 1999 also show a clear trend towards more comprehensive reporting 

with the inclusion of performance data and external verification that was not evident in 1994. 

 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

Primarily, information on activities such as rehabilitation, waste and recycling, and pollution 

was  disclosed  in  all  of  the  disclosure  media  analysed  in  1994.    Disclosures  were  found 

predominantly  in  separate  reports  but  also  in  press  releases  and  advertisements.  These 

disclosures were almost entirely narrative or descriptive, with little quantitative data provided. 

 

It  is  only  possible  to  compare  this  study’s  analysis  of  other  disclosure  media  to  one  other 

study, due to the paucity of alternative evidence.  Zéghal and Ahmed (1990), in a study more 

limited in scope than the present study, found similar results.  Their study was conducted on 

all  types  of  social  reporting,  not  just  environment,  for  the  years  1981  and  1982.    It  was 

conducted on Canadian firms and was limited to only two industries – petroleum and banks.  

Specifically,  disclosures  were  found  to  be  narrative  and  concerned  company  operations  or 

activities.    These  findings  were  supported  by  this  study,  albeit  twelve  years  later  and  in  a 

different country. 

 

Other findings from Zéghal and Ahmed (1990) were supported by this study.  They found that 

advertisements were not a major means of disclosure and similarly for corporate brochures.  

This study confirmed that advertisements and company booklets contained no performance 

reporting and were confined to information on sites or activities.  This study also attempted to 

answer one of Zéghal and Ahmed’s (1990) questions – whether non-annual report disclosures 

provide  new  information  or  reinforce  existing  disclosures  in  the  annual  report?  –  by 

comparing  the  results  of  the  1994  data  analysis  to  a  study  of  annual  reports  for  the  same 

 

18


period (Tilt, 2001).  The results showed that no new information from that provided in the 

annual report was disclosed, and that even less detail was provided. 

 

The 1999 analysis showed that environmental reporting by these large, predominantly mining 

and chemical companies has certainly developed over the last five years, with a majority of 

companies  now  producing  separate  environmental  reports.    While  the  areas  of  reporting 

remain similar such as the emphasis on the various activities that affect the environment, most 

importantly the quality of reporting has improved, with companies now providing targets and 

performance data, rather than simply policies and description.  There also appears to be some 

trend towards independent verification of reports. 

 

Limitations 

It is important to note that this study was restricted to large, public companies that operate in 

industries that have know environmental effects, such as mining and chemical production.  It 

is therefore not possible to generalise these findings to other firms or industries.  The sample 

was also relatively small and self selected, and much further research is warranted in order to 

confirm the preliminary results reported here. 

 

Future Research Directions 

Access  to  environmental  information  is  now  more  easily  gained  than  in  the  past,  with  all 

companies providing this information via their web sites.  Such a change in accessibility to 

information by the general public, or any interested party, most likely explains the finding that 

other media, such as advertising and company brochures, seems to be decreasing. 

 

 

19


This leads to a major implication that appears from the findings of this study.  Most authors 

examining annual report disclosures include the caveat that there may be ‘other media’ used 

for  environmental  disclosure  purposes,  and  they  provide  various  justifications  for  not 

examining  these.    However,  this  study  suggests  that  except  for  the  use  of  separate 

environmental reports or the company web site, this is most likely not the case.  In fact, the 

use of the annual report for environment related disclosure may well diminish further as more 

companies produce separate reports and web pages, setting research into yet another direction.  

An  interesting  issue  for  further  study  is  the  effect  that  this  trend  has  had  on  other  ‘social’ 

disclosures in the annual report, such as health and safety, community and customer relations, 

philanthropy and employee issues. 

 

 

20


References 

Bansal P. 1993 “Environmental Management in the UK Food Retailing Sector”, Templeton 

College Management Research Paper, 93/23, Oxford. 

Cairncross F. 1991 Costing the Earth, The Economist Books Ltd., UK. 

Cowen S., L.B. Ferreri and L.D. Parker 1987 “The Impact of Corporate Characteristics on 
Social  Responsibility  Disclosure:  A  Typology  and  Frequency-Based  Analysis”, 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 12(2), pp. 111-122. 

Deegan  C.  &  C.  Blomquist  2000  “Stakeholder  Influence  on  Corporate  Reporting:  An 
Exploration  of  the  Interaction  between  the  World  Wide  Fund  for  Nature  and  the 
Australian  Minerals  Industry”  presented  at  the  University  of  Adelaide  School  of 
Commerce Seminar Series, August. 

Freedman  M.  and  B.  Jaggi  1986  “An  Analysis  of  the  Impact  of  Corporate  Pollution 
Disclosures  Included  in  the  Annual  Financial  Statements  on  Investors’  Decisions”, 
Advances in Public Interest Accounting, 1, pp. 193-212. 

Gray R.H. 1994 “Social and Environmental Accounting, Accountability and Reporting: New 
Wine  in  Old  Skins  or  Silk  Purses  from  Sow’s  Ears?”,  Accounting  Forum,  17(4), 
March. 

Gray R.H., R. Kouhy & S. Lavers 1995a “Corporate Social and Environmental Reporting: A 
Review  of  the  Literature  and  a  Longitudinal  Study  of  UK  Disclosure”,  Accounting, 
Auditing and Accountability Journal, 8(2), pp. 47-77. 

Gray R.H., R. Kouhy and S. Lavers 1995b “Constructing a Research Database of Social and 
Environmental  Reporting  by  UK  Companies:  A  Methodological  Note”,  Accounting, 
Auditing and Accountability Journal, 8(2), pp. 78-101. 

Gray  R.,  D.  Owen  and  C.  Adams  1996  Accounting  and  Accountability:  Changes  and 

Challenges in Corporate Social and Environmental Reporting, Prentice Hall, UK. 

Guthrie  J.  and  L.D.  Parker  1990  “Corporate  Social  Disclosure  Practice:  A  Comparative 

International Analysis”, Advances in Public Interest Accounting, 3, pp. 159-175. 

Harte G. and D. Owen 1992 “Current Trends in the Reporting of Green Issues in the Annual 
Reports  of  United  Kingdom  Companies”,  in  Owen  D.  (ed)  Green  Reporting, 
Accountancy  and  the  Challenge  of  the  Nineties,  Chapter  Eight,  Chapman  and  Hall, 
UK. 

Milne  M.J.  &  R.W.  Adler  1998  “Exploring  the  Reliability  of  Social  and  Environmental 
the  2nd  Asian  Pacific 
Disclosure  Content  Analysis”,  paper  presented  at 
Interdisciplinary Research in Accounting Conference (APIRA), Osaka City University, 
Japan, August. 

Müller K. and D. Koechlin 1992 “Environmentally Conscious Management”, in D. Koechlin  
and K. Müller (eds) 1992 Green Business Opportunities: The Profit Potential, Pitman, 
UK, pp. 33-57. 

 

21


Neu  D.,  Warsame  H.  &  Pedwell  K.  “Managing  Public  Impressions:  Environmental 
Disclosures in Annual Reports”, Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 23, No. 
3, 1998, pp. 265-282. 

O’ Dwyer B. “Corporate Social Reporting in Ireland: Legitimacy Denied?”, paper presented 
at the School of Commerce Seminar Series, Flinders University, Adelaide Australia, 
19 May, 2000. 

Polonsky  M.,  R.  Zeffane  and  P.  Medley  1992  “Corporate  Environmental  Commitment  in 
Australia: A Sectorial Comparison”, Business Strategy and the Environment, 1(2), pp. 
25-39. 

Roberts  C.  1992  “Environmental  Disclosures  in  Corporate  Annual  Reports  in  Western 
Europe”, in Owen D. (ed) 1992 Green Reporting, Accountancy and the Challenge of 
the Nineties, Chapter Seven, Chapman and Hall, UK. 

Shimell  P.  1991  “Corporate  Environmental  Policy  in  Practice”,  International  Journal  of 

Strategic Management, Long Range Planning, 24(3), pp. 10-17. 

Teoh H. & G. Thong 1984 “Another Look at Corporate Social Responsibility and Reporting: 
An  Empirical  Study  in  a  Developing  Country”.  Accounting,  Organizations  and 
Society, 9(2), pp. 189-206. 

Tilt  C.A.  1997  “Environmental  Policies  of  Major  Australian  Companies:  Australian 

Evidence”, British Accounting Review, 29(4), pp. 367-394. 

Tilt C.A. 2001 “The Content and Disclosure of Australian Corporate Environmental Policies”, 

Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, 14(2), pp. 190-212. 

Trotman K.T. & G.W. Bradley 1981 "Associations Between Disclosure and Characteristics of 

Companies".  Accounting, Organizations and Society, 6(4), pp. 355-362. 

Zéghal  D.  and  S.A.  Ahmed  1990  “Comparison  of  Social  Responsibility  Information 
Disclosure Media Used by Canadian Firms”, Accounting, Auditing and Accountability 
Journal, 3(1), pp. 38-53. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22


Table 1 

Summary of Environmental Characteristics Investigated 
General classifications: 
General policy statements 
Specifics (see below) 
Non environmental 
Specific Variables: 
Objective to report on environmental activities 
Environmental standards/targets 
Performance Data 
Sustainability 
Environmental management 
Environmental audit / verification 
Environmental law / compliance issues 
Environmental Activities (site or process related) eg: 
pollution; rehabilitation / site restoration; land/water/forests; 
waste & recycling; impact assessment; products; other 
environmental activities 
Other disclosures 

Characteristics of Separate Environmental Reports 

Table 2 

 

Average No. 

Environmental policy statement 
Environmental standards/targets 
Performance data 
Sustainability 
Environmental management 
Environmental audit / verification 
Environmental law / compliance 
Environmental activities 

No. of  

Companies 
12 (100%) 
7 (58%) 
11 (92%) 
4 (33%) 
11 (92%) 
7 (58%0 
7 (58%) 
9 (75%) 

Pages 
2.1 
1.5 
6.7 
0.3 
1.3 
0.5 
0.7 
6.5 

 
 

 
 
 

 

23


Appendix 

 

Summary of Environmental Reports Obtained 
1998/99 Company  Notes  

1994 
Company* 
Amcor 
BHP 
Boral 

Amcor 
BHP 
Boral 

On web in 1998/9 
Hard copy 
No separate report in 98/99 (policy 
statement only on  web site) 
Hard copy 
No report in 1999 
Pdf downloaded from web in 98/9 
On web in 1998/9 
Pdf downloaded from web in 98/9 
 
First report 1999 
First report 1998 
First report 1999 
First report 1999 
First report 1998 
First report 1999 
 
  * all reports obtained in hard copy in 1994 
 

Orica/ICI 
James Hardie 
MIM 
Placer Pacific 
WMC 
 
Acacia 
Goldfields Ltd 
Normandy 
Pasminco 
Rio Tinto 
Wesfarmers 
12 reports 

ICI 
James Hardie 
MIM 
Placer Pacific 
WMC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 reports 

 

24

