Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Business Research

Transformational leadership and job performance:
A social identity perspective☆
Herman H.M. Tse a,⁎, Warren C.K. Chiu b
a Grifﬁth University, Australia
b The Center for Leadership and Innovation, Department of Management and Marketing, Faculty of Business, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon,
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 1 January 2011
Received in revised form 1 June 2011
Accepted 1 August 2011
Available online 23 December 2012

Keywords:
Transformational leadership
Individual differentiation
Group identiﬁcation
Creative behavior
OCB
Social identity theory

Drawing on social identity theory, this study provides a model explaining the underlying process through
which transformational leadership inﬂuences creative behavior and organizational citizenship behaviors. In-
dividual differentiation and group identiﬁcation are proposed as social identity mechanisms reﬂecting the
characteristics of personal and collective identity orientations that underpin the differential effects of trans-
formational leadership behaviors on performance outcomes. The model is tested with data from a sample of
250 front-line employees and their immediate managers working in ﬁve banks in the People's Republic of
China. Results of hierarchical linear modeling provide support for the model whereby group-focused and
individual-focused transformational leadership behaviors exert differential impacts on individual differenti-
ation and group identiﬁcation. Furthermore, individual differentiation mediates the relationship between
individual-focused transformational leadership and creative behavior, whereas group identiﬁcation mediates
the relationships between group-focused transformational leadership and OCBs toward individuals and
groups. Implications for theory and practice are discussed and future research directions are outlined.

© 2012 Published by Elsevier Inc.

1. Introduction

Transformational leadership is one of the most prevalent approaches
to understanding individual, group and organizational effectiveness
(Bass, 1985). Transformational leaders display certain types of behaviors
that include raising followers to a higher level of achievement, enabling
them to transcend their personal interests for collective welfare, focusing
on their abilities to facilitate personal growth, and developing their intel-
lectual ability to approach problems in new ways (Bass, 1985). These be-
haviors imply that the motivational basis of transformational leadership is
a process of changing the way followers envision themselves (see Lord &
Brown, 2004; Shamir, House, & Arthur, 1993).

According to social identity theory (SIT), individuals have a range
of identities open to them including personal and social identities. Each
identity reﬂects an individual's self-worth and self-esteem that, in turn,
serve as foundations for cognitive, emotional and motivational processes

☆ The authors acknowledge and are grateful for the ﬁnancial support provided by
Hong Kong Polytechnic University to undertake this research. Comments by Sandra
Lawrence and Amy Collins, Grifﬁth University, to an earlier draft were helpful in the re-
vision of this paper. The authors alone are responsible for all limitations and errors that
may relate to the study and the paper. Both authors contributed equally to the writing
of this paper.

⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Employment Relations and Human Resources,
Grifﬁth Business School, Grifﬁth University, Brisbane, Queensland, 4111, Australia.
Tel./fax: +61 7 3735 7305/7177.

E-mail addresses: h.tse@grifﬁth.edu.au (H.H.M. Tse), mschiuw@polyu.edu.hk

(W.C.K. Chiu).

0148-2963/$ – see front matter © 2012 Published by Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2012.07.018

(Tajfel, 1978, 1982). Hence, it is important to motivate individuals to en-
hance their self-worth and self-esteem by orientating themselves either
as a unique person with idiosyncratic needs or as an enthusiastic mem-
ber of a social group whose obligations align with the obligations of the
group (Tajfel & Turner, 1986). This theory suggests that the identity ori-
entations of followers may play a vital role in the motivational process
of transformational leadership, inﬂuencing how followers deﬁne them-
selves: as unique individuals (personal identity orientation) or as mem-
bers of a workgroup (collective identity orientation). Unfortunately,
few empirical studies adopt the social identity perspective to explore
the role of followers' identity orientations in the transformation process
in organizations (e.g., Hogg & Terry, 2000; Kark & Shamir, 2002;
Reicher, Haslam, & Hopkins, 2005). The current study develops and
tests a model (Fig. 1) to explore group-focused and individual-focused
transformational leadership behaviors and their underlying processes
from the social identity perspective.

The present study aims to advance the research on transformational
leadership processes by achieving three objectives. First, the study re-
sponds to repeated calls to understand the unique implications of individ-
ual components of transformational leadership on different outcomes,
such as personal and collective identity orientations (Yammarino, 1990;
Yammarino & Bass, 1990). In line with Wu, Tsui, and Kinicki (2010), the
study conceptualizes transformational leadership components (e.g., in-
dividualized consideration and intellectual stimulation) as individual-
focused leadership which aims to inﬂuence individual followers within
a workgroup. The study also conceptualizes the other two leadership
components (e.g., identifying and articulating a vision and fostering the


2828

H.H.M. Tse, W.C.K. Chiu / Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

Group-focused
Transformational

Leadership

Group-level

Individual-level

H2

H6

Group

Identification

Individual-focused
Transformational

Leadership

H1

Individual

Differentiation

H5b

H5a

H4

H3

Organisational

Citizenship
Behaviour

toward Groups 

Organisational

Citizenship
Behaviour

toward

Individuals

Creative
Behaviour

Fig. 1. Hypothesized model of the processes linking transformational leadership and work behaviors.

acceptance of group goals) as group-focused leadership which aims to in-
ﬂuence the group as a whole. This conceptualization of transformational
leadership behaviors provides new theoretical insights because existing
research regards transformational leadership as an overarching construct
based on the assumption that all components of transformational lead-
ership exert similar effects on followers' work attitudes and behaviors
(e.g., Piccolo & Colquitt, 2006; Shin & Zhou, 2007).

Second, individual components of transformational leadership have
important implications for followers' social identity orientations. This
study seeks to explain how SIT underpins the motivational impact of
leadership by proposing and examining the mediating roles of individ-
ual differentiation and group identiﬁcation which epitomize key identity
orientations of SIT during the transforming process. Individual differenti-
ation reﬂects the characteristics of personal identity, focusing on per-
sonal traits and self interests instrumental to the enhancement of an
individual's self-esteem, whereas group differentiation indicates the
characteristics of social identity, emphasizing the group processes
and shared values as a means to increase an individual's self-esteem
(Brewer & Gardner, 1996). Understanding the relationship between
transformational leadership and different identity orientations is impor-
tant because prior research focuses primarily on examining the psycho-
logical processes of transformational leadership from the perspectives of
intrinsic motivation and job characteristics (Piccolo & Colquitt, 2006;
Shin & Zhou, 2003). This new conceptualization of transformational lead-
ership behaviors thus increases our understanding of how individual
differentiation and group identiﬁcation explain the implications of
transformational leadership for important work outcomes (Kark &
Shamir, 2002; Kark, Shamir, & Chen, 2003; Lord & Brown, 2004).

Finally, this study extends Kark et al.'s (2003) work on followers'
self-reported work attitudes of dependence and empowerment by in-
corporating supervisor-reported behavioral repertoires of followers'
performance outcomes such as creative behavior, organizational citizen-
ship behavior toward individuals (OCBI) and organizational citizenship
behavior toward groups (OCBG). This further underscores the implica-
tions of how personal and social identity orientations exert differential
impacts on the relationships between transformational leadership be-
haviors and behavioral outcomes beyond followers' self-reported work
attitudes.

2. Theory and hypotheses

2.1. Transformational leadership, social identity theory and work outcomes

Social identity theory (SIT) postulates that individuals seek to see
themselves positively, and extend this motivation to include the
individual's group memberships or social identities (Tajfel, 1978;
Tajfel & Turner, 1986). A person's self-concept comprises a personal
identity (i.e., idiosyncratic characteristics such as individual attributes,
abilities and past experience), and a social identity (i.e., salient group clas-
siﬁcations and characteristics such as group attributes, processes and
composition; Tajfel & Turner, 1986). Research suggests that both personal
and social identities are important as they inﬂuence the self-esteem and
self-worth of individuals. Empirical research examines how group identi-
ﬁcation and other related constructs such as group cohesiveness and
group potency mediate the effect of charismatic leadership or transforma-
tional leadership on work outcomes (e.g., Bass, Avolio, Jung, & Berson,
2003; Cicero & Pierro, 2007), yet few studies pay attention to the effect
of personal and social identities with respect to speciﬁc work outcomes,
and to understanding what factors contribute to these two identities
(e.g., Doosje & Ellemers, 1997; Janssen & Huang, 2008; Lord & Brown,
2004). In addition, Kark and Shamir (2002) and Yammarino and Bass
(1990) call for research to investigate how individual components of
transformational leadership relate to work outcomes because examining
speciﬁc components provides insights on how transformational leader-
ship affects individual and group effectiveness.

To demonstrate the differential effects of transformational leadership
behaviors and their theoretical relevance for this study, this study adopts
Wu et al.'s (2010) behavioral foci of transformational leadership, that is,
individual-focused leadership (e.g., individualized consideration and in-
tellectual stimulation) and group-focused leadership (e.g., idealized inﬂu-
ence and inspirational motivation). Individual-focused leadership aims at
affecting individual employees by considering the uniqueness of each
follower, whereas group-focused leadership deals with inﬂuencing the
group as a whole by creating shared values and seeking a common
ground. These two behavioral foci of transformational leadership are in-
deed more relevant than the overall transformational leadership con-
struct in theorizing foci speciﬁc effects on different work outcomes


H.H.M. Tse, W.C.K. Chiu / Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

2829

because not all the components of transformational leadership are con-
ducive to both identity orientations. In fact, transformational leaders
can behave ﬂexibly to match the needs of speciﬁc individuals and groups
and in different work situations such that individual-focused leadership
is more effective for personal identity while group-focused leadership is
more effective for social identity.

Brewer and Gardner (1996) distinguish the identity orientations
by arguing that personal identity is based on individual differences and
personal uniqueness, and collective identity is derived from membership
and characteristics in groups. This study proposes that individual differen-
tiation exempliﬁes personal identity orientation in the sense that group
members see themselves as different from other members in terms of
their thoughts, feelings and behaviors. Such individuals deﬁne themselves
based on their unique characteristics and focus on individuality (Hornsey
& Jetten, 2004). Likewise, group identiﬁcation represents collective iden-
tity orientation illustrating how group members deﬁne themselves in
terms of values, goals, attitudes and behaviors they share with other
group members. These members emphasize common interests, col-
lective welfare and shared objectives in groups (Turner, Hogg, Oakes,
Reicher, & Wetherell, 1987; van Knippenberg, 2000). By nature of
these two identity orientations, we argue that individual differentiation
stimulates individuals' creative behavior which is deﬁned as the extent
to which individuals are able to generate and communicate new ideas
and creative thoughts in groups (George & Zhou, 2001; Shin & Zhou,
2007). This study also posits that group identiﬁcation inﬂuences individ-
uals to engage in organizational citizenship behaviors directed at helping
other group members (OCBI), and organizational citizenship behaviors
directed at making suggestions to improve their groups (OCBG). OCBI
is a helping dimension referring to how an individual directs his/her
helping behavior toward other group members whereas OCBG is a voice
dimension referring to how an individual makes suggestions for group
improvement. The present study hypothesizes that individual differentia-
tion and group identiﬁcation are distinct psychological mechanisms
which mediate the effects of individual-focused and group-focused
transformational leadership behaviors on followers' performance out-
comes. A detailed discussion of each hypothesis derived from the con-
ceptual model is presented below.

Individual-focused transformational

2.2.
differentiation

leadership and individual

Brewer and Gardner (1996) assert that individuals with a strong
personal identity often perceive themselves to be different from others
and deﬁne themselves based on their own needs, goals, and desires.
Such individuals seek to achieve personal distinctiveness by being spe-
cial in a group, and that will enhance their self-worth and self-esteem
(Turner et al., 1987; van Knippenberg, 2000). According to Wu et al.
(2010), individual-focused transformational leadership has direct im-
pacts on individual differentiation because leaders adjust their behaviors
based on followers' individual differences and personal distinctive-
ness. Two components of transformational leadership behaviors –
individualized consideration and intellectual stimulation – appear to
focus on followers' individuality.

Speciﬁcally, leaders who display individualized consideration tend
to develop a high quality dyadic relationship with each follower. Such
leaders understand their followers individually (Avolio, 1999; Podsakoff,
MacKenzie, Moorman, & Fetter, 1990), pay attention to followers' special
needs and wants, provide information and resources needed for success-
ful completion of tasks, and more importantly, give them discretion to act
independently (Bass, 1985; Bass & Avolio, 1994). Through the interaction
process, the followers feel encouraged to express their individual feelings
and thoughts because they believe that their leaders are genuinely inter-
ested in helping and developing them (Yammarino, 1990; Podsakoff et al.,
1990). Leaders' acts of individualized consideration are therefore likely to
facilitate followers' individual differentiation. In addition, by means of in-
tellectual stimulation, transformational leaders stimulate followers on an

individual basis by encouraging them to rethink the way they do things,
to reexamine some of the basic assumptions about their job, and to
reconﬁgure new solutions from old problems (Podsakoff et al., 1990). In-
tellectually stimulated followers have their awareness raised, imagina-
tions stretched as well as their values and beliefs of creativity elevated
(Bass, 1985). The inspired followers are not content to comply with
what is considered to be normative. Rather, they adopt unique ap-
proaches to work-related issues through expressing their individuality,
and thus followers would feel better able to pursue and satisfy their per-
sonal identity (Bass, 1985; Randel & Jaussi, 2003). On this basis, followers
see their leaders' act of intellectual stimulation as an invitation to the free
expression of individuality in solving problems and they seek to develop
their particular uniqueness in their groups that in turn increases their
self-esteem and self-worth.

Hypothesis 1. Individual-focused transformational leadership is pos-
itively related to individual differentiation.

2.3. Group-focused transformational leadership and group identiﬁcation

To many individuals, characteristics of their work group can serve
as a basis for self-deﬁnition and they often compare these characteristics
to those of other groups for evaluating their self-worth and self-esteem
(Brewer & Gardner, 1996). Hence, collective identity reﬂects the extent
to which an individual's self is deﬁned in collective terms, leading them
to focus more on the interests of the collective and less on their own
(Brickson, 2000; Turner et al., 1987). According to Dansereau, Alutto,
and Yammarino (1984), group-focused transformational leadership in-
ﬂuences followers' group identiﬁcation because it tends to focus on the
whole group rather than individual members within the group. In this
respect, Wu et al. (2010) identiﬁed two components of transformation-
al leadership, namely, idealized inﬂuence and inspirational motivation,
owing to their emphasis on common beliefs, shared values and collec-
tive ideologies that would channel followers' concerns to the entire
group (Kark & Shamir, 2002; Wu et al., 2010).

Group-focused transformational leadership is effective in enhancing
followers' collective identity through painting an interesting picture of
the organization's future (Podsakoff et al., 1990). By making the vision ap-
parent and inspiring, they feel proud and develop a sense of belonging to
the group. Followers perceive membership in that group as valuable and
important, and thus, tend to deﬁne themselves based on the group char-
acteristics and the group's shared vision (Kark et al., 2003; Podsakoff et al.,
1990). In addition, transformational leaders enhance group identiﬁcation
by promoting value internalization and self-engagement with work
(Bono & Judge, 2003; Colbert, Kristof-Brown, Bradley, & Barrick, 2008;
Schaubroeck, Lam, & Cha, 2007). This can be achieved by nurturing fol-
lowers' acceptance of the group's goals, and enabling them to see how
they work together to achieve the same goals (Podsakoff et al., 1990;
Schaubroeck et al., 2007; Spreitzer, Perttula, & Xin, 2005). Once fol-
lowers align with the values of the group, they start focusing on collec-
tive interests and purposes, and view their individual effort and work
roles as contributing to a larger collective effort (Shamir et al., 1993,
1998; Wang, Law, Hackett, Wang, & Chen, 2005), which enhances their
emotional attachment to, and identiﬁcation with their group (Bass,
1985; Kark et al., 2003; Shamir et al., 1993, 1998).

Hypothesis 2. Group-focused transformational leadership is posi-
tively related to group identiﬁcation.

2.4. Individual differentiation and creative behavior

Organizations expect their employees to generate and implement
creative ideas because creativity is one of the important factors contrib-
uting to individual and group effectiveness (Goncalo & Staw, 2006;
Somech, 2006; West, Tjosvold, & Smith, 2003). As deﬁned earlier, crea-
tivity refers to the extent to which individuals are able to generate and


2830

H.H.M. Tse, W.C.K. Chiu / Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

communicate new ideas and creative thoughts (George & Zhou, 2001;
Shin & Zhou, 2007). In line with this deﬁnition, it is conceivable that
generating creative thoughts are likely to be facilitated and communi-
cated if individuals' thoughts, feelings and behaviors are distinguishable
from that of other members in groups. Recently, there is an emerging
consensus of research ﬁndings substantiating the relationship between
individuality and creativity. Haslam, Powell, and Turner (2000) report
that individuals in a group who promote their individual uniqueness
are apt to feel idiosyncratic and different from other group members
in their cognitive thinking, emotional experience and behavioral reac-
tions. Similarly, Janssen and Huang (2008) explain that individuals who
focus on their idiosyncratic and distinctive perspectives tend to challenge
the status quo behind the established thoughts shared among group
members. Indeed, groups comprising members with strong individualis-
tic orientations produce more new ideas and creative suggestions than
groups with conforming members in an experimental study (Goncalo &
Staw, 2006). Although the ﬁndings of past studies have made important
contributions, the theoretical development supporting the relationship
between individual differentiation and creative behavior remains under-
developed (Goncalo & Staw, 2006; Janssen & Huang, 2008).

Hypothesis 3. Individual differentiation is positively related to crea-
tive behavior.

2.5. The mediating role of individual differentiation

It is further hypothesized that individual-focused transformational
leadership inﬂuences individual differentiation which in turn leads to
followers' creativity. As discussed earlier, transformational leadership be-
haviors facilitate followers' sense of personal uniqueness by 1) treating
them on an individual basis and paying attention to their individual
needs, 2) by encouraging followers to express their individuality through
thinking outside the box, and 3) applying new ideas and unconventional
practices (Podsakoff et al., 1990; Schaubroeck et al., 2007). The sense of
uniqueness derived from their personal identity motivates the extent to
which followers will engage in appropriate behaviors in order to enhance
their self-esteem and self-worth in a group (Brewer & Gardner, 1996;
Brickson, 2000; Jetten, Postmes, & McAuliffe, 2002). Building upon this,
individual-focused transformational leaders are capable of developing
and strengthening followers' sense of individual differentiation so that
followers will strive to express their individuality by generating and dis-
seminating new ideas and creative thoughts.

Hypothesis 4. Individual-focused transformational leadership is pos-
itively related to creative behavior through the mediating effect of in-
dividual differentiation.

2.6. Group identiﬁcation, OCBG and OCBI

Following the classiﬁcation by Lee and Allen (2002), OCB com-
prises citizenship behavior directed at helping other group members
(OCBI), and citizenship behavior directed at making suggestions to
improve their groups (OCBG). According to SIT, when individuals identi-
fy with a group, they are likely to base their self-concept and self-esteem
on their sense of belonging to the group and to perceive and experience
group successes and failures as their own (see Ashforth & Humphrey,
1993; Mael & Ashforth, 1992; Pratt, 1998). Because sharing common in-
terests with a group would induce individuals to develop a keen interest
to seek group membership with the group, the committed members at-
tach a positive value to the group and emphasize the importance of col-
lective welfare and group values (Ellemers, Kortekaas, & Ouwerkerk,
1999; Haslam et al., 2000; van Knippenberg, 2000).

This notion suggests that group identiﬁcation promotes a sense of
oneness among members in a group and motivates individuals to
think and behave in group prototypical ways in order to enhance their
self-worth and self-esteem as group members. Research supports the

notion that individuals perceiving themselves as belonging to the
group often emphasize collective interests (Brickson, 2000; Turner
et al., 1987). Such individuals are likely to experience a sense of satis-
faction and achievement through helping other members and to im-
prove group effectiveness by providing constructive suggestions. In
this respect, group identiﬁcation is important for OCBI and OCBG be-
cause group identiﬁcation represents how individuals perceive a sense
of unity with other group members (Restuborg, Bordia, & Tang, 2007;
Turnipseed & Rassuli, 2005). Indeed, prior research reports a positive
relationship between group identiﬁcation and OCB (Christ, van Dick,
Wagner, & Stellmacher 2003). This study aims to extend this ﬁnding
by integrating leadership and social identity theories.

Hypothesis 5. Group identiﬁcation relates positively to a) OCBI and
b) OCBG.

2.7. The mediating role of group identiﬁcation

Although researchers (e.g., Bass, 1985; Shamir et al., 1993) argue
that transformational leaders motivate followers' performance beyond
their initial performance expectations by enhancing their social identi-
ﬁcation, this notion receives limited empirical support (e.g., Judge &
Piccolo, 2004; Wang et al., 2005). Kark et al. (2003) report that group
identiﬁcation mediates the relationships between transformational
leadership and self-reported work attitudes such as collective efﬁcacy
and organizational based self-esteem. However, they do not explain
how these mediating effects operate on actual behavioral outcomes.
Until further evidence is available, the link between group identiﬁcation
and work behaviors remains unclear.

The current model posits that the way followers feel and deﬁne
themselves within a group (i.e., group identiﬁcation) will mediate the
main effect of transformational leadership on citizenship behaviors. As
discussed earlier, group identiﬁcation becomes salient to followers
when transformational leaders encourage them to deﬁne their mem-
bership based on group or organization values (Bass, 1985; Howell &
Shamir, 2005). Transformational leaders achieve this by identifying
and articulating a strong vision so that followers' self-interest will
align with that of the group. Value congruence enhances self-worth,
self-esteem, and job satisfaction (Bono & Judge, 2003; Kark & Shamir,
2002; Shamir et al., 1998). Also, group-oriented followers will focus
on the collective interests of their group, helping other members and
suggesting ideas for improvement. Thus, group identiﬁcation serves as
a proximal outcome through which group-focused transformational
leadership inﬂuences the more distal outcomes of OCBI and OCBG.

Hypothesis 6. Group-focused transformational leadership is posi-
tively associated with a) OCBI and b) OCBG through the mediating ef-
fect of group identiﬁcation.

3. Methods

3.1. Sample and procedure

The sample for this study comprises 280 employees and 40 man-
agers working in 40 branches of ﬁve banks located in a major city of
China. The human resource manager of each bank randomly selected
eight branches to participate in the study. Each branch has a manager
and a number of employees working together as a group to provide re-
tail banking services to customers. Each branch manager is required to
oversee ﬁve to eight subordinates (Mean=7) and the subordinates re-
port their job progress directly to the branch manager.

Two sets of questionnaires are used to collect data from managers
and subordinates. Forty managers provide ratings on OCBI, OCBG and
creative behavior for each of their immediate subordinates, whereas
280 employees provide responses to items pertaining to transforma-
tional leadership, individual differentiation and group identiﬁcation.


H.H.M. Tse, W.C.K. Chiu / Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

2831

With the assistance of the human resource department in each bank,
an identiﬁcation code matches subordinate responses and manager
ratings for each set of questionnaires.

Thirty-six supervisors and 260 subordinates completed and returned
questionnaires, yielding response rates of 90% and 93%, respectively.
After discarding incomplete and unmatched questionnaires, a total of
250 matched supervisor–subordinate dyads (34 supervisors and 250
subordinates) provide useable data for this study. Given that employees
working for ﬁve different banks provide data for this study, it is impor-
tant to compare the data of the subsamples, and results indicate no sig-
niﬁcant differences in respondents' age, gender, or education level
across the banks. Of the supervisor sample, 60.8% are female, 71% are
aged between 30 and 40, and 97.2% have tertiary education. Their aver-
age organizational tenure is 8.62%. Of the subordinate sample, 71.5% are
women, 76.4% are aged between 23 and 35, and 62.4% have tertiary ed-
ucation. Their average organizational tenure is 4.34 years.

3.2. Measures

To ensure equivalence of the following measures in the Chinese
and English versions of the survey instrument, we utilize a standard
translation and back-translation procedure (Brislin, 1980). All of the
following measures consist of items with response options ranging
from 1 “strongly disagree” to 7 “strongly agree”, unless otherwise in-
dicated. Table 1 reports the internal consistency scores of these scales.

3.2.1. Transformational leadership

The transformational leadership behavior inventory (TLI) is used to
measure individuals' perceptions of leader behaviors (Podsakoff et al.,
1990). Several recent empirical studies use the TLI to measure transfor-
mational leadership in Chinese samples (e.g., Schaubroeck et al., 2007;
Spreitzer et al., 2005). Given the aim of this study is to examine the ef-
fects of individual-focused and group-focused transformational leader-
ship behaviors on respective mediators and performance outcomes, we
adopt 12 TLI items to measure four components of transformational
leadership. The two group-focused leadership components of TLI in-
clude 1 — identifying and articulating a vision (e.g., My leader paints
an interesting picture of the group's future) and 2 — fostering the accep-
tance of group (e.g., My leader encourages employees to be group
players). The two individual-focused leadership components of TLI con-
sist of 1 — providing individualized support (e.g., My leader shows
respect for my personal feelings) and 2 — providing intellectual stimu-
lation (e.g., My leader has ideas that have challenged me to reexamine
some of the basic assumptions about my work).

3.2.2. Individual differentiation

The measure of individual differentiation contains seven items de-
veloped and validated by Janssen and Huang (2008). The scale assesses
the extent to which an individual perceives himself/herself as different
from other members in his/her group based on knowledge, skills, abili-
ties, roles, thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Respondents indicate the
degree to which they generally agree with the items, for example “To
what extent you are different from your group members owing to
your personal opinions and belief”.

3.2.3. Group identiﬁcation

The measure of group identiﬁcation consists of six items adapted
from Ellemers et al.'s (1999) social identiﬁcation scale which mea-
sures an individual's identiﬁcation with his/her group. Respondents
indicate the extent to which they generally agree with items, for ex-
ample, “My group is an important reﬂection of who I am”.

3.2.4. Creative behavior

Supervisors rate the extent to which individuals performed creative-
ly using an 8-item abbreviated version of George and Zhou's (2001) cre-
ativity scale. The items reﬂect the generation and communication of

Table 1
Comparison of measurement models of group-focused and individual-focused trans-
formational leadership behaviors.

Variables

The hypothesized model — second-factor two-factor
model (visionary and foster group acceptance)
and (individualized consideration and intellectual
stimulation)

Nested measurement models
4-Factor model (visionary and foster group

acceptance) and (individualized consideration
and intellectual stimulation)

χ2/df

CFI

IFI RMSEA

130.43/49 .94 .94

.70

287.03/60 .85 .85

.123

3-Factor model_1 combining (visionary and

322.26/61 .83 .83

.131

foster group acceptance as one factor)
and (individualized consideration
and intellectual stimulation)

3-Factor model_2 combining (individualized

322.07/61 .83 .83

.131

consideration and intellectual stimulation as
one factor) and (visionary and foster
group acceptance)

Alternate measurement models
3-Factor model_1 combining (visionary

and intellectual stimulations as one factor)
and (foster group acceptance and individualized
consideration)

350.12/61 .81 .81

.141

3-Factor model_2 combining (visionary and

350.19/61 .81 .81

.141

individualized considerations as one factor)
and (foster group acceptance and
intellectual stimulation)

1-Factor model combining all (visionary, foster

395.09/66 .78 .78

.142

group acceptance, individualized consideration
and intellectual stimulation) as a single factor

creative ideas. Janssen and Huang (2008) used the same items to mea-
sure creative behavior as a single construct. A sample item is “This em-
ployee comes up with creative solutions to problems”.

3.2.5. Organizational citizenship behaviors

This study uses six items adapted from Lee and Allen's (2002)
OCBI scale to measure individuals' citizenship behavior directed to-
ward other coworkers within a group. Managers indicate the extent
to which they agree with the items describing the helping behavior
displayed by subordinates toward other members within a group. A
sample item is “This employee helps others who have been absent”.
We use another six items also adapted from Lee and Allen's (2002)
OCBO scale to measure individuals' citizenship behavior directed to-
ward their branches (OCBG). Managers evaluate subordinates' citizen-
ship behaviors that are intended to beneﬁt the branch instead of the
bank as a whole. A sample item includes “This employee keeps up the
development in the branch”.

3.3. Measurement model

We conduct a series of conﬁrmatory factor analyses (CFA) with
AMOS 17 to determine the factor structures of the study variables
using chi-square statistics and the ﬁt indices of CFI, IFI and RMSEA
(Anderson & Gerbing, 1988; Joreskog, 1993). An examination of the
second-order two-factor model of transformational leadership shows
that each of the 12 items from the transformational leadership scale
load onto its ﬁrst-order construct (visionary and fosters goal acceptance
representing group-focused leadership, and individualized consider-
ation and intellectual stimulation reﬂecting individual-focused leader-
ship). The ﬁrst-order constructs in turn load onto their respective
second-order construct of transformational leadership. Table 1 reports
that chi-square and ﬁt indices of the second-order two-factor model
are (χ2=130.43, df=49; CFI=.94, IFI=.94 and RMSEA=.07). These
results show that the second-order two-factor model of transforma-
tional leadership ﬁts the data signiﬁcantly better than any other


2832

H.H.M. Tse, W.C.K. Chiu / Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

factor models. The results are consistent with Wu et al.'s (2010)
operationalization of group-focused and individual-focused transfor-
mational leadership behaviors using the MLQ transformational leader-
ship scale.

In addition, the factor structures of group identiﬁcation and individu-
al differentiation are conﬁrmed. CFA results indicate that a two-factor
model (χ2=147.93, df=53; CFI=.95, IFI=.94 and RMSEA=.08) yields
a better ﬁt to the data than the single-factor model (χ2=254.94, df=54;
CFI=.90, IFI=.87 and RMSEA=.12). These results provide evidence
supporting the notion that group identiﬁcation is distinct from individual
differentiation.

Finally, the factor structures of branch managers' ratings of perfor-
mance outcomes are examined, that is, OCBI, OCBG, and creative behav-
ior. CFA results of the hypothesized three-factor model of OCBI, OCBG
and creative behavior (χ2=200.16, df=87; CFI=.93, IFI=.93 and
RMSEA=.07) yield a better ﬁt to the data than both the two-factor
model (combined components of OCBI and OCBG), and creative behavior
(χ2=254.84, df=88; CFI=.90, IFI=.90 and RMSEA=.09) and the
single-factor model (χ2 = 321.79, df= 89; CFI= .85, IFI = .85 and
RMSEA = .10). This provides support for the distinctiveness of the
performance outcomes in this study.

3.4. Level of analysis

To examine the social identity process of how transformational lead-
ership inﬂuences behavioral work outcomes, this study operationalizes
and analyzes group-focused and individual-focused transformational
leadership differently. We aggregate group-focused leadership as a
group-level construct, conceptualizing the responses to this leader be-
havior as collective perceptions which are shared among subordinates
within each branch, as subordinates tend to have a similar perception
of group-focused leadership behaviors their managers display for the
group as a whole. This study treats individual-focused leadership as
an individual-level construct, conceptualizing the responses to this
leadership behavior as individual perceptions of subordinates within
each branch, because subordinates are likely to have different percep-
tions of the individual-focused leadership behaviors their managers dis-
play for different individuals. Because this study involves group-level and
individual-level independent variables, we conduct hierarchical linear
modeling (HLM) analyses to test the hypotheses in this study. HLM esti-
mates simultaneously the effects of independent variables at different
levels on individual-level outcomes, while maintaining the appropriate
levels of analysis for the predictors (see Bryk & Raudenbush, 1992).

4. Results

4.1. Justiﬁcation for aggregation

To examine whether the group-focused leadership was statistically
appropriate for aggregation, we conduct intra-class correlation (ICCs)
and inter-rater agreement (rwg) tests (Bliese, 2000; James, Demaree, &
Wolf, 1984). The ICC (1) and ICC (2) for group-focused leadership are
.23 and .69, respectively. The average rwg of the group-focused leadership
across 34 branches is .90. These results show a strong between-group
variation and within-group inter-rater agreement, which supports the
appropriateness of aggregating the group-focused component of trans-
formational leadership as group-level variables (see Bliese, 2000; James
et al., 1984).

4.2. Descriptive statistics and correlations

Table 2 provides the descriptive statistics, reliabilities and correla-
tions for all study variables. Consistent with our model, key variables
are signiﬁcantly related to one another in the predicted directions.
Consistent with hypotheses, group-focused leadership positively relates
to group identiﬁcation (r=.48, pb.01) and individual-focused leader-
ship is positively related to individual differentiation (r=.25, pb.01).
Furthermore, group identiﬁcation is positively associated with OCBI
(r=.29, pb.01) and OCBG (r=.33, pb.01). Individual differentiation
also has a positive relationship with creative behavior (r=.21, pb.01).

4.3. Test of hypotheses

To conduct HLM analyses, a series of null models are run (no
individual- or group-level predictors) in order to examine whether or
not there is substantial between-group variance in all the outcome
variables. HLM results provide support for signiﬁcant within-group vari-
ation in creative behavior (τ00=.50, χ2 (33)=35.23, pb.01), OCBG
(τ00=.17, χ2 (33)=70.40, pb.01), and OCBI (τ00=.13, χ2 (33)=
70.26, pb.01) and the ICC (1) results were .52, .44 and .32, respectively.
These results suggest that there is systematic between-group variance
in the outcomes (see Snijders & Bosker, 1999).

Table 3 reports the HLM results pertaining to Hypotheses 1 to 6.
Each hypothesis is tested according to Baron and Kenny's (1986) 4-step
mediation procedures. Step 1 examines Hypotheses 1 and 2, exploring
the effects of the two independent variables – individual-focused
and group-focused transformational leadership on the two mediators –
individual differentiation and group identiﬁcation. As predicted, results

Table 2
Individual-level descriptive statistics, reliabilities, and correlations.ab.

Variables

M

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1. Individual-focused TLc
2. Group-focused TLd
3. Group identiﬁcation
4. Individual differentiation
5. Creative behavior
6. OCBIe
7. OCBGf

(.88)
.48⁎⁎
.06
.07
.35⁎⁎
.41⁎⁎
a N=250. Internal consistency reliabilities are reported in parentheses along the diagonal.
b Signiﬁcant levels and correlations among the study variables at the individual level should be interpreted with caution because correlation tests do not take the effects of data
non-independence of group-focused transformational leadership into consideration (i.e., the each group-level mean score of group-focused transformational leadership was
assigned down to each group member to form the correlation results).

(.80)
.04
.07
.29⁎⁎
.33⁎⁎

(.92)
.24⁎⁎
.13
.11

(.91)
.03
.08

(.83)
.55⁎⁎

(.75)

(.78)
.46⁎⁎
.14⁎
.25⁎⁎
.21⁎⁎
.07
.15⁎

4.94
5.58
5.26
4.31
4.51
5.62
5.60

.74
.74
.71
.93
.90
.57
.65

c Individual-focused TL=combined components (individualized consideration and intellectual stimulation) of transformational leadership.
d Group-focused TL=combined components (identifying and articulating a vision and fostering the acceptance of group goals) of transformational leadership.
e OCBI = organizational citizenship behavior toward individuals.
f OCBG = organizational citizenship behavior toward groups.
⁎ pb.05.
⁎⁎ pb.01.


H.H.M. Tse, W.C.K. Chiu / Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

2833

Table 3
Mediation of the relationships of transformational leadership behaviors with job per-
formance by individual differentiation and group identiﬁcation.a

5. Discussion

5.1. Theoretical implications

Individual-level mediating variables

Independent variables

Individual differentiation

Group identiﬁcation

Step 1
Individual-level
Individual-focused TL
Group-level
Group-focused TL

.30⁎⁎ (248)

.69⁎⁎ (32)

Individual-level dependent variables

Creative behavior

OCBG

OCBI

Step 2
Individual-level
Individual-focused TL
Group-level
Group-focused TL

Step 3
Individual-level
Individual-focused TL
Group-level
Group-focused TL

Step 4
Individual-level
Individual differentiation
Individual-level
Group identiﬁcation

.20⁎⁎ (248)

.14 (246)

.16⁎⁎ (246)

.40⁎⁎ (32)

.32⁎ (32)

.29 (32)

.22 (32)

.16⁎⁎ (246)

.12⁎⁎ (246)

OCBG = organizational citizenship behavior directed toward groups.
OCBI = organizational citizenship behavior directed toward individuals.
All study variables except for group-focused leadership are individual-level constructs
for analysis.

a Note. Results are unstandardized parameter estimates from HLM analyses; num-

bers in parentheses are correspondingly degrees of freedom.

⁎ pb.05.
⁎⁎ p b.01.

in Table 3 show that individual-focused leadership positively relates to
individual differentiation (γ10=.30, pb.01), whereas group-focused
transformational leadership is positively associated with group identiﬁ-
cation (γ01=.69, pb.01). Hence, Hypotheses 1 and 2 receive support.
We follow Step 2 of the mediation procedures by testing the differen-
tial effects of the two independent variables — ﬁrst, individual-focused
leadership on creative behavior, and second, group-focused leadership
on OCBI and OCBG. Findings indicate that individual-focused leadership
has a positive impact on creative behavior (γ 10=.20, pb.01), and
group-focused leadership has a positive effect on both OCBG (γ01 =.40,
pb.01), and OCBI (γ01=.32, p b.05), respectively. These results provide
support for Step 2 of the mediation test.

Consistent with the hypotheses, ﬁndings at Step 4 reveal that only
individual differentiation, not group identiﬁcation, positively relates
to creative behavior (γ20=.16, p b.01). This signiﬁcant relationship
becomes non-signiﬁcant in Step 3 (γ10=.14 n.s.). Results indicate a
similar pattern of results in that only group identiﬁcation, not indi-
vidual differentiation, is positively associated with OCBG (γ10 =
.16, p b.01) and OCBI (γ10 = .12, p b.01). The relationships between
group-focused leadership, OCBG and OCBI also become non-signiﬁcant
in Step 3 (γ01=.29, n.s. and γ01=.22, n.s., respectively). Pertaining to
Hypotheses 4 and 6, results of Sobel tests reveal that individual differ-
entiation signiﬁcantly mediates the relationship between individual-
focused leadership and creative behavior (z=2.49, p b.01). Similarly,
group identiﬁcation also signiﬁcantly mediates the relationships be-
tween group-focused leadership and OCBG (z = 5.14, p b.01) and
OCBI (z = 3.56, p b.05). Hence, both Hypotheses 4 and 6 receive
support.

The present study contributes to the research on transformational
leadership and SIT by achieving three objectives. First, this study re-
sponds to the repeated calls by Yammarino (1990) and Yammarino
and Bass (1990) to explore how individual components of transfor-
mational leadership can inﬂuence different work attitudes and behaviors
in different ways because the extant research to date has tended to con-
ceptualize transformational leadership as a global construct, presuming
that its components are equally important and exert similar effects on
work outcomes. Based on Wu et al. (2010), this study conceptualizes
transformational leadership components (e.g. individualized con-
sideration and intellectual stimulation) as individual-focused lead-
ership which inﬂuences individual followers within a workgroup.
This study also conceptualizes the other two leadership components
(e.g., identifying and articulating a vision and fostering the acceptance of
group goals) as group-focused leadership which serves to inﬂuence the
group as a whole. The CFA results support the idea that group-focused
transformational
leadership and individual-focused transformational
leadership are distinct from each other and exert differential impacts
on work attitudes and behaviors.

Second, this study contributes to our understanding of the motivation-
al basis of transformational leadership from a social identity perspective
to explain why and how individual-focused and group-focused transfor-
mational leadership behaviors inﬂuence followers' dual identity ori-
entations (Tajfel, 1978, 1982). This new perspective supplements
transformational leadership research which often builds on the intrinsic
motivation and job characteristics theories (Piccolo & Colquitt, 2006;
Shin & Zhou, 2003), and also informs the literature about the impor-
tance of how followers envision themselves as a unique person with id-
iosyncratic needs or an enthusiastic group member whose obligations
align with the interests of the collective in transformation processes
(Tajfel & Turner, 1986). This study takes a step forward through ex-
amining the mediating roles of individual differentiation and group
identiﬁcation which epitomize key identity orientations of SIT during
the transforming process (e.g. Postmes, Spears, Lee, & Novak, 2005). The
results show that personal identity and group identity are separate and
may co-exist within a person in a group setting, each exerting differential
effects on distinct work outcomes. For example, individual differentiation
is related to creative behavior, and group identiﬁcation to both OCBI and
OCBG. The results also suggest that individual differentiation is more like-
ly to mediate the relationship between individual-focused transforma-
tional leadership and creative behavior, while group identiﬁcation is
more likely to mediate the links between group-focused transformational
leadership and citizenship behaviors.

Finally, this study extends Kark et al.'s (2003) study on followers'
self-reported work attitudes by incorporating supervisor-reported be-
havioral repertoires of followers' performance outcomes. Our ﬁndings
show that group-focused transformational leadership is more effective
in facilitating followers' OCBI and OCBG but less effective in facilitating
their creative behavior. In contrast, individual-focused transformational
leadership is more effective in enhancing followers' creative behavior
but less effective in facilitating their citizenship behaviors. The notion
of target-speciﬁcity of transformational leadership is also consistent
with the recent ﬁndings by Wu et al. (2010) who report that differenti-
ated leadership diminishes group effectiveness.

5.2. Practical implications

The results of this study suggest that organizations should focus on
training managers so that they are capable of recognizing and encourag-
ing both individuality and diversity in a group setting. In other words,
managers should take a contingent approach to their own leadership
style. When and where group cohesiveness and citizenship behaviors


2834

H.H.M. Tse, W.C.K. Chiu / Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

are needed, they should use their idealized inﬂuence and inspirational
motivation behaviors to guide their followers (Shamir, 1991; Shamir et
al., 1993, 1998). If, however, creative behavior is required, then managers
should focus on individualized consideration and intellectual stimulation
behaviors to enhance individuality and recognizing individual differ-
ences. The current ﬁndings suggest that managers should be mindful of
the leadership behaviors they display with respect to different followers'
identity orientations because these will affect how their followers en-
gage in their tasks to produce different performance outcomes. For ex-
ample, if managers want to motivate group-based performance, they
should use group-focused transformational leadership. Managers who
attempt to facilitate individual-based performance should consider
using individual-focused transformational leadership. Understand-
ing followers' identity orientations demands the necessary skills and
becomes a new challenge for managers seeking to be effective at lead-
ing and motivating their subordinates.

5.3. Limitations and future research directions

The current study has several limitations. First, the use of cross-
sectional data means no causal relationships among the study variables
can be inferred from our ﬁndings. For example, it is possible that citizen-
ship behaviors and creative behavior inﬂuence individual differentiation
and group identiﬁcation. Hence the cross-sectional research design
limits our understanding of the implications of the two identity ori-
entations as mechanisms mediating the effects of individual-focused
and group-focused transformational leadership behaviors on creative
behavior and citizenship behavior over time. Therefore, future research
should adopt experimental and longitudinal designs to strengthen the
conclusions of this study.

Second, it is arguable that common method variance may have inﬂat-
ed the hypothesized relationships in this study because we measured the
independent variable (transformational leadership), and mediating vari-
ables (individual differentiation and group identiﬁcation) as individual
perceptions with subordinates' self-report data. To minimize such con-
cerns, data on the outcome variables of creative behavior and citizenship
behaviors are collected from supervisors as a separate source (Podsakoff,
MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003). The study also followed Kark et al.'s
(2003) suggestion to aggregate transformational leadership to the group
level, conceptualizing that the responses to group-focused leadership are
collective perceptions and subordinates will share their perceptions
within each group. However, future research should consider collecting
data on the variables from different points in time, following the sug-
gestions outlined by Podsakoff et al. (2003).

Finally, it is important to note that the ﬁndings of this study may not
be generalizable across other country boundaries because the data com-
prised samples working in the banking industry only. Data collected
from a sample in other industries may yield different results, and future
research should therefore be conducted to validate the study ﬁndings
using different samples in other industries to ensure that the effect of in-
dustry does not confound the relationships examined in this study. In ad-
dition, given that the PRC is a highly collectivistic culture (Hofstede,
2001), it is unclear whether this has set a ceiling effect on the extent
that an employee will report his/her opinion about individual differenti-
ation and group identiﬁcation. Researchers may also beneﬁt from repli-
cating the present investigation by including cultural values such as
power distance or collectivism/individualism as a boundary condition
to examine whether or not the relationships will be altered under differ-
ent cultural contexts such as USA.

6. Conclusion

The present study aims to provide insights into the motivational
basis of how transformational leadership inﬂuences important work
behaviors in organizations. The study integrates theories of social iden-
tity and transformational leadership to develop and test a mediating

model examining dual identity orientations and their differential medi-
ated effects on the relationship between behavioral components of
transformational leadership and creative behavior and citizenship
behaviors. Findings provide evidence to support the hypothesized
model. Speciﬁcally, results suggest that group-focused transformational
leadership affects OCBI and OCBG through the mediating role of group
identiﬁcation rather than through individual differentiation. Further-
more, individual-focused transformational leadership determines fol-
lowers' creative behavior through the mediating effect of individual
differentiation, rather than through group identiﬁcation. Hopefully the
current study will encourage researchers to further explore the poten-
tial effects of both identity orientations in leadership research.

References

Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural equation modeling in practice: A re-
view and recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 411–423.
Ashforth, B. E., & Humphrey, R. H. (1993). Emotional labor in service roles: The inﬂuence

of identity. Academy of Management Review, 18, 88–115.

Avolio, B. J. (1999). Full leadership development: Building the vital forces in organizations.

Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Press.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173–1182.

Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: Free

Press.

Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1994). Improving organizational effectiveness through transfor-

mational leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Bass, B. M., Avolio, B. J., Jung, D. J., & Berson, Y. (2003). Predicting unit performance by
assessing transformational and transactional leadership. The Journal of Applied Psycholo-
gy, 88, 207–218.

Bliese, P. (2000). Within-group agreement, non-independence, and reliability. In K.
Klein, & S. Kozlowski (Eds.), Multi-level theory, research, and methods in organiza-
tions (pp. 349–381). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Bono, J. E., & Judge, T. A. (2003). Self-concordance at work: Toward understanding the
motivational effects of transformational leaders. Academy of Management Journal,
17, 5–18.

Brewer, M. B., & Gardner, W. L. (1996). Who is this “we”? Levels of collective identity

and self representations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 83–93.

Brickson, S. (2000). The impact of identity orientation on individual and organizational
outcomes in demographically diverse settings. Academy of Management Review, 25,
82–101.

Brislin, R. W. (1980). Translation and content analysis of oral and written materials. In
H. C. Triandis, & W. W. Lambert (Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology
(pp. 349–444). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Bryk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). Hierarchical linear models. Newbury Park, CA:

Sage.

Christ, O., van Dick, R., Wagner, U., & Stellmacher, J. (2003). When teachers go to the
extra mile: Foci of organizational
identiﬁcation as determinants of different
forms of organizational citizenship behavior among school-teachers. The British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 73, 239–290.

Cicero, L., & Pierro, A. (2007). Charismatic leadership and organizational outcomes: The
mediating role of employees' work-group identiﬁcation. International Journal of
Psychology, 42, 297–306.

Colbert, A. E., Kristof-Brown, A. L., Bradley, B. H., & Barrick, M. R. (2008). CEO transfor-
mational leadership: The role of goal importance congruence in top management
groups. Academy of Management Journal, 51, 81–96.

Dansereau, F., Alutto, J. A., & Yammarino, F. J. (1984). Theory testing in organizational behavior:

The varient approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Doosje, B., & Ellemers, N. (1997). Stereotyping under threat: The role of group identi-
ﬁcation. In R. Spears, P. J. Oakes, N. Ellemers, & S. A. Haslam (Eds.), The social psy-
chology of stereotyping and group life (pp. 257–272). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Ellemers, N., Kortekaas, P., & Ouwerkerk, J. (1999). Self categorization, commitment to
the group and social self esteem as related but distinct aspects of social identity.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 28, 371–398.

George, J. M., & Zhou, J. (2001). When openness to experience and conscientiousness
are related to creative behavior: An interactional approach. The Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86, 513–524.

Goncalo, J. A., & Staw, B. M. (2006). Individualism–collectivism and group creativity.

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100, 96–109.

Haslam, S. A., Powell, C., & Turner, J. C. (2000). Social identity, self-categorization and
work motivation: Rethinking the contribution of the group to positive and sustain-
able organizational outcomes. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 49,
319–339.

Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture's consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions,
and organizations across nations (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Hogg, M. A., & Terry, D. J. (2000). Social identity and self-categorization processes in or-

ganizational contexts. Academy of Management Review, 25, 121–140.

Hornsey, M. J., & Jetten, J. (2004). The individual within the group: Balancing the need
to belong with the need to be different. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 8,
248–264.


H.H.M. Tse, W.C.K. Chiu / Journal of Business Research 67 (2014) 2827–2835

2835

Howell, J. M., & Shamir, B. (2005). The role of followers in the charismatic leadership
process: Relationships and their consequences. Academy of Management Review,
30, 96–112.

James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolf, G. (1984). Estimating within-group inter-rater
reliability with and without response bias. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 69,
86–98.

Janssen, O., & Huang, X. (2008). “Us and me”: Group identiﬁcation and individual dif-
ferentiation as complementary drivers of group members' citizenship and creative
behavior. Journal of Management, 34, 69–88.

Jetten, J., Postmes, T., & McAuliffe, B. (2002). “We are all individuals”: Group norms of
individualism and collectivism, levels of identiﬁcation, and identity threat. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 189–207.

Joreskog, K. G. (1993). Testing structural equation models. In K. A. Bollen, & J. S. Long

(Eds.), Testing structural equation models (pp. 294–316). Newbury, CA: Sage.

Judge, T. A., & Piccolo, R. F. (2004). Transformational and transactional leadership: A
meta-analytic test of their relative validity. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 89,
755–768.

Kark, R., & Shamir, B. (2002). The dual effect of transformational leadership: Priming
relational and collective selves and further effects on followers. In B. J. Avolio, &
F. J. Yammarino (Eds.), Transformational and charismatic leadership: The road
ahead (pp. 67–91). Amsterdam: JAI Press.

Kark, R., Shamir, B., & Chen, G. (2003). The two faces of transformational leadership:

Empowerment and dependency. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 2, 246–255.

Lee, K., & Allen, N. J. (2002). Organizational citizenship behavior and workplace deviance:

The role of affect and cognitions. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 131–142.

Lord, R. G., & Brown, D. J. (2004). Leadership processes and follower identity. Mahwah,

NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Mael, F., & Ashforth, B. (1992). Alumni and their alma mater: A partial test of the
reformulated model of organizational identiﬁcation. Journal of Organizational Be-
havior, 13, 103–123.

Piccolo, R. F., & Colquitt, J. A. (2006). Transformational leadership and job behaviors:
The mediating role of core job characteristics. Academy of Management Journal,
49, 327–340.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method
biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 879–903.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R. (1990). Transformational
leader behavior and their effects on followers' trust in leader, satisfaction, and or-
ganizational citizenship behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 1, 107–142.

Postmes, T., Spears, R., Lee, A. T., & Novak, R. J. (2005). Individuality and social inﬂuence
in groups: Inductive and deductive routes to group identity. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 89, 747–760.

Pratt, M. G. (1998). To be or not to be: Central questions in organizational identiﬁca-
tion. In D. A. Whetten, & P. Godfrey (Eds.), Identity in organizations: Developing theory
through conversations (pp. 171–207). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Randel, A. E., & Jaussi, K. S. (2003). Functional background identity, diversity and indi-
vidual performance in cross-functional groups. Academy of Management Journal,
46, 763–774.

Reicher, S. D., Haslam, S. A., & Hopkins, N. (2005). Social identity and the dynamics of
leadership: Categorization, entrepreneurship and power in the transformation of
social reality. The Leadership Quarterly, 16, 547–568.

Restuborg, S. L. D., Bordia, P., & Tang, R. L. (2007). Behavioral outcomes of psychological
breach in a non-western culture: The moderating role of equity sensitivity. British
Journal of Management, 18, 376–386.

Schaubroeck, J., Lam, S. K., & Cha, S. (2007). Embracing transformational leadership:
Group values and the impact of leader behavior on group performance. The Journal
of Applied Psychology, 92, 1020–1030.

Shamir, B. (1991). The charismatic relationship: Alternative explanations and direc-

tions. The Leadership Quarterly, 2, 81–104.

Shamir, B., House, R., & Arthur, M. B. (1993). The motivational effects of charismatic

leadership: A self-concept based theory. Organization Science, 4, 577–594.

Shamir, B., Zakay, E., Breinin, E., & Popper, M. (1998). Correlates of charismatic leader be-
havior in military units: Subordinates' attitudes, unit characteristics and superiors'
appraisal of leader performance. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 387–409.

Shin, S. J., & Zhou, J. (2003). Transformational leadership, conservation and creativity:

Evidence from Korea. Academy of Management Journal, 46, 703–714.

Shin, S. J., & Zhou, J. (2007). When is educational specialization heterogeneity related to
creativity in research and development groups? Transformational leadership as a
moderator. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1709–1721.

Snijders, T., & Bosker, R. (1999). Multilevel analysis. London: Sage Publications.
Somech, A. (2006). The effects of leadership style and group process on performance and
innovation in functionality heterogeneous groups. Journal of Management, 32, 132–157.
Spreitzer, G. M., Perttula, K. H., & Xin, K. (2005). Traditionality matters: An examination
of the effectiveness of transformational leadership in the United States and Taiwan.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26, 205–227.

Tajfel, H. (1978). Social categorization, social identity and social comparison. In H.
Tajfel (Ed.), Differentiation between social groups: Studies in the social psychology
of intergroup relations (pp. 61–76). London: Academic Press.

Tajfel, H. (1982). Social identity and intergroup relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press.

Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of inter-group behavior. In S.
Worchel, & L. W. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 1–10). Chicago:
Nelson-Hall.

Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., & Wetherell, M. C. (1987).
Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory. New York: Basil Blackwell.
Turnipseed, D. L., & Rassuli, A. (2005). Performance perceptions of organisational citi-
zenship behaviours at work: A bi-level study among managers and employees.
British Journal of Management, 16, 231–244.

van Knippenberg, D. (2000). Work motivation and performance: A social identity per-

spective. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 49, 357–371.

Wang, H., Law, K. S., Hackett, R. D., Wang, D., & Chen, Z. X. (2005). Leader–member ex-
change as a mediator of the relationship between transformational leadership and
followers' performance and organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 48, 420–432.

West, M., Tjosvold, D., & Smith, K. G. (2003). International handbook of groupwork and

cooperative working. Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Wu, J. B., Tsui, A. S., & Kinicki, A. J. (2010). Consequences of differentiated leadership in

groups. Academy of Management Journal, 53, 90–106.

Yammarino, F. J. (1990). Individual- and group-directed leader behavior descriptions.

Educational and Psychological Measurement, 50, 739–759.

Yammarino, F. J., & Bass, B. B. (1990). Transformational leadership and multiple levels

of analysis. Human Relations, 43, 975–995.

