The International Journal of Human Resource
Management

ISSN: 0958-5192 (Print) 1466-4399 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rijh20

The difference a manager can make:
organizational justice and knowledge worker
commitment

Marc Thompson & Paul Heron

To cite this article: Marc Thompson & Paul Heron (2005) The difference a manager can make:
organizational justice and knowledge worker commitment, The International Journal of Human
Resource Management, 16:3, 383-404, DOI: 10.1080/0958519042000339561

To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0958519042000339561

Published online: 17 Feb 2007.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 761

View related articles 

Citing articles: 15 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at

http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rijh20

Download by: [University of North Carolina Charlotte]

Date: 01 February 2017, At: 12:26


Int. J. of Human Resource Management 16:3 March 2005 383 – 404

The difference a manager can make:
organizational justice and knowledge
worker commitment

Marc Thompson and Paul Heron

Abstract The quality of the employment relationship is argued to be central to knowledge
workers’ commitment, which in turn supports knowledge creation. Given the high levels of
discretion enjoyed by knowledge workers, managers’ decisions over work distribution,
content and resources become more critical for commitment and knowledge creation.
However, little research has explored how justice perceptions shape the quality of the
employment relationship and the consequences for commitment. Using a sample of 429 R&D
workers from across six science and technology-based ﬁrms this paper explores the three-way
interaction of procedural and interactional justice with the psychological contract to predict
knowledge worker commitment. We found that when employees simultaneously perceived
high levels of procedural and interactional justice this moderated the relationship between
psychological contract breach and knowledge worker commitment. Furthermore, where there
was contract breach, positive perceptions of procedural justice moderated the relationship with
commitment. However, in the context of contract fulﬁlment, low perceived levels of
interactional justice predicted lower comparative levels of commitment, regardless of the level
of procedural justice.

The results suggest that the perceived quality of the relationship between knowledge
workers and their manager can make a positive difference in the context of breach of the
psychological contract and this in turn can help maintain levels of commitment important for
knowledge creation.

Keywords Organizational
workers; knowledge creation.

justice; psychological contract; commitment; knowledge

Introduction

The quality of the relationships that ﬁrms can create internally with (and between)
employees and externally with customers, suppliers and other stakeholders is increasingly
seen as a critical source of competitive advantage (Leana and Rousseau, 2000).
In knowledge-intensive ﬁrms that rely primarily on the problem-solving capabilities of their
employees for long-term success, the quality of internal relationships become central to
organizational strategies to achieve knowledge creation and appropriation.

Indeed, there is growing evidence that a speciﬁc dimension of internal relational quality,
employee identiﬁcation with and attachment to the organization, can play an important part

Marc Thompson, Templeton College, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK (tel: þ 44 (0) 1865
422728; fax: þ 44 (0) 1865 422501; e-mail: marc.thompson@templeton.ox.ac.uk). Paul Heron,
Templeton College, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK (tel: þ 44 (0) 1865 422596; fax: þ 44 (0)
1865 422501; e-mail: paul.heron@templeton.ox.ac.uk).

The International Journal of Human Resource Management

ISSN 0958-5192 print/ISSN 1466-4399 online q 2005 Taylor & Francis Group Ltd

http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals

DOI: 10.1080/0958519042000339561


384 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

in shaping knowledge-creating behaviours (Alvesson, 2001; Storey and Quintas, 2001;
Robertson and O’Malley Hammersely, 2000; Thompson and Heron, 2003).

While the importance of affective commitment for the creation of knowledge has support
both theoretically and to some extent empirically, there is less evidence on the role played by
managers in this process. This is despite the fact that a growing number of writers point to the
importance of managers in the knowledge creation process and in particular their part in
helping foster employee commitment to and identity with the organization and its goals
(Nonaka et al., 2001; Kim and Mauborgne, 1997; Naito, 2001; Child and Rodrigues, 2001).
We argue that the quality of employee commitment, which is important for knowledge
creation, is dependent on the interaction of two other important internal relationships.
These are the perceived quality of the employment relationship (i.e. the psychological
contract) and the perceived fairness of organizational policies and practices (i.e.
organizational justice). In this latter dimension, we place particular emphasis on the role
played by managers in creating a felt fair working environment for knowledge workers.
We present empirical evidence from 429 scientists and engineers across six R&D
organizations on how perceptions of the fairness of management are related to the
development of knowledge worker commitment, which has been shown to be critical to
the creation and sharing of knowledge. The paper is structured as follows. It begins by
situating the role of the manager within the wider context of knowledge creation and explores
how and why management behaviour and attitudes are important for knowledge worker
commitment. We then turn to discuss the importance of social capital (i.e. the quality of
relationships) in the generation of intellectual capital, emphasizing the critical role played by
the quality of the employment relationship in shaping knowledge worker attitudes and
behaviour. This leads to a review and discussion of psychological contract theory as a means
of evaluating the quality of the employment relationship of knowledge workers. Next we
focus on the part played by justice in the employment relationship and present our theoretical
model, which integrates the psychological contract, managerial behaviour (justice) and
knowledge worker commitment. Finally, we discuss the implications of our ﬁndings.

Previous research

We consider the literature that has explored the interrelationships important in enabling
knowledge creation. We begin by making the case for the link between employee
commitment and knowledge creation, and then move on to review studies on the link
between managerial behaviour and knowledge creation. Next, we consider the relevance
of the psychological contract as a means of evaluating the quality of employee – ﬁrm
relationship and then review evidence on links between the psychological contract,
managerial behaviour and employee commitment.

Employee commitment and knowledge creation

There is a small but growing body of both empirical and theoretical evidence that
provides support for the link between employee commitment and knowledge creation.
In a detailed case study of an IT ﬁrm Alvesson (2001) argued that the company was
successful in generating and appropriating knowledge when it created high levels of
commitment to the organization. Storey and Qunitas (2001) have similarly argued that
developing the trust, motivation and commitment of knowledge workers is critical
because this results in the retention of knowledge through lower employee turnover,
greater discretionary effort and greater willingness to share knowledge. In a study of a
consulting ﬁrm Robertson and O’Malley Hammersely (2000) found that employees were
more likely to share their knowledge when they espoused a high level of commitment to


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 385

the company. At the theoretical level, Hislop (2003) has argued that commitment is the
concept that links the employment relationship (i.e. the psychological contract) to
knowledge sharing.

Other writers, building on the idea that social capital is an important basis for the
creation and sharing of knowledge in organizations (e.g. Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998;
Leana and Van Buren, 1999), have identiﬁed commitment as a critical element in their
theoretical models. Coff and Rousseau (2000) suggest that ‘when affective commitment
is part of the tie that binds persons and groups to the ﬁrm, we observe higher rates of
discretionary behaviours that are aligned to the ﬁrm’s interests, including citizenship
behaviour, higher quality of service and innovation’.

Despite the growing interest in these issues, there have been relatively few studies that
have empirically tested the relationship between dimensions of social capital and their
importance for outcomes such as knowledge creation. In one of these studies, Thompson
and Heron (2003) found affective commitment to be a critical lynchpin in a model that
explored the relationship between social capital and knowledge creation. Their analysis
found that employees who reported higher levels of commitment were also more likely to
report a higher quality employment relationship (i.e. psychological contract) and higher
levels of innovative behaviour.

Managers and knowledge creation

From within the knowledge management, or knowledge-based, view of the ﬁrm ﬁelds (e.g.
Grant, 1996) a number of writers have stressed the important role of managers in creating
the context and conditions within which knowledge creation or sharing can take place. This
perspective emphasizes the relational and humanistic character of knowledge creation and
suggests that ﬁrms need to ensure there are conditions that enable knowledge conversion
through the interplay of tacit and explicit knowledge (Kogut and Zander, 1992). This has
led to an increasing interest in the role of managers in this conversion process. For example,
Nonaka et al. (2001) argue that ‘because knowledge needs to be shared to be created and
exploited, it is important for leaders to ensure that there is an atmosphere in which an
organization’s members feel safe sharing their knowledge. It is also important for leaders
to cultivate commitment among organization members to motivate the sharing and
creation of knowledge based on the knowledge vision.’

The importance of commitment in the context of tacit knowledge is stressed by

Takeuchi:

Once the importance of tacit knowledge is realised, then one begins to think about innovation in
a wholly new way. It is not just about putting together diverse bits of data and information. The
personal commitment of the employees and their identifying with the company and its mission
become crucial.

(Takeuchi, 2001: 322)

This suggests that managers have a central role in developing a context within which
knowledge worker commitment is generated. The importance of commitment to knowledge
creation is also recognized by practitioners. Naito describes the knowledge creating
processes in his pharmaceutical company, Eisai, arguing that ‘[it] is clear to me that middle
managers hold the key to knowledge creation. Good middle managers bring organizational
knowledge creation to life’ (2001: 282).

Child and Rodrigues (2001) argue that organizational learning and innovation do not
occur naturally and that they require active management: ‘Managers cannot assume that
an existing organizational identity provides an acceptable psychological contract for


386 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

group members to willingly contribute their specialised knowledge and competencies to
the learning process.’

However, Kim and Mauborgne (1997) imply that a balance needs to be achieved in
managing knowledge creation and that there may be a potential down side arising from
the (over-)management of knowledge workers: ‘Creating and sharing knowledge are
intangible activities that can neither be supervised nor forced out of people. They happen
only when people operate voluntarily.’

In a comprehensive review of the literature on innovation and creativity Mumford
et al. (2002) found that leadership, deﬁned as the exercise of inﬂuence to increase the
likelihood of idea generation by followers, was ‘conspicuously absent’ from the list of
potential inﬂuences. However, there is some evidence from the innovation literature that
management can make a difference. In a study of 300 scientists working in twenty
different laboratories, Pelz (1963) found that the intensity of interaction with group
leaders was positively related to the innovation particular for more junior scientists.
Conversely, exposure to poor management
in unusually poor
performance. Tierney et al. (1999), examining creativity among 191 R&D scientists in
a large chemical company, found that effective leader – member exchange relationships
were correlated with creativity ratings and invention disclosures. In a review of the
literature on climate and culture in the organization on the leadership of creative people,
Mumford et al. (2002) concluded that ‘less research is available examining how leaders
should behave to ensure a culture and climate likely to support innovation’.

tended to result

We have established that there is a signiﬁcant and growing body of evidence from across
a number of ﬁelds that supports the argument that managerial behaviour and attitudes are
critical in shaping the context in which knowledge creation and innovation can prosper.
The central argument of this paper is that the perceived fairness of leaders, as evidenced
through followers’ assessment of organizational justice, will be critical in inﬂuencing
knowledge worker commitment and, in consequence, knowledge creation. However, the
manager – subordinate relationship is only one relational dimension that can contribute to
knowledge worker commitment and we now turn to consider the perceived quality of the
relationship between the employee and the organization, the psychological contract.

The relevance of the psychological contract

At a theoretical level, there has been a recent attempt to connect the quality of the
employment relationship (i.e. the psychological contract) to knowledge creation (Hislop,
2003) and, within the wider debates on the social capital (Leana and Rousseau, 2000),
considerable emphasis has been placed on the role played by high-quality employment
relationships in inﬂuencing desired organizational outcomes such as employee retention
and discretionary behaviour.

Despite the growing recognition of the importance of the psychological contract,
research has found that the majority of employees believe their contracts have been
violated in some way (Robinson and Rousseau, 1994). Research on the consequence of
psychological contract breach consistently shows that
it negatively inﬂuences
employees’ attitudes and behaviours, which in turn has implications for organizational
effectiveness (Robinson and Morrison, 1995; Coyle-Shapiro and Kessler, 2000; Coyle-
Shapiro, 2002; Turnley and Feldman, 1999; Robinson and Rousseau, 1994). These
potential negative performance effects, although important across a range of
organizational contexts, are more signiﬁcant for knowledge-intensive organizations
where creating the conditions for employees’ creativity and innovation is critical for
organizational success (Tushman and O’Reilly, 1997; Katz, 1997).


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 387

In these ﬁrms, problem-solving is a complex, demanding and time-consuming
activity, which is dependent on high levels of individual motivation (Pelz and Andrews,
1976; Collins and Amabile, 1999). Furthermore, because scientists and engineers see
their work as a source of identity, the extent to which organizations can help fulﬁl
opportunities for professional achievement and recognition, important dimensions of the
psychological contract, can therefore be powerful motivators (Fiest and Gorman, 1998).
In this context, the fairness with which organizational resources are distributed to
knowledge workers is highly sensitive (Pelz and Andrews, 1976; Alvesson, 2001).

Given the implications of the violation of the psychological contract for negative
employee attitudes and behaviours, including in innovation and knowledge creation,
researchers and practitioners need to develop a deeper understanding of the factors that
may inﬂuence and shape employees’ perceptions of positive fulﬁlment of the contract.
Researchers have explored the role of perceived organizational support (Coyle-Shapiro
and Kessler, 2000) and trust (Robinson and Rousseau, 1994), but the role of organizational
justice has not been systematically investigated. Consequently, there have been calls for
researchers to take account of the role of organizational justice in moderating reactions to
breaches of the psychological contract (Morrison and Robinson, 1997; Rousseau, 1995).
The lack of emphasis on the role of justice in existing research is surprising given its
centrality to psychological contract theory. First, the psychological contract captures the
extent to which the employee believes the organization has delivered its side of the bargain.
In other words, employees are evaluating whether the outcomes they have received, in terms
of training, reward, job satisfaction and so on, are fair in relation to the obligations they have
made to the organization. Second, employees’ perceptions of outcome favourability are
signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the perceived fairness of the procedures that are used to determine
these outcomes (Greenberg and Cropanzano, 2001). Finally, in the context of much greater
line management responsibility in the allocation of organizational resources through, for
example, performance management processes, perceptions of the fairness of the actions of
the line manager (i.e. interactional justice) become a salient issue for employees.

Organizational justice as a moderator between the psychological contract and
commitment

There are relatively few studies that have explored the moderating role of organizational
justice in the relationship between the psychological contract and outcomes such as
commitment and organizational citizenship behaviours. For example, in a study of over
800 managers, Turnley and Feldman (1999) explored the role of moderating factors such
as availability of alternative employment opportunities, justiﬁcation for violating the
contract and procedural justice. They found that procedural justice did not moderate the
relationship between the psychological contract and a range of outcomes (exit, voice,
loyalty). However, only a single item was used to explore procedural justice and this was
speciﬁcally related to procedures for making decisions about lay-offs and terminations,
and not wider organizational resource allocation decisions. One reason for the lack of a
moderating effect may have been the under-speciﬁcation of the justice variable and the
fact that only a fraction of the 800 managers sampled was employed in contexts where
downsizing had recently occurred.

In a longitudinal study of 480 public-sector employees, which used broader measures
of organizational justice, Coyle-Shapiro (2002) did not ﬁnd a moderating role for either
procedural or interactional justice in the relationship between the psychological contract
and organizational citizenship behaviours (OCB). In this research, the procedural justice
measure focused on perceptions of how change was managed rather than on the fairness


388 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

with which wider organizational resources were distributed. In addition, Coyle-Shapiro
argued that the lack of a moderating effect might be explained by the way the
longitudinal design of the study was operationalized. Justice perceptions were measured
at time 2 and related to perceived inducements measured at time 1, while not taking
account of the potential change in inducements between time 1 and time 2.

The case for exploring the role of organizational

The relative paucity of studies that have explored the role of organizational justice and the
psychological contract, and the limitations and questions raised by those that have, point to
the need for more research in this area. One notable exception is the study by Kickul (2001) of
part-time MBA students, which found that organizational justice played an important
moderating role between the psychological contract and employee attitudes and behaviours.
justice has also been made
theoretically within the psychological contract literature. Morrison and Robinson (1997),
in their model of how violation of the psychological contract develops through reneging
and incongruence, suggested that employees’ cognitive assessment of the fairness with
which they are treated might play an important part in explaining subsequent attitudes
and behaviour. Where there is lack of fairness and respect shown, and the psychological
contract has been breached, employees are more likely to express frustration and negative
emotions. Support for this model was subsequently found in a study of 147 managers
before and after they had started a new job (Robinson and Morrison, 2000). Furthermore,
in her pioneering work, Rousseau (1995) emphasizes the importance of both procedural
and interactional justice in relation to the violation of the psychological contract.

Perceptions of

fairness are inextricably bound up within the notion of

to which justice has been done. Workers have expectations of what

the
psychological contract because, in a sense, the contract reﬂects employees’ views of the
extent
the
organization should do in relation to the distribution of resources such as reward, careers
and development and when these expectations are not met, they perceive this as injustice
(Brockner and Wisenfeld, 1996).

Consequently, this study seeks to advance earlier research on the quality of internal
relationships and their importance for knowledge creation in a number of ways. First,
there has been little research that has examined three dimensions of relational quality—
the psychological contract, justice and commitment constructs—within one study. It is
only by studying these variables simultaneously that we can develop a greater
understanding of the role of organizational justice in moderating the relationship between
the psychological contract and knowledge workers’ commitment. Second, by focusing
on fairness and interactional justice in particular, the research emphasizes the critical role
played by line managers in shaping knowledge workers’ experiences of the employment
relationship. As such, our research contributes to the growing debate on how managers
add value in organizations (Bartlett and Ghoshal, 1998; CEML, 2002).

Lastly, by focusing on knowledge workers, R&D workers across several
organizational settings, we can explore the extent to which fairness is a generically
important moderator for this particular type of highly qualiﬁed professional group.
For example, most previous studies operationalizing the psychological contract have
used heterogeneous occupational samples, sometimes in a single employer (Coyle-
Shapiro and Kessler, 2000) but often in multiple organizational settings (Robinson and
Rousseau, 1994). While such designs can be valuable in providing considerable variation
against which to test hypotheses, they may also build in error because ﬁrms’ employment
strategies, and therefore the nature of the psychological contract, can differ between
occupational groups. For some groups, ﬁrms may develop sophisticated HR strategies
that lock them into the organization whereas for others much more rudimentary strategies
may exist (Lepak and Snell, 1998; Tsui et al., 1999).


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 389

Group values and identity may also be important across occupational samples, such as
R&D workers (Pelz and Andrews, 1976). Group value theory (Lind and Tyler, 1988)
suggests that the extent to which an individual perceives that they are valued by the group
and have a sense of belonging or inclusion is important in shaping individual’s views of
justice. Furthermore, if group identity is a powerful motivator (Alvesson, 2001), dealing
with a range of occupational contexts where such dynamics are weak or strong may
present difﬁculties when exploring the effect of justice perceptions. Judgments of the
fairness of outcomes are made relative to the outcomes of some referent and often this
other referent is an individual or a group.

Referents cognition theory (Folger, 1987) suggests that, when people perceive their
outcomes as poorer than those of their referent (in our case other R&D workers in the
same organization), they make an assessment of whether this is fair (Brockner and
Wisenfeld, 1996). Where they perceive the outcome not to be fair in reference group
terms they are likely to feel a sense of injustice. Both group identity theory and referents
cognition theory strongly support our focus on a speciﬁc occupational group, R&D
employees, in order to explore justice perceptions.

In summary, we argue that, in order to understand the importance of the quality of the
employment relationship for knowledge creation, we need to focus on the mechanisms
through which it is linked to the development of employee commitment. Commitment, as
we have established, is a critical mechanism driving innovative behaviour among
knowledge workers. Furthermore, there is strong evidence to suggest that the link
between the psychological contract and commitment is heavily inﬂuenced by the role of
the knowledge worker’s manager and in particular the fairness with which they allocate
resources. Our arguments are summarized in Figure 1.

The contribution made by this paper is to understand the extent to which the perceived
fairness of the manager moderates the relationship between knowledge workers’
psychological contracts and their commitment, which is critical for knowledge
creation. As such, we can evaluate the difference a manager makes in the knowledge
creation process.

Theory and research hypotheses

In this section we consider the constructs used in the study and present the hypotheses
tested in the analysis.

Figure 1 Conceptual model


390 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

The psychological contract and commitment

Rousseau (1995) deﬁned the psychological contract as an inherently subjective
phenomenon, arising when ‘one party believes that promise of future returns has been
made and thus an obligation has been created to provide future beneﬁts’. Although the
organization is perceived as making these promises,
the
organization deﬁnes these reciprocal obligations. They are, as a consequence, highly
subjective, and the individual infers their psychological contract with the organization on
the basis of their interpretation of the organization’s actions.

the individual and not

The psychological contract has its theoretical roots in the exchange model ﬁrst proposed
by Barnard (1938) and later developed by March and Simon (1958). This model suggests
that individuals exchange their contributions (effort, time, conscientiousness, etc.) for
certain inducements that the organization provides (pay, training, etc). Blau (1964)
distinguished between social and economic dimensions of this exchange, with the economic
emphasizing the ﬁnancial and more tangible aspects while social exchange stresses the
socio-emotional aspects. A critical element in the development of social exchange theory is
the idea of the norm of reciprocity (Gouldner, 1960), which obligates individuals to respond
positively to positive treatment from others. The social exchange model suggests that, in an
organizational context where the ﬁrm may provide various economic and social beneﬁts, an
exchange relationship is established and employees feel under an obligation to reciprocate
with behaviours and attitudes that the organization values.

Our interest focuses on the relationship between the psychological contract and affective
commitment, which we have established is critical for knowledge creation, and the extent to
which justice perceptions moderate this relationship. Affective commitment (Meyer and
Allen, 1991) captures the extent to which the individual identiﬁes with the goals and values
of the organization, and previous research has shown that this can be important for
innovative behaviour in organizations (Scott and Bruce, 1994; Thompson and Heron, 2003).
Furthermore, research on affective commitment suggests that the level to which individuals’
needs and expectations are matched by their actual experiences will inﬂuence the extent of
attachment to the organization (Meyer and Allen, 1997).

In this sense, affective commitment has links to the perceived reciprocal obligations
captured in the psychological contract. Based on previous research and predictions in the
psychological contract literature, we would expect that where employees perceive
employer obligations to have been fulﬁlled, they would reciprocate with higher levels of
commitment to the organization.

Organizational justice and the psychological contract

In this section we consider two forms of justice (procedural and interactional) and how
they interact with the psychological contract, which, we argue, can be viewed as a way of
capturing employees’ views of distributive justice.

There are few studies that have explored the factors (such as justice) that are important
in shaping the formation and breach of the psychological contract. Robinson and
Morrison (2000) found that contract breach was high when the employee had not
experienced a formal socialization process and where there were low levels of contact
between new employees and managers. Furthermore, the study posited that managers
have a critical role in dealing with contract breach by offering ‘honest and adequate
explanations for the situation’ and that feelings of psychological contract violation can be
less intense ‘if the employee feels that he or she was treated with fairness, honesty and
respect’. These insights suggest that justice perceptions may play a critical role in
shaping workers’ views of the contract and consequently moderate employee attitudes


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 391

and behaviours. Related to this,
the relationships established
between knowledge workers and their managers (interactional justice) may also have
a critical impact on how they perceive the psychological contract.

the quality of

We argue that measuring the state of the psychological contract can capture the extent
to which employees feel that they have been fairly treated in terms of the distribution of
outcomes. In other words, it can serve as a more broadly based measure of distributive
justice (Kickul, 2001) and embraces economic as well as socio-emotional beneﬁts. Where
contracts have been breached (i.e. where expectations have not been met), employees are
signalling that the beneﬁts and rewards they felt they were owed have not been delivered.
The result is a feeling of distributive injustice (Morrison and Robinson, 1997).

Research that has utilized distributive justice previously has tended to focus on
economic aspects such as people’s response to their pay rise (e.g. Folger and
Cropanzano, 1998). However, other areas, such as interesting and challenging work, can
be important socio-emotional rewards, and there is also evidence that other types of
reward (such as ofﬁce allocation) can carry symbolic signiﬁcance (Greenberg, 1988).
Of course, many of the beneﬁts people value at work can simultaneously carry both
economic and socio-emotional meaning. Pay can act in this way, not only because people
value the economic aspects but because it enables people with the means to achieve
social status and a sense of self-esteem and self-worth. Following Kickul (2001), we
argue that, by embracing both economic and socio-emotional dimensions,
the
psychological contract can broaden our understanding of the potential moderating role
of procedural and interactional justice perceptions.

than one that

Skarlicki and Folger (1997) have also stressed the importance of broadening the
concept of distributive justice in a study exploring the relationship between distributive,
procedural and interactional justice and employees’ retaliatory behaviour. They argued
that future work would beneﬁt from deploying a more global assessment of distributive
justice rather
the
psychological contract (which can cover both socio-emotional and monetary aspects)
could be seen as capturing employees’ assessment of the favourability of a broader set of
outcomes. From this perspective, psychological contract breach can be interpreted as a
form of distributive injustice arising from employees’ assessment as to whether speciﬁc
promises and outcomes they believe to have been made to them have not been fulﬁlled
(Morrison and Robinson, 1997).

focuses narrowly on pay outcomes. As such,

However, Folger and Cropanzano (2001) argue that different

the
psychological contract may have different implications for fairness perceptions. In a
transactional contract, based on economic exchange, individuals tend to have agreements
that are narrow in scope involving easily monetizable outcomes and ‘tit-for-tat’
exchanges. It is likely that, given the emphasis on the economic connection between the
individual and the organization, individuals will place more weight on economic justice
concerns, for example the fairness of pay and reward distribution.

forms of

Under relational contracts (which we would expect in R&D environments), where the
relationship is more open ended and is more demanding of the whole person, outcomes
are as likely to be social (e.g. status and dignity are important) and emotional (e.g.
friendship and love are important), they are more likely to emphasize procedural justice,
for example workers’ involvement in decisions about organizational resource allocation.
There is some evidence that, when a fair process is used, there is a greater chance of
treating someone with dignity and respect (Lind, 1995), which aligns with the relational
form of the contract. Procedural justice has also been found to be important for employee
behaviour because, as Leventhal (1980) have argued, individuals are more likely to
accept the responsibility for their problems if they feel the related procedures are fair.


392 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Fair decision-making in organizations is more likely to take place when decision-making
processes demonstrate consistency, bias suppression, accuracy, correctability,
representativeness and ethicality. As such, Leventhal’s criteria provide a framework
for understanding when this is most likely to occur.

In summary, the literature suggests that there are grounds to hypothesize that
procedural justice may play an important role in shaping employees’ satisfaction with
outcomes (i.e. fulﬁlment of the psychological contract).

There is also increasing evidence that employees’ perceptions of the quality of
interpersonal treatment received while being managed (interactional justice) can be
highly inﬂuential in shaping employees’ attitudes and behaviours (Bies and Moag, 1986).
Previous research has found that interactional justice is positively related to commitment
and organizational citizenship behaviours (Malatesta and Byrne, 1997 cited in Coyle-
Shapiro 2002) and high levels of interactional
justice can moderate employees’
retaliatory behaviours (Skarlicki and Folger, 1997). The manager or supervisor is the
focal point of interactional justice perceptions and has even been called a ‘climate
engineer’, because managers shape the meaning employees attribute to organizational
phenomenon (Naumann and Bennett, 2000).

As such, we would expect that the relationship between the psychological contract and
employee commitment would be strongly inﬂuenced by the quality of the employee’s
relationship with their immediate manager. For example, if a manager does not deal well
with employee concerns about career or job design issues, this could directly and
negatively inﬂuence employee motivation and commitment. However, high-quality
interpersonal relations may moderate the impact where expectations have not been met.
The discussion so far suggests the following: ﬁrst, where employees perceive the
psychological contract to have been breached this will lead to negative attitudes and
behaviours, such as lower affective commitment. Second, individuals’ negative attitudes
and behaviours, may be moderated by the extent to which they feel that the procedures
used to arrive at resource allocation decisions are fair. And, third, attitudes and
behaviours may also be affected by the perceived quality of the relationship between the
manager and the individual employee.

However, there is also the possibility that the psychological contract and the two
forms of justice may work together to inﬂuence attitudes and behaviours. Folger (1993),
using referents cognition theory, proposed that, when individuals perceive unfavourable
outcomes at work, two factors would predict when they would respond negatively: ﬁrst,
the severity of the loss or, in psychological contract terms, the scale of the breach and,
second, the inappropriateness of the conduct by a manager or agent of the organization.
On this latter factor, Folger (1993) suggests that inappropriate conduct by the manager
may cover either procedural or interactional justice.

Both theory and research suggest that it is important to examine how the different
forms of justice (psychological contract, procedural and interactional) interact with one
another to predict attitudes and behaviours such as commitment. Following Skarlicki and
Folger (1997), we suggest that there are grounds for a three-way interaction between
procedural, interactional justice, the psychological contract and commitment. This
insight opens up the possibility that interactional and procedural justice may interact in
the same way with the psychological contract
to inﬂuence individuals’ affective
commitment and could be substitutes for each other.

For example, if employees see a manager to be interpersonally fair in transactions
with employees through consideration of employees’ needs and respectful of their
dignity, there may be less need for procedural safeguards. However, if the manager’s
behaviour is seen to drop below acceptable levels of interactional fairness then


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 393

procedural safeguards become critical and may shape levels of employee commitment in
the context of unfavourable outcomes (psychological contract breach). Similarly, when
procedures are deemed to be unfair, an employee’s assessment of a manager’s
interpersonal treatment is likely to predict whether commitment follows from perceived
breach of the psychological contract.

This argument suggests that the relationship between the psychological contract
breach and commitment is likely to be positive in the context of high levels of both
procedural and interactional justice. Furthermore, the relationship between psychologi-
cal contract breach and commitment will be less positive where one form of justice
(procedural or interactional) is low and the other is high.

Following Skarlicki and Folger (1997) we argue that procedural and interactional
in the relationship between the
justice function as substitutes for each other
psychological contract and employee commitment, which leads to the following
hypotheses on the two-way interactions:

Hypothesis 1: The psychological contract and procedural justice will interact to

predict knowledge worker commitment.

Hypothesis 2: The psychological contract and interactional justice will interact to

predict knowledge worker commitment.

The substitution argument also suggests that the three-way interaction should also be

signiﬁcant, leading to three further hypotheses:

Hypothesis 3: At a low level of interactional justice, procedural justice will moderate
the relationship between breach of the psychological contract and
knowledge worker commitment.

Hypothesis 4: At low levels of procedural justice, interactional justice will moderate
the relationship between psychological contract breach and knowledge
worker commitment.

Hypothesis 5: High levels of both procedural and interactional justice will moderate
the relationship between psychological contract breach and knowledge
worker commitment.

Methods

Sample and data collection

A survey design was used to assess the importance of procedural and interactional justice
in the relationship between the psychological contract and commitment across R&D
workers in six different leading high-technology ﬁrms: 3M Healthcare, ARM, Delcam,
HP Labs, Osmetech and Pﬁzer.

The R&D workforce in these ﬁrms varied from thirty to 2,000 scientists or engineers.
In each company we surveyed all R&D employees, with the exception of Pﬁzer where
a 15 per cent random sample was selected from the large number of R&D workers.
The surveys were completed on-line in ﬁve of the ﬁrms and a paper version in one ﬁrm
whose employees did not have individual desktop access to the Internet. A total of 849
R&D workers were invited to respond and 429 replies were received, achieving an
overall response rate of 51 per cent, which is considered acceptable for an independent
and voluntary survey of this type.


394 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Our six organizations covered three different market sectors within high technology:
IT software, IT hardware and pharmaceuticals. The organizations included in our sample
range from the small to the large in both size of company (forty to 5500 employees) and
R&D capability (twenty-two to 2000 employees). R&D activities carried out are also
varied both within and between companies, ranging from blue-sky, basic and applied
research to product development and design. There were signiﬁcant differences between
organizations by age of employee (33 to 39 years), gender (8 to 46 per cent female),
density of doctorate qualiﬁed employees (10 to 48 per cent) and salary (mean difference
of £13,000). These all formed primary control variables within the research, along with
organizational membership.

Measures

relationship,

Psychological contract Thompson and Heron (2003) assessed the state of
the
psychological contract in UK R&D intensive high-technology ﬁrms with an instrument
that broadly tapped the employment
including opportunities for
development, autonomy, responsibility and rewards, both monetary and non-monetary.
Using an index approach (Turnley and Feldman, 1999), they combined the individual
employees’ rating of the extent to which each factor in the psychological contract is owed
to them personally, the extent to which the organization has fulﬁlled this expectation
weighted by the importance of each factor to the individual employee. They reported that
the twenty-one items factored out into four distinct and reliable scales: performance pay,
job design, career and work/life balance. Through their analysis it was shown that each
scale had a signiﬁcant and positive relationship with affective commitment. Further
analysis for this study revealed that all four of the scales loaded onto a single meta-factor
(principal components extraction with a varimax rotation) explaining over 55 per cent of
the variance. This meta-scale is simply called ‘psychological contract’ and measures the
combined total of violation or fulﬁlment for each employee. The psychological contract
scale has an alpha reliability of .86.

Interactional justice We used three items from the interactional justice measure
developed by Moorman (1991). Furthermore, Ettlie and O’Keefe (1982) have identiﬁed
the role of the supervisor and their interaction with employees to be of importance in
relation to their innovative behaviour. As innovation is an important organizational goal
for our R&D sample, we therefore included ﬁve items from Oldham and Cumming’s
(1996) supportive supervision scale that has been shown to correlate with objective
measures of
innovation such as number of patents and supervisory ratings of
performance and creativity. The eight items are shown in Table 1 and measure the
competence and interpersonal skills of R&D supervisors, the extent to which they
communicate their decisions effectively, provide feedback and encourage development
and interact with the employee in a truthful and fair manner. Alpha reliability was .88.

Procedural justice Procedural justice was measured with three items taken from a scale
developed by Moorman (1991) and based on the work regarding the fairness of formal
procedures suggested by Leventhal (1980). The items measure the degree to which
employees perceive there to be opportunities to challenge decisions affecting them,
whether there are procedures in place to make sure that these decisions are consistent and
that they take account of their concerns. The alpha reliability of .66 is lower than that
reported in the study by Moorman and is perhaps a reﬂection of using only three out of
the original seven scale items (albeit three of the strongest factor loadings).


Table 1 Descriptive statistics, correlationsa and reliabilitiesb

Variables

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Psychological contract
Interactional justice
Procedural justice
Affective commitment
Doctoratec
Length of serviced
Femalec
Salaryd
No dependantsc
Age

Mean

2 1.78
3.51
2.83
3.16
0.21
0.56
0.26
4.47
0.54
34.26

SD

2.15
0.79
0.77
1.00
0.41
0.46
0.44
0.17
0.50
7.89

1

.86
.53
.51
.42
.08
.07
2 .20
.37
2 .07
.13

Notes
a For correlations greater than .10, p , :05:
b Cronbach’s alpha reliability scores appear on the diagonal, where appropriate.
c Dummy variable.
d Natural log.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

.88
.50
.43
.04
2 .09
2 .07
.09
2 .03
2 .04

.66
.38
2 .04
2 .15
2 .11
.13
.02
2 .05

.82
2 .01
.10
2 .13
.18
2 .10
.10

2 .06
2 .03
.27
.01
.09

2 .10
.34
2 .31
.48

2 .43
.10
2 .20

2 .22
.53

2 .44

T
h
o
m
p
s
o
n

a
n
d
H
e
r
o
n
:

T
h
e

d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
c
e

a
m
a
n
a
g
e
r

c
a
n
m
a
k
e

3
9
5


396 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Affective commitment We used the three highest-loading items on the affective
commitment factor that were operationalized by McGee and Ford (1987) in their
validation of Meyer and Allen’s (1984) commitment dimensions. The items were: ‘I feel
a strong sense of belonging to my organization’; ‘I feel “emotionally attached” to this
organization’; and ‘This organization has a great deal of personal meaning for me’. The
alpha reliability at .82 was similar to that found by McGee and Ford.

The justice and affective commitment measures were self-reported and measured on a

5-point Likert scale from ‘strongly disagree’ to ‘strongly agree’.

Scale structure and modiﬁcation Given that part of Moorman’s (1991) study was to
show how formal procedural justice was distinct from interactional justice, and in the
light of the weaker reliability of our procedural justice measure, we tested the integrity of
the scale structure of all of our study’s variables. A factor analysis (principal components
extraction, varimax rotation) of all the items contained within the two justice measures,
affective commitment, along with the four psychological contract aspects was carried
out. The results revealed a clean four-factor solution explaining 60 per cent of the
variance and with each item loading onto its designated scale. This showed a high degree
of construct validity among the study’s variables and further support for Moorman’s
distinction between procedural and interactional justice.

Controls

In our model we control for a number of personal and demographic variables that could
pose a threat to internal validity and confound our results. We included variables that in
the Thompson and Heron (2003) study were signiﬁcantly related to the psychological
contract. These include gender, educated to doctorate level, age, dependants, salary and
length of service. The six organizations were coded as individual dummy variables.

Method of analysis

Hierarchical regression was used to test the hypotheses, as we wanted to control for the
order in which our variables of interest were entered. The controls, main effects, second-
order and third-order interactions were entered as predictors in steps of a multiple
regression equation predicting the dependent variable. Signiﬁcant changes in the
adjusted R 2 were examined to assess the changes in the level of explained variance at
each step. To reduce the level of multicollinearity when using interaction terms, the
predictor variables were mean centred prior to forming the interaction variable (Cohen
and Cohen, 1983).

Results

Table 1 presents the means, standard deviations, reliabilities and correlations for the
study’s variables. All correlations were below the .70,
thus indicating that
multicollinearity would not be a problem using these variables in our analysis
(Tabachnick and Fidell, 1996).

The results from the hierarchical regression are shown in Table 2. In step 1 the control
variables were entered, followed by the psychological contract measure in step 2. Fulﬁlment
of the psychological contract had a strong and positive relationship with affective
commitment and explained 10 per cent of varianceðb¼ :38; p , :001Þ: The inclusion of the
interactional ðb¼ :27; p , :001Þ and procedural justice ðb¼ :18; p , :01Þ measures in
step 3 explained a further signiﬁcant 8 per cent of variance.


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 397

Table 2 Results of hierarchical regression analyses

Variables

b

Change in R 2

F

Step 1
Organizationa
Doctorate
Length of service
Female
Salary
No dependants
Age
Step 2
Psychological contract (PC)
Step 3
Interactional justice (IJ)
Procedural justice (PJ)
Step 4
PC * IJ
PC * PJ
IJ * PJ
Step 5
PC * IJ * PJ
Overall model
R 2 (adjusted R 2)
F

*p , :05; **p , :01; ***p , :001:
a Five dummy variables were entered.

.05
.16*
.01
2 .04
2 .11
2 .01

.38***

.27***
.18**

.05

2 .23**
.15*

2 .20*

.40 (.36)

10.23***

.14

.04

.10

.08

.02

.01

9.69***

2.06

40.48***

17.85***

3.46*

6.30*

The entry of the set of two-way interactions in step 4 increased R 2 by an additional 2
per cent with a signiﬁcant interaction between the psychological contract and procedural
justice ðb¼ 2:23; p , :01Þ; in support of hypothesis 1. Contrary to hypothesis 2, we did
not ﬁnd a two-way interaction between the psychological contract, interactional justice
and commitment. There was a further interaction between interactional justice and
procedural justice ðb¼ :15; p , :05Þ; which we did not predict in our hypotheses.

three independent variables (psychological contract,

However, these relationships are made moot by a signiﬁcant three-way interaction
interactional and
between all
procedural justice) in predicting affective commitment in the ﬁnal stage of the analysis
ðb¼ 2:20; p , :05; R 2 ¼ :01Þ: Over all, the speciﬁed model accounted for 40 per cent
of the variance in affective commitment (adjusted R 2 ¼ :36; F ¼ 10:23; p , :001Þ:

In order to test hypotheses 3, 4 and 5 the nature of the three-way interaction was
assessed following the procedure outlined by Aiken and West (1991). We used the
unstandardized regression coefﬁcients and constant from the full regression equation to
plot the primary relationship between psychological contract fulﬁlment and affective
commitment at high levels (one standard deviation above the mean) and low levels (one
standard deviation below the mean) of interactional and procedural justice. The nature of
the interaction is revealed in Figure 2, which shows that the highest levels of commitment
are reported when there are high levels of both interactional and procedural justice.

Table 3 contains details of a simple slope regression analysis that enabled us to assess
the signiﬁcance of each pair of moderators. The non-signiﬁcance of the slope when both
justice types are high indicates that, regardless of the state of the psychological contract
(breached or fulﬁlled), affective commitment to the organization is high. This supports


398 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Figure 2 The moderating effect of justice on the relationship between the psychological contract
and affective commitment

hypothesis 5 but the results go beyond our prediction by showing that when both
procedural and interactional justice are high commitment is high regardless of the state of
the psychological contract. We predicted that, in the case of contract breach, high levels
of justice would moderate the relationship. By contrast, in the absence of justice
(i.e. when both justice types were low) the state of the psychological contract made a
signiﬁcant difference to the level of commitment.

We did not ﬁnd support for our argument (hypotheses 3 and 4) that procedural and
distributive justice would act as substitutes in the relationship between the psychological
contract and commitment. We found that where employees perceive both types of justice
to be high this moderated the breach of the psychological contract; however, the absence
of procedural justice (when interactional justice was high) meant signiﬁcantly lower
commitment when the psychological contract was unfulﬁlled. This ﬁnding is contrary to
our prediction in hypothesis 4. There was also no support for hypothesis 3. We found no
statistically signiﬁcant relationship between the psychological contract and affective
commitment under the reverse conditions—high procedural and low interactional
justice. Furthermore, when the psychological contract was fulﬁlled levels of affective
commitment were at their lowest when interactional justice was reported to be low.

Table 3 Standard errors and t-tests for simple slopes of affective commitment on psychological
contract

At levels of Interactional
justice

Procedural
justice

High
Low
High
Low

Note
***p , :001:

High
High
Low
Low

Simple
slope

2 .06
.03
.21
.14

Standard
error

.05
.06
.06
.04

t-test

2 1.21
.39
3.48***
3.30***


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 399

Discussion

In this study we set out to explore the extent to which organizational justice (and thereby
managers’ behaviour) makes a difference in the knowledge creation process through its impact
on the quality of two important dimensions of social or relational capital in organizations, the
psychological contract and commitment. A growing literature from a number of diverse ﬁelds,
such as knowledge management, innovation and organizational behaviour, emphasizes the
important part played by the quality of employee–manager relationships in creating the
context within which employee behaviour and attitudes are fostered.

The main contribution of this paper has been to integrate these perspectives around the
management of knowledge worker commitment and to bring rigorous empirical evidence
to bear on the question: how does the quality of the employee – management relationship,
as evidenced by organizational justice perceptions, make a difference in the relationship
between the psychological contract and knowledge worker commitment? As such, our
focus has been on the quality of relationship of two distinct types, that between the
individual and the organization and that between the individual and the managers and the
consequences for knowledge-worker commitment.

The paper is unique in that it explores, simultaneously, the role of procedural and
interactional justice as a moderator in the relationship between the psychological
contract and commitment, particularly for one speciﬁc occupational group (R&D
workers) across different organizational settings. The results show that, where employees
perceive unfair processes and feel that they have not been treated with dignity and
respect, this can have considerable impact on their levels of commitment, which is a
critical lynchpin in the knowledge creation process.

Our research found that the affective commitment of R&D workers was predicted by
the three-way interaction among the psychological contract, procedural and interactional
justice. When the psychological contract is perceived as fulﬁlled, and individuals report
high levels of both procedural and interactional justice, this predicts high levels of
affective commitment. In other words, organizational justice really does matter.

These results conﬁrm the theoretical predictions made by Morrison and Robinson
(1997) and Rousseau (1995), who suggested that the negative attitudes and behaviours
that can arise from contract breach may be mitigated by employees’ perceptions of the
fairness of organizational processes and practices. In other words, organizations that
create strong ethical work climates through fair procedures and developing good quality
employee-manager
levels of employee
commitment. The ﬁndings also build upon Kickul’s (2001) study of part-time MBA
students by providing further empirical evidence on the role of justice in moderating the
relationship between the psychological contract and outcomes.

relationships will beneﬁt

from higher

There is also support for Folger’s (1986) referent cognitions theory, which posited that
when unfair procedures are combined with unfair outcomes, people are likely to feel
angry and resentful. Our analysis shows that the lowest levels of affective commitment
exist where all forms of justice and the psychological contract are low. However, our
analysis also departs signiﬁcantly from Folger’s predictions. It is only when interactional
and procedural justice is jointly perceived as positive that justice successfully moderates
the relationship between a poor psychological contract and affective commitment.

The results also provide important insights into the way in which procedural and
interactional justice interacts with perceived psychological contract fulﬁlment to predict
affective commitment. Affective commitment is higher only when interactional justice is
perceived to be high. Affective commitment is much lower when procedural justice is high
and interactional justice is low. In the context of psychological contract breach, higher


400 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

perceived levels of procedural justice are important in moderating the relationship with
commitment. However, where the contract is fulﬁlled, and there are low levels of
interactional justice, affective commitment will always be lower regardless of perceptions
of procedural justice. This suggests that the perceived quality of the relationship between the
employee and their manager is critical in shaping R&D employees’ commitment. It also
suggests that we cannot necessarily view procedural and interactional justice as substitutes for
one another (Skarlicki and Folger, 1997).

Most research on organizational justice has suggested that fair procedures can obviate
the potential negative effects of unfavourable outcomes, if, for example, they conform to
Leventhal (1980) criteria. However, it may also be possible, using Cropanzano and
Ambrose’s (2002) suggestion that outcomes themselves may serve to qualify the effects of
procedures that are perceived as unfair. In our study, there is evidence, albeit constrained
by the cross-sectional nature of our data, that fulﬁlment of obligations in the psychological
contract may potentially mitigate such perceptions. Employees rate affective commitment
higher, in the context of low levels of both procedural and interactional justice, where they
perceive the psychological contract to have been fulﬁlled.

Future research using longitudinal designs is needed to understand the causal patterns
among the various organizational justice dimensions, if this is possible, given the strong
potential interaction between perceptions of the fairness of outcomes and individuals’
evaluation of interactional and procedural
justice, as pointed out by Folger and
Cropanzano (2001).

The results suggest that management really can make a difference in the context of
breach of the psychological contract but only if R&D organizations can ensure that they
create work environments where employees perceive high levels of both procedural and
interactional justice. Organizations need to ensure that the psychological contract is not
breached and that the relationship between managers and individuals is of a high quality.
This supports the arguments made by Nonaka et al. (2001), who suggest that ‘it is important
for leaders to ensure that there is an atmosphere in which an organisation’s members feel
safe sharing their knowledge’. High levels of justice and fair treatment are likely to
contribute to members ‘feeling safe’ and underpin knowledge creation and sharing.

From an organizational perspective, these results suggest that R&D ﬁrms should
prioritize investment in the development of people management capabilities among their
R&D managers. Indeed, research on R&D workers suggests that the levels of autonomy
and task discretion, as well as strong professional standards and ethos demanded by R&D
workers, means that they value high levels of managerial support but not necessarily
direction (Raelin, 1985). As such, they are likely to value supportive managerial styles
which can facilitate their work activities. In the context of the shift from traditional
bureaucratic modes of control to market-based models, the importance of managerial
support may become more important to R&D employees and presents a real challenge to
directors of R&D functions.

In addition to improving the quality of management

through training and
development, R&D ﬁrms may also ﬁnd it valuable to introduce systems such as
employee feedback and development. Such systems can help to institutionalize contact
between employees and managers but also provide a mechanism through which
managers can learn about their comparative effectiveness in creating innovative and
supportive climates. The use of performance feedback systems with clear and transparent
criteria as well as processes may go some way to mitigating knowledge worker concerns
about fair treatment. However, ﬁrms also need to be sensitive to the dangers of over-
bureaucratization of the employment relationship and the potential detrimental effects
this may have for innovation (Kim and Mauborgne, 1997).


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 401

their knowledge and expertise rather

Firms in non-R&D contexts have been drawn to competency frameworks as a means
for developing a shared language around managerial behaviour and attitudes. Such
approaches are not that widespread in R&D organizations, where leaders of scientists
and engineers are valued more for
than
management style, a fact often reﬂected in career progression systems. However, our
study suggests that expert knowledge may be a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition
for the leadership of highly effective R&D organizations. A key challenge for such
ﬁrms will be to develop HR strategies that balance the needs of the organization for
knowledge creation with the needs of individuals, and also managers. In some
organizations, dual-career ladders have been introduced as a means of providing
progression for
talented scientists and engineers who do not want managerial
responsibilities. Future research is needed to understand the types of HR strategies that
are most effective for leading R&D organizations and the conditions under which they
work best.

In conclusion, this study has sought to bring work relationships back in to the discussions
on knowledge creation in organizations. It has done this by exploring how the quality of
relationships, as reﬂected through the psychological contract and organizational justice, is
critical in driving knowledge worker commitment, which is argued to be core to the creation
of knowledge. Our analysis suggests that, when managers succeed in developing high-
quality relationships with employees based on procedural and interactional justice they are
more likely to create the conditions where knowledge workers’ commitment and knowledge
creation can take place.

Acknowledgements

The research was funded under the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC)
Innovation Programme: Award L125251055. We would like to thank our anonymous
reviewers and also Ian Kessler and Roger Undy for comments on the paper.

References

Aiken, L.S. and West, S.G. (1991) Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions.

Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Alvesson, M. (2001) ‘Knowledge Work: Ambiguity, Image and Identity’, Human Relations, 54:

863 – 86.

Barnard, C.I. (1938) The Functions of the Executive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bartlett, C.A. and Ghoshal, S. (1998) ‘Beyond Strategic Planning to Organization Learning:

Lifeblood of the Individualized Corporation’, Strategy & Leadership, 26: 34 – 9.

Bies, R.J. and Moag, J.S. (1986) ‘Interactional Justice: Communication Criteria for Fairness’.
In Lewicki, R.J., Sheppard, B.H. and Bazerman, M. (eds) Research on Negotiation in
Organizations, Vol. 1. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, pp. 43 – 55.

Blau, P. (1964) Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: Wiley.
Brockner, J. and Wiesenfeld, B. M. (1996) ‘An integrative framework for explaining reactions to
the interactive effects of outcomes and procedures’, Psychological Bulletin,

decisions:
120:189 – 208.

CEML (2002) Raising Our Game, Final Report of Council for Excellence in Management and

Leadership. London.


402 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Child, J. and Rodriguez, S. (2001) ‘Social Identity and Organizational Learning’. In Easterby-
Smith, M. and Lyles, M.A. (eds) The Blackwell Handbook of Organizational Learning and
Knowledge Management. Blackwell.

Coff, R.W. and Rousseau, D.M. (2000) ‘Sustainable competitive advantage and employability: Is it
a ‘win-win’ situation?’ In Leana, C.R. and Rousseau, D.M. (eds) Relational Wealth: The
advantages of Stability in a Changing Economy. Oxford: OUP.

Cohen, J. and Cohen, P. (1983) Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analyses for the

Behavioral Sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Collins, M.A. and Amabile, T.M. (1999) ‘Motivation and Creativity’. In Sternberg, R.J. (ed.)

Handbook of Creativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Coyle-Shapiro, J.A.M.

(2002)

‘A Psychological Contract Perspective on Organizational

Citizenship Behavior’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23: 927 – 46.

Coyle-Shapiro, J. and Kessler, I. (2000) ‘Consequences of the Psychological Contract for the
Employment Relationship: A Large-Scale Survey’, Journal of Management Studies, 37:
903 – 30.

Cropanzano, R. and Ambrose, M.L. (2002) ‘Procedural and Distributive Justice are More Similar
than You Think: A Monistic Perspective and Research Agenda’. In Greenberg, J. and
Cropanzano, R. (eds) Advances in Organizational Justice. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.

Ettlie, J.E. and O’Keefe, R.D.

(1982)

‘Innovative Attitudes, Values, and Intentions in

Organizations’, Journal of Management Studies, 19: 163 – 82.

Fiest, G.J. and Gorman, M.E. (1998) ‘The Psychology of Science: Review and Integration of a

Nascent Discipline’, Review of General Psychology, 2: 3 – 47.

Folger, R. (1986) ‘Rethinking Equity Theory: A Referent Cognitions Model’. In Bierhoff, H.W.,

Cohen, R.L. and Greenberg, J. (eds) Justice in Social Relations. New York: Plenum.

Folger, R. (1987) ‘Reformulating the preconditions for resentment: A referent cognitions model’.
In Masters, J.C. and Smith, W.P. (eds) Social comparison, justice, and relative deprivation:
Theoretical, empirical and policy perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Folger, R. (1993) ‘Reactions to Mistreatment at Work’. In Murnigham, J.K. (ed.) Social Psychology
in Organizations: Advances in Theory and Practice. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall,
pp. 161 – 83.

Folger, R. and Cropanzano, R. (1998) Organizational Justice and Human Resource Management.

London: Sage.

Folger, R. and Cropanzano, R. (2001) ‘Fairness Theory: Justice as Accountability’. In Greenberg, J.
and Cropanzano, R. (eds) Advances in Organizational Justice. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

Gouldner, A.W.

(1960)

‘The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement’, American

Sociological Review, 25: 161 – 79.

Grant, R.M. (1996) ‘Towards a Knowledge-Based Theory of the Firm’, Strategic Management

Journal, 17: 109 – 22.

Greenberg, J. (1988) ‘Cultivating an Image of Justice: Looking Fair on the Job’, Academy of

Management Executive, 1: 155 – 8.

Greenberg, J. and Cropanzano, R. (2001) Advances in Organizational Justice. Stanford, CA:

Stanford University Press.

Hislop, D. (2003) ‘Linking human resource management and knowledge management via

commitment: a review and research agenda’, Employee Relations, 25(1/2).

Katz, R. (1997) ‘Motivating Professionals in Organizations’. In Katz, R. (ed.) The Human Side of

Managing Technological Innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kickul, J. (2001) ‘When Organizations Break their Promises: Employee Reactions to Unfair

Processes and Treatment’, Journal of Business Ethics, 29: 289 – 307.

Kim, W.C. and Mauborgne, R. (1997) ‘Fair process: managing in the knowledge economy’,

Harvard Business Review, 75(4).

Kogut, B. and Zander, U. (1992) ‘Knowledge of the Firm, Combinative Capabilities and the

Replication of Technology’, Organization Studies, 3: 383 – 97.


Thompson and Heron: The difference a manager can make 403

Leana, C.R. and Van Buren, H.J. (1999) ‘Organizational social capital and employment practices’,

Academy of Management Review, 24: 538 – 55.

Leana, C.R. and Rousseau, D.M. (eds) (2000) Relational Wealth: The Advantages of Stability in a

Changing Economy. Oxford: OUP.

Lepak, D.P. and Snell, S.A. (1999) ‘The Human Resource Architecture: Toward a Theory of

Human Capital Allocation and Development’, Academy of Management Review, 24: 31 – 48.

Leventhal, G.S. (1980) ‘What Should Be Done with Equity Theory? New Approaches to the Study
of Fairness in Social Relationships’. In Gergen, K.S., Greenberg, M.S. and Willis, R.H. (eds)
Social Exchange: Advances in Theory and Research. New York: Plenum Press.

Lind, E.A. (1995) ‘Justice and Authority Relations in Organizations’. In Cropanzano, R. and
Kacmar, M.K. (eds) Organizational Politics, Justice, and Support: Managing the Social
Climate of the Workplace. Westport, CT: Quorum Books.

Lind, E.A. and Tyler, T.R. (1998) The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice. New York: Plenum

Press.

McGee, G.W. and Ford, R.C. (1987) ‘Two (or More?) Dimensions of Organizational Commitment:
Re-examination of the Affective and Continuance Commitment Scales’, Journal of Applied
Psychology, 72: 638 – 41.

March, J.G. and Simon, H.A. (1958) Organizations. New York: Wiley.
Meyer, J.P. and Allen, N.J. (1984) ‘Testing the “Side-Bet Theory” of Organizational Commitment:

Some Methodological Considerations’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 69: 372 – 8.

Meyer, J.P. and Allen, N.J. (1991) ‘A Three-Component Conceptualization of Organizational

Commitment’, Human Resource Management Review, 1: 61 – 89.

Meyer, J.P. and Allen, N.J. (1997) Commitment in the Workplace: Theory, Research, and

Application. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Moorman, R.H.

(1991)

‘Relationship between Organizational Justice and Organizational
Citizenship Behaviors: Do Fairness Perceptions Inﬂuence Employee Citizenship?’, Journal of
Applied Psychology, 76: 845 – 55.

Morrison, E.W. and Robinson, S.L. (1997) ‘When Employees Feel Betrayed: A Model of How

Psychological Contract Violation Develops’, Academy of Management Review, 22: 226 – 56.

Mumford, M.D., Scott G.M., Gaddis, B. and Strange, J.M. (2002) ‘Leading creation people:

Orchestrating expertise and relationship’, The Leadership Quarterly, 13: 705 – 50.

Nahapiet, J. and Ghoshal, S. (1998) ‘Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational

advantage’, Academy of Management Journal, 23: 242 – 66.

Naito, H. (2001) ‘Knowledge is Commitment’. In Nonaka, I. and Teece, D. (eds) Managing

Industrial Knowledge: Creation, Transfer and Utilization. Sage.

Naumann, S.E. and Bennett, N. (2000) ‘A Case for Procedural Justice Climate: Development and

Test of a Multilevel Model’, Academy of Management Journal, 43: 881 – 9.

Nonaka, I., Toyama, R. and Konno, N. (2001) ‘SECI, Ba and Leadership: a Uniﬁed Model of
Dynamic Knowledge Creation’. In Nonaka, I. and Teece, D. (eds) Managing Industrial
Knowledge: Creation, Transfer and Utilization. Sage.

Oldham, G.R. and Cumming, A. (1996) ‘Employee Creativity: Personal and Contextual Factors at

Work’, Academy of Management Journal, 39: 607 – 34.

Pelz, D.C. (1963) ‘Relationships between measures of scientiﬁc performance and other variables’.
In Taylor, C.W. and Baron, F. (eds) Scientiﬁc Creativity: Its Recognition and Development.
New York: Wiley.

Pelz, D.C. and Andrews, F.M. (1976) Scientists in Organizations: Productive Climates for

Research and Development. New York: Wiley.

Raelin, J.A. (1985) ‘The Basis for the Professional’s Resistance to Managerial Control’, Human

Resource Management, 24: 147 – 75.

Robertson, M. and O’Malley Hammersely, G. (2000) ‘Knowledge management practices within a
knowledge-intensive ﬁrm: The signiﬁcance of the people management dimension’, Journal of
European Industrial Training, 24(2-4): 241 – 53.


404 The International Journal of Human Resource Management

Robinson, S.L. and Morrison, E.W. (1995) ‘Psychological Contracts and OCB: The Effect of
Unfulﬁlled Obligations on Civic Virtue Behavior’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 16:
289 – 98.

Robinson, S.L. and Morrison, E.W. (2000) ‘The Development of Psychological Contract Breach

Violation: A Longitudinal Study’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21: 525 – 46.

Robinson, S.L. and Rousseau, D.M. (1994) ‘Violating the Psychological Contract: Not the

Exception but the Norm’, Journal of Organizational Behavior, 15: 245 – 59.

Rousseau, D.M. (1995) Psychological Contracts in Organizations: Understanding Written and

Unwritten Agreements. London: Sage.

Scott, S.G. and Bruce, R.A. (1994) ‘Determinants of Innovative Behavior: A Path Model of

Individual Innovation in the Workplace’, Academy of Management Journal, 37: 580 – 607.

Skarlicki, D.P. and Folger, R. (1997) ‘Retaliation in the Workplace: The Roles of Distributive,

Procedural and Interactional Justice’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 82: 434 – 43.

Storey, J. and Quintas, P. (2001) ‘Knowledge management and HRM’. In Storey, J.(ed.) Human

Resource Management: A critical Text. London: Thomson Learning.

Tabachnick, B.G. and Fidell, L.S. (1996) Using Multivariate Statistics. New York: HarperCollins.
Takeuchi, H. (2001) ‘Towards a Universal Management of the Concept of Knowledge’.
In Nonaka, I. and Teece, D. (eds) Managing Industrial Knowledge: Creation, Transfer and
Utilization. Sage.

Thompson, M. and Heron, P. (2003) ‘Knowledge Creation and the Employment Relationship’.

Paper presented at the Academy of Management Conference, Seattle.

Tierney, P., Farmer, S.M. and Graen, G. B. (1999) ‘An examination of leadership and employee

creativity: the relevance of traits and relationships’, Personnel Psychology, 52.

Tsui, A.S., Pearce, J.L., Porter, L.W. and Tripoli, A.M. (1997) ‘Alternative Approaches to the
Employee – Organization Relationship: Does Investment in Employees Pay Off?’, Academy of
Management Journal, 40: 1089 – 121.

Turnley, W.H. and Feldman, D.C. (1999) ‘The Impact of Psychological Contract Violations on

Exit, Voice, Loyalty, and Neglect’, Human Relations, 52: 895 – 922.

Tushman, M.L. and O’Reilly, C.A., III. (1997) Winning through Innovation. Boston, MA: Harvard

Business School Press.

Tyler, T.R. and Lind, E.A. (1992) ‘A Relational Model of Authority in Groups’. In Zanna, M.P.

(ed.) Advances In Experimental Social Psychology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

