Effects of Introducing 
A  Performance Management 
System on  Employees' 
Subsequent Attitudes and Effort 

Paul J.Taylor 
Jon  L  Pierce 

A  longitudinal  e v a l u a t i on  w as  c o n d u c t ed  on  the  effects  of  i n t r o d u c i ng  a  p e r f o r m a n ce 
m a n a g e m e nt  s y s t em  ( P M S ),  w h i ch  f e a t u r ed  m e r i t - b a s ed  b o n us  pay,  on  s u b s e q u e nt 
e m p l o y ee  a t t i t u d es  a nd  self-reported  w o rk  effort  in  a  small,  g o v e r n m e nt  o r g a n i z a­
tion.  Additionally,  e m p l o y e e s'  t a r g e ts  of  b l a me  for  receiving 
l o w e r - t h a n - e x p e c t ed 
ratings  w e re  e x p l o r e d.  A  significant  c h a n ge  in  e m p l o y e e s'  o r g a n i z a t i o n al  c o m m i t­
ment  o c c u r r ed o v er  the  t i me  that  the  P MS  w as  i m p l e m e n t e d,  w i th  a  s u b s t a n t i al 
increase  o c c u r r i ng  w i t h in  the  p e r f o r m a n ce  p l a n n i n g / g o a l - s e t t i ng  p h a s e,  followed  by 
a  slight  d e c ay  o v er  t he  following  year,  b ut  still  e n d i ng  h i g h er  t h an  the  p r e - P MS  b a s e­
line  level.  Substantial  i n c r e a s es  in  r a t i n gs  of  satisfaction  a nd  c o o p e r a t i on  w i th  o n e 's 
supervisor  w e re  found  w i th  the  i n t r o d u c t i on  of  the  P MS  for  low  p e r f o r m e rs  ( p a r t i c u­
larly  following  the  p e r f o r m a n ce  p l a n n i n g / g o a l - s e t t i ng  p h a s e ).  In  c o n t r a s t,  h o w e v e r, 
high  p e r f o r m e rs  h ad  high  base-line  levels  of  these  a t t i t u d es  t o w a rd  s u p e r v i s i o n, 
followed  by  substantial  d r o ps  i m m e d i a t e ly  after  r e c e i v i ng  a p p r a i s al  a nd  b o n us  p ay 
distributions.  As  a n t i c i p a t e d,  m o st  p a r t i c i p a n ts  in  this  s t u dy  h ad  e x p e c t ed  a  p e r f o r­
m a n ce  rating  h i g h er  t h an  they  a c t u a l ly  r e c e i v e d,  a nd  m o st  of  t h e se  i n d i v i d u a ls  m a de 
external  attributions  for  the  rating  d i s c r e p a n c y,  b l a m i ng  either  their  s u p e r v i s o r,  the 
organization,  or  the  P MS  itself.  H o w e v e r,  neither  h a v i ng  r e c e i v ed  a  l o w e r - t h a n-
expected  a p p r a i s al  r a t i ng  n or  h a v i ng  m a de  e x t e r n al  attributions  for  a  l o w e r - t h a n-
expected  rating  w e re  related  to  c h a n g es  in  a t t i t u d es  or  self-reported  effort. 

Compensation  surveys  in  the  United  States have  consistently  reported 
that pay-for-performance  systems  are  used  in  the  vast  majority of 
private  firms.i'2,3,4,5 While the  prevalence  of pay-for-  performance  in 
public  organizations  is considerably  less, public  sector use  of these 
systems  has  been  on  the increase.^ 

From  a measurement  perspective,  a pay-for-performance  system,  which 
relies exclusively on  objective indices  of performance,  would  be  prefer­
able. However,  for  many  (particularly  white-collar) jobs, at least  some 
aspects  of performance  cannot be  adequately  captured  with  only  objec­
tive measures,  and  so the  most  commonly  used  individually-based 
system  to link pay  with  performance  appears  to be merit  pay,''-« a 
system  which  relies on  subjective appraisal  ratings,  typically made  by 
one's  manager. 

Public Personnel Management 

Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall  1999 

423 


Merit  pay  is frequently  implemented  for professional  and  managerial 
jobs  as a component  of a  larger performance  management  system 
(PMS), which  typically involves the  following  cyclic activities. First, 
employee and  supervisor  first  agree on key result  areas  (or broad 
accountabilities)  for  the employee's job.  Then, on a regular  basis (typi­
cally  a yearly  cycle),  they jointly set results-type  objectives for  the 
employee within  those  key result  areas, and  identify  how  progress 
toward  achievement of those  objectives will be measured.  During  the 
PMS  cycle,  the employee and  manager  track performance  against  objec­
tives, with  the  manager  providing  support  and  coaching as necessary. 
At  the  completion  of the  cycle, performance  against  objectives is 
measured,  and  the  employee  receives feedback  on performance  and  an 
overall  appraisal  rating, which  is translated  into a merit-based  pay 
increase  or bonus  payment.  At  this same  time, the  next cycle is  started, 
with  the  setting  of new  performance  objectives. 

The  primary  focus  of this  investigation  is on  the  associated attitude  and 
motivational  effects  of introducing  a PMS in a public sector organiza­
tion. Specifically,  the present  study, employing  data  from  four  different 
time periods,  has  the  following  exploratory  objectives: 

1.  to investigate  the  effects  of two  major  components  of a  perfor­

mance management  system  (i.e., goal-setting  and  appraisals)  on 
work-related  attitudes and  effort; 

2.  to determine  if receiving a lower-than-expected  appraisal  rating 

results  in a drop  in work-related  attitudes and  effort,  and 

3.  to explore  "blame targets"  for  the  receipt of a  lower-than-

expected  performance  rating,  and  their  relationship  to 
subsequent  attitudes and  effort. 

Effects of Performance  Management  Systems 

Even  though  there  is widespread  use  of performance  management 
systems  throughout  the  world,  research focused  on  their  effectiveness is 
sparse  and  is typically focused  on  the  performance  appraisal/merit  pay 
component  of the  system. We review  theoretical perspectives  and 
empirical  evidence for motivational  and  attitudinal  effects  of both  the 
performance  planning/goal-setting  and  appraisal/merit  pay  compo­
nents  of a PMS below. 

Performance  planning/goal-setting.  Goal theory^ has  suggested  that 
goals are  motivational  because they are  arousal  producing.  Goals, espe­
cially difficult  ones, enhance performance  because they  tell us  that we 
have  to  try  hard, and  they  provide  a directional cue steering  the 
performer  in  the  right  direction, while encouraging  thought about  the 

424 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall  1999 


process. Thus, the  foundation  of a plan  (strategy) for  subsequent 
performance  behavior  gets established. Feedback, when  coupled  with 
goals, informs  us  as  to whether  or not  we  are  on  the right  road,  and if 
so,  whether  or not  more effort  is needed  in order  to  attain  one's goals. 
Thus,  the  combination of goal-setting early in the  PMS cycle  and 
continued  monitoring  of performance  during  the  cycle should  lead  to 
increased  effort  and  increase the  likelihood  that  we  are  moving  in  the 
right  direction. 

Indirect evidence for  the  relationship  between  the  goal-setting compo­
nent  of a PMS and  increased effort  can be found  in  the many  goal-
setting  studies,io  and  evidence more  directly related  to  PMSs  can be 
found  in  the  evaluations  of management-by-objectives  (MBO) 
programs.  A recent meta-analysis  on  the  effect  of MBO  programs  on 
productivity!!  has  indicated  a consistent, positive  effect  provided  that 
there  is top  management  support  for  the  program. 

In  addition  to increasing effort,  there  is theoretical support  for  the  idea 
that  the  performance  planning/goal-setting  component  of a PMS 
results  in  improved  work-related  attitudes.  Clarifying  the  key  result 
areas  for  one's job and  setting  goals within  those areas should  lead  to 
greater  role clarity for  employees, which  has been found  to result  in 
increased  satisfaction with  the job, satisfaction with  supervision,  and 
organizational  commitment.!2,i3 Thus, to the extent  that  employees' job 
roles may  have  been  ambiguous  prior  to the establishment  of a PMS, 
the  initial stage  of the  PMS should  not  only lead  to increased  effort,  but 
also  to increased satisfaction and  organizational  commitment. 

Appraisal  rating/merit  pay. Locke, Feren, McCaleb, Shaw, and  Dennyi* 
claim  that  there  is substantial  evidence to support  the proposition  that 
there  can be a positive effect  on productivity  stemming  from  individual 
incentives. Expectancy and  reinforcement  theory,i5,i6 for  example, are 
two  theoretical models  that  can be employed  to provide  irxsight into a 
relationship  between  pay  and  performance.  In addition,  there  is  empir­
ical evidence demonstrating  a pay-performance  relationship. For 
example,  Gerhart  and  Milkovich,!^ in  their  longitudinal  investigation of 
multiple  organizations,  found  that  there  was  a linkage between  pay  and 
subsequent  organizational  performance.  However,  this  relationship 
does  not  always  reveal  itself  and  at other  times it has been both  posi­
tive and  negative  in nature.  Recent reviews  of the  compensation  litera-
ture!8,i9,20  highlight  that  our  ability to offer  firm  conclusions as to  the 
motivational  and  attitudinal  effects  of merit pay  is limited  and  in  need 
of  more  detailed  investigation. 

Assuming  that  motivation  is one of the  major  determinants  of 
employee performance,2! studies  of the  performance  effects  associated 
with  pay-for-performance  systems provide  indirect  insight  into  the  rela-

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management System 

425 


tionship  between  pay-for-performance  and  motivation. Theoretically, 
expectancy  theory22 would  posit  that  to the extent that  money  is valued 
and  the  employee  has  strong  expectancy perceptions,  there  should  be a 
positive  relationship  between  a pay-for-performance  system  and 
employee  motivation  (and  subsequently,  though  a somewhat  weaker 
relationship  with  performance). Reinforcement theory  provides  a 
similar  prediction.  If there  is an  experienced-based  line of sight  linking 
the  receipt  of valued  compensation  as a consequence of  performance 
behavior  there  will be a  motivational  effect. 

There  does  not  appear  to be a well-articulated  theory  of merit  pay  and 
its relationship  to employee  attitudes.  But, we  can draw  upon  social 
exchange  theory23  and  norms  of reciprocity24 to provide  insight  into  the 
relationship  between  pay-for-performance  and  employee  attitudes. 
Social  exchange  theory25 and  norms  of reciprocity26 posit  that  employee 
attitudes  are, in part, contingent  upon the  pay  they  receive from  the 
organization.  It might  be reasoned  that  there  is a greater  opportunity  to 
achieve  an  equitable exchange between  employees' performance  and 
the  compensation  they  receive when  there  is a performance  manage­
ment  system  that  attempts  to objectively  measure  and  reward  perfor­
mance at  the  individual  level, as opposed  to indiscriminately  paying 
individuals  across-the-board  without  consideration  of their  individual 
performance  contributions. With an  increased  likelihood of achieving, 
what  Homans27  called, distributive  justice  (i.e., a balance  between 
outcomes  received for  performance  given) through  one's  compensation 
system,  the  achievement of a positive  relationship  between  employee 
work-related  attitudes  (e.g., job and  supervisory  satisfaction) and  a 
stronger  attachment  (i.e., organizational  commitment) to the  source of 
that  satisfaction, an  equitable  relationship  might be  realized. 

Despite  the  prevalence  of merit  pay  systems  used  in  organizations 
throughout  the  world,  research  into  the effectiveness of merit  pay 
programs  in  motivating  employees has been  surprisingly  limited.28,29 
Some  of our  insight  into  the  motivational  effects  of merit  pay  need  to 
be  drawn  from  studies  of merit  pay  and  performance  while  treating 
motivation  as a linking  and  hypothetical  construct  in  this  research. 

Pearce,  Stevenson, and  Parryso studied  the performance  effects  associ­
ated  with  the  implementation  of the  Social  Security Administration 
merit  pay  program.  They concluded  their  study by noting  that  the 
"merit  pay  program  had  no  effect  on  organizational  performance" 
(p.  261),  which  implies that  the program  had  no  motivational  effects. 
Similar  observations  stem  from  the work  of Thierry,3i  who  examined 
the  effects  of a number  of pay-for-performance  plans  operating  in 
Western  Europe  and  the  old  Soviet  Union. Summarizing  the  results  on 
the  effectiveness of six major  plans  (i.e., piece-rate, individual  bonus, 
group bonus,  merit  rating,  and  the  Scanlon gain-sharing  plan), Thierry 

426 

Public  Personne/Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall!  999 


observed  that,  in contrast  to results  for all other  pay-for-performance 
plans,  the vast  majority  of the  merit  pay  studies  showed  either  null  or 
negative  findings. 

Kahn  and  Sherer's32 investigation provides  a somewhat  different 
perspective. They observed  that  a pay-for-performance  bonus  system 
was  associated with  subsequent  performance.  In addition,  those 
managers  who  had  previously  experienced a  link between  their 
bonuses  and  performance  had  the highest  subsequent  performance 
levels.  Drawing  upon expectancy theory,  this  finding  suggests  that  the 
instrumentality  perceptions  may  have  been strong  in  the  Kahn  and 
Sherer  investigation  and  possibly not  established  in the  Pearce et  al.33 
investigation.  Schay34  observed  a significant pay-  performance  relation­
ship  following  the  introduction  of a merit  pay  system. Her  findings  also 
imply  that  the pay-for-performance  compensation  system  had  motiva­
tional  effects  that  manifested  themselves in performance  increases. 

A survey  by  the  Hay  Group35  found  that  less than one-half  of  middle-
managers  and  professionals  thought  that  "better  performers"  actually 
received  higher  pay  increases than  average  or poor  performers.  In  addi­
tion,  Lawler36  noted  that  "all  too often  only a few  percentage  points 
separate  the  raises given  good performers  from  those  given  poor 
performers"  (p. 151). Both  of these observations  suggest  that  the  moti­
vational  effects  stemming  from  a pay-for-performance  system  are  likely 
to be negligible, since these perceptions  would  suggest  a weak  instru­
mentality  perception. 

Heneman37  observed  that,  while  the results  associated with  merit  pay 
were  mixed, there  were  more favorable  results  for  merit  pay  effects  on 
work-related  attitudes  than  there  was  for  its effects  on employee  moti­
vation.  In  terms  of employee  attitudes,  Schay38  used  a  pretest/posttest 
design,  including  quasi-control  groups,  to assess the  effects  of a  merit 
pay  system  introduced  at  two  US Naval  laboratories  on  satisfaction  and 
perceptions  of equity.  She  found  no  change in job satisfaction  even 
though  there  were  significantly increased perceptions  of equity. 
Similarly, Jenkins and  Lawler39  used  a pre-posttest  design  to  assess  the 
impact  of a merit pay  plan  on equity  perceptions, job and  pay  satisfac­
tion. They found  significant  and  positive changes for  all three  of these 
variables  after  the  introduction  of the  merit  pay  plan. 

Pearce and  her  colleagues also used  a longitudinal  design  to  measure 
the  effects  of introducing  a merit pay  plan,  in  this  case a  new 
objectives-based  appraisal  and  merit  pay  system  introduced  in  the U.S. 
Federal Government.  They concluded  that  there  were  no  positive 
effects  on worker  motivation,'*o a conclusion similar  to the  one  that 
Pearce and  her  colleagues'*! drew  in  a subsequent  study  also within  the 
Federal  Government.  Pearce and  Porter*^ did,  however, note  that  the 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

4 27 


introduction  of the  merit  pay  plan  was  accompanied  by a drop in  orga­
nizational  commitment  among  employees who  received less than  very 
favorable  appraisal  ratings. This later finding  is consistent with  what 
Gabris  and  MitchelHs have  termed  the  "Matthew  Effect"  of merit  raise 
scores. The Matthew  Effect  is intended  to suggest  that  accompanying 
the  introduction  of merit-pay  plans, small differences  in  performance 
can lead  to artificially large differences  in pay. This leads  all but  the 
high-scoring employees to feel  discontent  with  management  and  the 
organization  (i.e., dissatisfaction and  a weakening  of organizational 
commitment), which  can lead  to a reduction  in effort  and  a decline in 
performance  among  those employees who  receive relatively small or no 
merit increases. 

Building  upon  the work  of Meyer,44 Pearce and  her  colleagues specu­
lated  that  the  detrimental  effects  of the  appraisal/merit  pay  system 
might  be explained by the mediating  role of self-esteem. Meyer noted 
that  surveys  quite  consistently demortstrate  that  most  employees 
believe  that  their  own  performance  is well above average. When  rated, 
through  an  appraisal  system, below what  they  think  they  deserve,  indi­
viduals'  self-esteem is threatened,  which  culminates in  employees 
placing  less importance  on  their jobs,  thereby  reducing  their  motiva­
tion, and  disparaging  the source of the  ratings  (i.e.,  their  supervisors). 

Gardner,  Pierce, Van Dyne, and  Cummings^s focused  on  pay  as a moti­
vational  form  of communication  about  the worth  of the individual  to 
the organization.  They reasoned  that  an  individual's  level of pay  sends 
signals about  that  individual's  value  to the  organizahon,  and  that  over 
time,  this information  becomes integrated  into beliefs about  the  self 
(i.e., into  global self-esteem in  general, and  organization-based  self-
esteem  in particular). Those who  receive high  pay  levels are more likely 
to believe that  they  are significant, worth,  and  valuable  parts  of the 
organization  (high organization-based  self-esteem) than  those with low 
pay levels. 

High  self-esteem employees are  motivated  to maintain  and/or  enhance 
their  self-image so  they put  forth  the  goal directed  effort  needed  for 
high  performance.  To the extent that  performance  is a function  of moti­
vation,  we  are  likely to witness  performance  effects  stemming  from  pay 
level and  its impact  upon  the employee's organization-based  self-
esteem. Employing longitudinal  data,  drawn from  three  different  time 
periods,  Gardner  et  al. provided  support  for  the  full  mediational  effects 
of  pay  level on employee performance  by operating  through  organiza­
tion-based  self-esteem. They did  not,  however, provide  support  for  the 
mediational  effects  of self-esteem in the pay  level-attitude  (i.e., job satis­
faction  or  organizational  commitment)  relationship. 

428 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  FalM999 


Pay  level, as in  the  Gardner  et al*^ investigation, as well as  performance 
ratings, as  in  the  Pearce and  Porter^^ investigation, both  serve as a 
communication  directed  from  the  organization  to the  employee 
signaling  to  the  employee the organization's  belief  as  to  their value  and 
importance  to the  organization.  Gardner  et al's findings  can possibly be 
interpreted  as providing  confirmation  for  the  proposition  that  feedback 
about  one's performance  level (i.e., feedback  expressed  through  perfor­
mance  ratings  or pay  levels) has  an  impact upon self-esteem, with  a 
subsequent  impact  upon  performance. 

Interpreting  their  findings,  Pearce and  Porter  placed  less emphasis  than 
Meyer  on  the  mediating  effects  of self-esteem. They suggested  that 
receiving an  appraisal  rating  lower  than one expects, which would  be 
true for  the majority  of employees, would  simply result  in  the 
employee  "blaming" external  factors  (e.g., one's supervisor,  the 
appraisal  system, or  the  organization) for  the discrepancy  leading  to 
reduced  organizational  commitment,  dissatisfaction, and  possibly 
reduced  effort  on  the job.  Pearce and  Porter  did  not, however,  measure 
self-esteem,  effort,  blame  targets, or attitudes  toward  supervision,  so it 
remains  unclear  (a) whom  employees receiving  lower-than-expected 
appraisal  ratings  blame, and  (b) effects  of receiving a mediocre  or 
lower-than-expected  appraisal  rating  on  self-esteem, effort,  or satisfac­
tion  with  supervision.  It is toward  providing  insight  into  these  issues 
that  this  investigation  was  intended. 

Study Aims 

The present  study seeks to: 

1. investigate  the effects  of the  two  major  PMS components  (perfor­

mance planning/goal-setting  and  appraisals/merit-pay)  on 
work-related  attitudes  and  effort; 

2.  determine  if receiving a lower-than-expected  appraisal  rating 

resulted  in a drop in work-related  attitudes and  effort; 

3.  explore blame targets  for receiving a lower-than-expected  rating, 

and  their  relationship  to subsequent  attitudes and  effort;  and 

4.  obtain participants'  evaluations  of the new  system's effectiveness. 

Each  of these aims  is discussed  in greater  detail  below. 

Our  first  aim was  to determine  the  effect  of introducing  a PMS on rele­
vant  work-related  attitudes and  effort.  In particular,  we  were  interested 
in  assessing effects  of the  two  primary  PMS components  (the  perfor­
mance planning/goal-setting  exercise, and  the  appraisal/merit 
payment  aspect) on  attitudes and  effort  of employees receiving  high 
versus  mediocre appraisal  ratings. 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

4 29 


We  included  dependent  variables of organizational commitment, job 
satisfaction,  attitudes  toward  supervision,  and  subsequent  effort 
because  they have been widely  presumed  to be outcomes of 
introducing  both  goal-setting and  merit-pay  systems. Organization-
based  self-esteem was  included  because of Meyer's^s widely-cited, 
though  untested,  belief  that  receiving less than a very  favorable 
appraisal  rating  in  a merit-pay  system would  threaten  the  appraisee's 
self-esteem. 

Based on goal theory and  prior  research on the consequences of role 
ambiguity, we hypothesized  that  the performance  planning/goal-setting 
component of the PMS would  increase subsequent effort, and  that job 
satisfaction  and  attitudes  toward  supervision would  improve due  to the 
sessions leading  to greater role clarity. However, based on previous stud­
ies  by Meyer49  and  Pearce and  Porter,5o we anticipated a possible drop in 
satisfaction, commitment and  self-esteem following the  appraisal/merit-
pay component of the PMS for staff  receiving mediocre ratings. 

Our second aim focused  on the effects  associated with  receiving a "lower-
than-expected" appraisal  rating.  Both Meyer,5i  and  Pearce and  Porter^z 
have suggested  that receiving a mediocre appraisal  rating  can lead to a 
drop in work-related  attitudes  and  effort. It is assumed  that for the major­
ity  of employees, mediocre ratings are lower than those that  were 
expected. Application of the principles of distributive justice^s would 
predict that  many people who experience outcomes that are less than 
their inputs are likely to be dissatisfied and  will resolve the imbalance by 
giving less in the next cycle of the individual-organization  relationship. 
Thus, we hypothesized  that receipt of a lower-than-expected  appraisal 
rating  leads to a reduction  in work-related  attitudes  and  effort. 

Building  on  the  development  of an  understanding of the  effects  associ­
ated  with  receiving a lower-than-expected  appraisal  rating,  our  third 
aim was  to explore 'blame targets'  for  the  lower-than-expected 
appraisal  rating.  In addition  to experiencing a deterioration  in  their 
work  attitudes  and  motivation,  Meyer54  and  Pearce and  her 
colleagues55,56  have  suggested  that  most  employees blame external 
sources  (e.g., their  supervisor,  the  organization,  or  the  appraisal system) 
if  they receive lower-than-expected  appraisal  ratings. The making of 
these external attributions  serve as one means by which  the  individual 
works  to protect  and  preserve  (as opposed  to denigrate)  the existing 
conceptualization  of the  self.  Thus, we  hypothesized  that:  (a) most 
employees  receiving a lower-than-expected  rating  would  blame  targets 
external  to themselves; and  (b) that  these employees, in  particular, 
would  suffer  a significant drop in work-related  attitudes  and  effort 
after  the  appraisal/merit  pay  distribution. 

430 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28 N o. 3  Fall 1999 


Method 

Finally, our  fourth  aim  was  to collect participants'  evaluative  comments 
on  the effectiveness of the  new  PMS in  meeting  its stated  objectives. 
They were  also asked  to identify  concerns and  to make  suggestions  that 
the  organization  could  use  to improve  the  system  for  the  future. 

Research  Setting 
This study  consisted  of a longitudinal  evaluation  of a  performance 
management  system  (PMS)  in  a regional environmental  council in  New 
Zealand. This organization  is responsible for providing  environmental 
planning  and  evaluation  for a large region  of the  central  North  Island. 
It  has  approximately  300 employees, including  professional  planners, 
scientists,  technical, and  administrative  support  staff. 

Prior  to the  introduction  of the  PMS,  the  council had  no  formal 
appraisal  system, and  pay  was  not  formally  linked  to performance. A 
five-member  project team  was  assembled  to develop  the  PMS, with  the 
aid  of a major  human  resource management  consulting  firm.  The 
project  team  consisted  of volunteer  representatives  from  management, 
professional  employees, and  the  union. 

During  an  eight-month  planning  and  development  period,  the project 
team: 

1.  researched  literature  on  appraisal  and  merit  pay  systems  and 

practices at  other  organizations; 

2.  sought  input  from  staff  and  top  management  on  alternative 

approaches;  and 

3.  developed,  with  the  aid  of the  consulting  firm,  the  organization's 

PMS. 

The  first  author  provided  technical support  to the  project  team  during 
the  development  phase  and  provided  feedback  to the  project  team  on 
employees'  reactions  to the  system  after  it had  been  in place  and 
running for  the  first  year. 

The  particular  PMS introduced  was  a bonus  plan,  where  annual, 
performance-based,  bonus  payments  to staff  were  made,  rather  than  the 
more  traditional  merit  increase system, in which  employees  progress  up 
a  pay  range,  year-by-year, based  on  their  levels of performance  each 
year. Merit-based  bonus  systems are  a recent development,  growing  in 
popularity57 and  advocated  recently by  pay-for-performance 
experts.58.59  Unlike traditional  merit-pay  systems, which pay  employees 
fixed,  merit  increases, merit bonuses  are  a form  of variable  pay. 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

431 


Theoretically,  under  such  a system, employees' pay  should  be much 
more strongly  linked  with  immediate  past  performance  and  thus have a 
stronger  motivational  impact.  Two percent  of the  gross salary  budget 
for  each year  was  allocated for  performance-based  bonuses. 

As  is common  in organizations'  performance  management  systems,60 
this  organization's PMS: 

1.  applied  only to managerial/professional  employees  in  the orga­

nization; 

2.  included  an  initial performance  planning/goal-setting  session, in 

which  employees and  their  immediate  superiors  agreed  on the 
key results  areas  of the  employee's job, cooperatively set results-
type  performance  objectives  in those  areas, and  identified  means 
of  measuring  progress  and  extent of goal achievement; 

3.  included  training  of all appraisers  and  appraisees;  and 

4.  required  immediate  superiors  to make  a  tentative, global 

appraisal  rating  of the employee each year, based  on achievement 
of  results-type  objectives. 

Supervisors  rated  employees' performance  on each results-type  objec­
tive,  using  a 4-point  scale  (l="requires improvement,"  2="competent," 
3="commendable," 4="outstanding"). Finally, a global appraisal  rating 
was  calculated, in  the  form  of a percentage, reflecting  the employee's 
performance  against  all of his/her  objectives  as a proportion  of the 
maximum  possible score on  those objectives.  For example, the 
maximum  possible score an  employee could  achieve for  five  objectives 
is 20 ( 4 x 5 ).  If an  employee's ratings  on  those  five  objectives  totaled 12, 
the employee would  get a global rating  of 60%  (12/20).  Ratings were 
finalized  after  both  appraisers'  managers  and  the  organization's  top 
management  team  reviewed  tentative  ratings  for  all employees covered 
by  the  system. 

Study  Design 

The study  used  a within-participant,  time-series design,  and  included 
surveys  administered  to all 218 professional/managerial  staff  covered 
by  the  PMS at four  times  (see Figure  1). The first  survey  was  to estab­
lish baseline measures, and  occurred  prior  to the start  of the PMS. 
Seventy  percent  (N 
administration.  Given that the  first  administration  preceded  the  perfor­
mance planning/goal-setting  meetings between  employees  and  their 
managers,  it is referred  to here  as the  "pre-planning"  survey. 

153) of the  staff  participated  in  the  first  survey 

432 

Public  Personnel  Manogement  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall 1999 


Figure  I.  Schedule  of Performance  Management  System  (PMS)  implementation 

and  Surveys 

PMS 
Implementation 
Schedule: 

PMS  introduced,  with 
plarming/goal-setting 

meeting  between 

employee and  manager 

End  of cycle  appraisals, 
bonus  distributions,  and 
planing/goal-setting  for 
following  year's cycle 

August, 
Year 1 

August, 
Year 2 

Time  Line: 

Survey 
Schedule: 

February, 

Year 1 

1 

Survey iT^N 

/ ^ S u r v ey 2: 

Survey 3: 

Pre-Planning  )  VPre-AppraisalyVPost-Appraisaly 

The  second  survey  administration,  referred  to  as the  "pre-appraisal" 
survey, occurred  midway  between  the initial performance  planning/ 
goal-setting sessions and  the end-of-cycle appraisal  sessions. This 
administration  achieved  a response  rate  of 80% (N  = 174) of the  original 
218 staff. The third  survey  followed  one month  after  appraisal  meet­
ings, had  a response  rate of 67%  (N = 146), and  is referred  to as  the 
"post-appraisal"  survey. The fourth,  and  final  survey  was  administered 
six  months  after  the  appraisal,  with  a response  rate  of 59%  (129), and  is 
referred  to as  the  "follow-up"  survey. 

Variables and Their  Measures 

Data  for  the study's dependent variables derive  from  employee  self-
reports.  Each of the  four  employee surveys  included  measures  of orga­
nizational  commitment,  organization-based  self-esteem, job satisfaction, 
satisfaction  with  supervision,  cooperation  with  one's  supervisor,  and  a 
self-rated  assessment  of recent effort  on  the job.  The  post-appraisal 
survey  also contained  a measure  of perceived  effectiveness of the 
appraisal/bonus  system. Scales  for  all measures, except satisfaction 
with  supervision  and  perceived  effectiveness of the  appraisal/bonus 
system, were  rated  on five-point  Likert "extent-of-agreement" scales 
(l=:strongly  disagree, 2=disagree, 3=neutral, 4=agree, 5=strongly agree). 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

4 33 


The study's  dependent  variables and  their  measures  were: 

•  Commitment to the organization. The 15-item scale developed  by 

Mowday, Steers and  Porter,61 with  a reported  internal consis­
tency  ranging  between  .82 and .93. 

•  Organization-based self-esteem. The 10-item scale, developed  by 

Pierce, Gardner,  Cummings,  and  Dunham,62 with  a  reported 
internal  consistency ranging  from  .86 to  .91 and  test-retest relia­
bility of .75. 

•  Job satisfaction. The 5-item  scale, comprising  the  general job 

satisfaction  scale from  Hackman  and  Oldham's  Job Diagnostic 
Survey,63 with  a reported  internal  consistency ranging  from 
.74 to .80. 

•  Satisfaction with  supervisor. A three-item  satisfaction scale 

developed  for  this  investigation:  (1) "the  degree  of respect  and 
fair  treatment  I receive from  my  manager,"  (2) "the  amount of 
support  and  guidance  I receive from  my  manager,"  and  (3) "the 
overall  quality  of the supervision  I receive in  my  work." 

•  Cooperation with  supervisor. A four-item  agreement  scale to 

assess  the  extent of cooperation  with  one's supervisor  was  devel­
oped  for  this  investigation:  (1) "I believe my  relationship  with 
my supervisor  has been particularly  good,"  (2) "I have  gone  out 
of  my  way  to cooperate with  my manager  on  the job,"  (3) "My 
manager  and  I have  discussed  work  situations  very  openly  and 
freely,"  and  (4) "My manager  and  I have  worked  particularly 
well  together  in  solving problems  and  getting  the job done." 

•  Recent effort on the job. A three-item  agreement  scale,  developed 

for  this  investigation  to  assess employees' effort  on  the job, with 
"this  past  year" as  the  frame  of reference: (1) "I have  worked 
particularly  hard  at doing  a good job," (2) "I have  extended  less 
effort  in  the job than  usual"  (reverse scored), and  (3) "Doing a 
good  job has  been  a high  priority  in  my  life." 

The  third  (post-appraisal)  survey  included  additional  questions. 

•  Expected  performance  ratings. In  the  post-appraisal  survey  the 

participants  were  asked  what  appraisal  rating  they had  expected 
to receive. 

•  Blame target. An  open-ended  question  was  employed  in  the 

post-appraisal  survey  to identify  the  "blame  targets"  to  which 
lower-than-expected  appraisal  ratings  were  attributed.  The 
following  question  was  posed  to each participant—"If  the 
percentage  rating  you  received was  different  from  the  rating  you 
had  expected, to what  do  you  attribute  the difference?" 

434 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall  1999 


Responses  to the  open-ended  question  in  the  post-appraisal  survey 
w^ere coded  using  a basic content analysis approach,64 in which  one 
author  and  two  graduate organizational  psychology students  (who 
were  naive  to the  aims  of this study)  (a) independently  developed 
possible response  categories, (b) discussed  and  agreed  on a  common  set 
of  categories, (c) independently  coded  each response  into  the  agreed-
upon categories, and  (d) discussed  codings to determine  percentage 
agreement  and  to resolve any  coding discrepancies. There was  unani­
mous  agreement  among  the  three  coders' independent  categorizations 
of  73%  of the  responses  to  the blame target  question,  and  two  of the 
three  coders  were  in agreement  for  97% of the  responses  prior  to 
discussion. Items of disagreement  were  discussed  and  categorized if 
unanimous  agreement  was  reached, or coded  as missing  in cases  where 
agreement  could  not  be reached. 

The study's independent  variables consisted of: 

1.  the  introduction  of the  performance  management  system, 
including  both  the performance  planning/goal-setting  and 
appraisal/merit-pay  components;  and 

2.  the  appraisal  rating  level. 

As shown  in  Figure 1, the  performance  planning/goal-setting  compo­
nent  of the  PMS was  implemented  approximately  six months  after  the 
administration  of the  first  survey  and  approximately  seven  months 
before  the second survey  administration;  while  the  appraisal/merit-pay 
component  was  introduced  approximately  five months  after  the  second 
survey  and  one  month  before  the  third  survey. 

Finally, three  sets of questions  were  used  in  the  post-appraisal  survey 
to elicit participants'  evaluations  of the  PMS (addressing  the  study's 
fourth  aim). Respondents'  were  asked  to rate  each of the  organization's 
seven  stated  objectives of its PMS (e.g., "clarifying  staff  roles" and 
"providing  incentives for  performance") in  terms  of how  effectively the 
PMS was  achieving each, using  a 5-point  scale ranging  from  "very 
effective"  to  "very  ineffective." Two open-ended  questions  were  asked: 
"What  concerns, if any, do you  have  about  the  Performance 
Management  System?"  and  "What suggestions, if any, do  you  have  for 
improving  the  Performance  Management  System?"  Responses were 
content-analyzed  as described  above for blame  target  responses,  with 
unanimous  agreement  among  the  three  coders  (before discussion) for 
82%  of the  18265 responses  to the  "concerns" question  (95%  two-thirds 
agreement), and  68%  of the  118 responses  to  the  "suggestions"  question 
(97%  two-thirds agreement). These evaluative  questions  were  asked  in 
the  (third) post-appraisal  survey  because, at  this  time, the  PMS had 
completed  one full  year's  cycle of  operation. 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

435 


Results 

Descriptive statistics and  inter-correlations  among  variables  at  the third 
(post-appraisal)  survey  are  presented  in  Tables 1 and  2, respectively. 

Table  I. 

Internal  Consistencies, Reliabilities  and Descriptive  Statistics 

Test-
Intemal  Retest 
Consis-  Relia-
tencya  bility'' 

Pre­

planning 
Survey 
(N=152) 
X  SD 

Pre-

Appraisal 
Survey 
(N=175) 
X  SD 

Post-

Appraisal 
Survey 
(N=147) 
X  SD 

.87 

.80 

3.48 

.52 

3.64  .49 

3.50  .47 

Follow-

Up 

Survey 
(N=129) 
X  SD 
3.44  .53 

.77 

.49 

4.05  .39 

4.11  .38 

4.04  .35 

4.06  .36 

Variable 
Organizational 
commitment*^ 
Organization-based 
self-esteem'^ 

Job  satisfaction*^ 

.77 

.63 

3.59 

.58 

3.64  .56 

3.54  .54 

3.46  .56 

Satisfaction  with 
supervision"^ 
Cooperation  with 
one's  supervisor*^ 

Recent  effort 
on  the job*^ 
Expected  appraisal 
rating 
Actual  appraisal 
rating 

.86 

.84 

.64 

3.93  .92 

4.02  .88 

3.78  .96 

3.79  .84 

.69 

3.79  .69 

3.83  .70 

3.62  .71 

3.70  .70 

.68 

.51 

4.26  .52 

4.25  .54 

4.21  .58 

4.15  .50 

— 

— 

—  — 

—  — 

71.0  9.20  —  — 

—  — 

—  — 

67.2^ 8.30  —  — 

"Internal  c o n s i s t e n cy  c a l c u l a t ed  as  m e d i an  C r o n b a ch  A l p ha  coefficients  for  the  s c a le  a c r o ss  the 

four  s u r v e y s. 

''Test-retest  reliability  w as  c a l c u l a t ed  a c r o ss  the  third  ( p o s t - a p p r a i s a l)  a nd  fourth  (follow-up) 

s u r v e y s,  a  s i x - m o n th  i n t e r v al  in  w h i ch  no  i n t e r v e n t i on  o c c u r r e d. 

•^S-point,  e x t e n t - o f - a g r e e m e nt  scale,  a v e r a g ed  a c r o ss  scale  i t e ms  so  that  " 1" a nd  " 5" c o r r e s p o nd 
w i th  " d i s a g r ee  s t r o n g l y"  a nd  " a g r ee  strongly,"  respectively. 

''S-point,  extent-of-satisfaction  scale,  a v e r a g ed  a c r o ss  s c a le  i t e ms  so  that  " 1" a nd  "5"  c o r r e s p o nd 

w i th  " v e ry  dissatisfied"  a nd  " v e ry  satisfied,"  respectively.  e A c t u al  a p p r a i s al  ratings  obtained 
f r om  p e r s o n n el  r e c o r d s,  after  a p p r a i s a ls  w e re  c o m p l e t e d. 

436 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall  1999 


Table  2. 

Correlations Among Variables  on the Third  (Post-Appraisal)  Survey and 
Actual Appraisal  Ratings 

Variable 
Organizational 
commitment 
Organization-based 
self-esteem 
Job satisfaction 

Satisfaction  with 
supervision 
Cooperation  with 
one's  supervisor 
Recent  effort 
on the job 

Expected  appraisal 
rating 

Actual  appraisal 
rating 

Org. 

Sat  Coop.  Recent Expected  Actual 
Commit, esteem  satis.  w/sup.  w/sup.  Effort  Rating  Rating 

Self- 

Job 

— 

.32"*  — 

.47"* 

.14* 

— 

.23" 

.30*" 

.23" 

.32*" 

.42*" 

.26*** 

.69*"  — 

.26*** 

.42*** 

.00 

.16* 

.31*"  — 

-.08 

.03 

-.37*" 

-.09 

.07 

.34***  — 

-.13 

-.01 

-.16* 

.08 

.04 

.21* 

.51*"  — 

• p < . 0 5. 

**p<.01. 

» » * p < . 0 0 1. 

Effect of PMS  and  Rating Level on Work-Related Attitudes 
and  Effort 

In order  to  test  the  combined  effects of introducing  the  PMS and  rating 
level  on  the  five work-related  attitudes  and  effort,  repeated  measures 
ANOVA's were  performed  for  each dependent  variable, with  survey 
time period  and  level of appraisal  rating  serving  as within-subject  and 
between-subject  factors, respectively. Appraisal  scores were  dichoto­
mized  into  two  groups:  those scoring 62.5 or higher  (i.e., in  the 
"commendable"  or  higher  range, Ν  = 77) and  those scoring lower  than 
62.5 (all within  the  "competent"  range, Ν  =  27). 

Results  of the analysis of variance are presented  in Table 3, and  signifi­
cant effects are graphed  in  Figures 2-4. There was  a significant  main 
effect  for  time of survey  on organizational  commitment, specifically an 
increase in  organizational  commitment  for both  staff  rated  as  'compe­
tent'  and  those rated  as  "commendable/outstanding"  between  the  first 
(pre-planning)  and  second  (pre-appraisal)  surveys,  which occurred  after 
planning/goal-setting  meetings. This increased  commitment  then 
dropped  over time, most prominently  in  the highly-rated  group,  and 
following  the  appraisal  sessions and  distribution  of merit  bonuses. 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

4 37 


Table  3. 

Repeated  Measures Analyses  of Variance: Effects  of Appraisal/Bonus 
System  and Appraisal  Rating  Level  on Subsequent Attitudes  and Effort 

Variable 

Organizational  commitment 

Source 

Rating 

Org.-based  self-esteem 

Rating 

Job  satisfaction 

Rating 

Satisfaction  with  supervisor 

Rating 

Cooperation  with  supervisor 

Rating 

Recent  effort  on  the job 

Rating 

MS 

df 

0.37 
0.91 
0.21 
0.09 
0.07 

0.29 
0.42 
0.07 
0.03 
0.07 

0.37 
0.77 
0.07 
0.09 
0.13 

2.36 
2.52 
0.83 
1.07 
0.38 

1.53 
1.55 
0.25 
1.08 
0.20 

1.47 
0.90 
0.12 
0.22 
0.12 

1 
49 
3 
3 
147 

1 
49 
3 
3 
147 

1 
49 
3 
3 
147 

1 
49 
3 
3 
147 

1 
49 
3 
3 
147 

1 
49 
3 
3 
147 

F 

0.41 

2.91* 
1.25 

0.67 

0.55 
0.37 

0.48 

0.55 
0.73 

0.94 

2.20 
2.86* 

0.99 

1.20 
5.43*** 

1.64 

1.02 
1.86 

Error 
Time 
Rating  X  time 
Error 

Error 
Time 
Rating  X time 
Error 

Error 
Time 
Rating  X time 
Error 

Error 
Time 
Rating  X  time 
Error 

Error 
Time 
Rating  X  time 
Error 

Error 
Time 
Rating  X  time 
Error 

N = 51  d ue  to  i n d i v i d u a ls  b e i ng  ren^oved  f r om  the  a n a l y s is  for  m i s s i ng  d a ta  at  a ny  of  the  four 

s u r v ey  times.  »p  <  .05. **p <  . 0 1. ***p  <  . 0 0 1. 

438 

Public Personnel  Managendem  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall  1999 


Figure  2.  Organizational  C o m m i t m e nt  by T i m e, for  Employees  Rated as 

"Competent"  and "Commendable/Outstanding" 

4.2 

4.0 

6  3.8 
o 
υ 
§ 

3.6 

3.4 

6 

3.2 

3.0 

C o m p e t e nt 

Commendable/ 

Outstanding 

Pre-Planning 

Survey 

Pre-Appraisal 

Survey 

Post-Appraisal 

Survey 

FoUow-Up 

Survey 

Significant  interactions between  time of survey  and  level of  appraisal 
rating  were  found  for  the  two variables related  to supervision:  satisfac­
tion  with  supervision  (Figure 3) and  cooperation with  one's  supervisor 
(Figure  4). For both  of these variables high  performing  staff  reported 
initially high  levels of satisfaction and  cooperation  with  their  supervi­
sors, which  remained  relatively stable after  the  planning/goal-setting 
session, but  dropped  substantially  immediately  after  appraisals/distrib­
ution  of bonuses, recovering only slightly six months  later  in  the  final 
follow-up  survey. 

Figure  3.  Satisfaction  with  Supervision  by T i m e, for  Employees  Rated as 

"Competent"  and "Commendable/Outstanding" 

4.2 

Commendable/ 

Outstanding 

3.8 

6  4.0 
e 
ε 
o 
υ 
I 

3.6 

3.4 

s 

3.2 

3.0 

Competent 

Pre-Planning 

Survey 

Pre-Appraisal 

Survey 

Post-Appraisal 

Survey 

FoUow-Up 

Survey 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

439 


Figure  4.  Cooperation  with  Supervisor  by T i m e, for  Employees  Rated as 

"Competent"  and "Commendable/Outstanding" 

4.2 

4.0 

c 
01 

S  3.8 
o 
U 
H  3.6 
§ 
Ν 

3.4 

O 

3.2 

3.0 

Commendable/Outstanding 

C o m p e t e nt 

Pre-Planning 

Survey 

Pre-Appraisal 

Survey 

Post-Appraisal 

Survey 

Follow-Up 

Survey 

In  contrast to high performers,  the lower-performing  staff  (i.e., those 
rated  in  the  "competent" range) started  with  substantially lower levels 
of  reported  satisfaction and  cooperation with  their  supervisors, 
reporting  substantial  increases after  the planning/goal-setting session 
(particularly for satisfaction with  supervision), which remained  higher 
than  pre-planning  levels through  the remaining measurement  periods. 

In  sum,  the introduction  of the PMS and  the appraisal  rating/bonus 
distribution  component in particular, had  somewhat  deleterious  effects 
on relationships with  their supervisors  for high-performers,  while the 
planning/goal-setting  component of the  PMS improved  relationships 
with  supervisors  for lower-performing  staff. 

No  significant change over  the PMS evaluation  period  was  found  for 
respondents'  organization-based self-esteem, job satisfaction, or effort, 
and  there  were no significant differences between employees rated  in 
the  ranges  of "competent" versus  "commendable/outstanding"  on 
these  three variables. Some respondents  voiced more  than  one 
concern/suggestion  in  response  to the open-ended  'concerns' and 
'suggestions for  improvement'  questions. 

Role of Disappointed Appraisal  Rating  Expectation 

Our  second aim was  to determine  whether  those who  received a lower-
than-expected  appraisal  rating  were more inclined than  other 
employees  to experience a drop in relevant work-related  attitudes and 
effort.  Of the 99 post-appraisal  survey  respondents  who  provided  data 
reflecting  the  rating  they had  expected to receive, 55 received lower-

440 

Public Personnel  Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall 1999 


than-expected  ratings, 22 received ratings  the  same  as they  had 
expected, and  22 received higher-than-expected  ratings. 

In order  to determine  the  relationship  between  receiving a  lower-than-
expected  appraisal  rating  and  subsequent  attitudes  and  effort,  a 
dummy-coded  variable representing  whether  the respondent  reported 
receiving a lower-than-expected  rating  was  entered  into  separate 
regression equations  for each of the  five attitudes  and  the  effort 
measure,  after  entering  the same pre-appraisal  measure  first,  to control 
for  prior  attitudes/effort.  Dependent  attitudinal  variables used  in  these 
analyses were  taken  from  the  post-appraisal  survey, while  the  depen­
dent  variables of (self-rated) recent effort  and  recent cooperation  with 
one's supervisor  were  measured  retrospectively, from  the final  follow-
up  survey. A significant contribution  of receiving a  lower-than-expected 
appraisal  rating  to  the  explanation  of changes in attitudes/effort  would 
be  indicated  by a statistically significant increase in  R-squared. Receipt 
of  a lower-than-expected  rating  did  not  significantly affect  (decrease) 
employee attitudes  and  motivation. 

Blame Targets 

Forty-nine of the  55 respondents  who  indicated  that  the  rating  they 
received  was  lower  than  they had  expected provided  an explanation  for 
what  they  attributed  the  rating  difference  to. The majority  of these  indi­
viduals  blamed  circumstances outside  of their  control.  Specifically: 

•  19 blamed  their supervisor  (e.g., their  supervisor:  failed  to under­
stand  their  work; failed  to provide  adequate  direction/feedback; 
or was  a severe marker); 

•  11 blamed  the  organization  (e.g., their  supervisor:  was  told  to 

mark  all employees low; or marked  the respondent  low in  order 
to give higher  ratings  to other, high-performing  staff); 

•  6 blamed  the  appraisal  system  (e.g., the system  does  not  take  into 

account: the  external constraints placed  on  an  individual's 
performance;  quality  of work  accomplished; or contributions  to 
team  and  colleagues'  efforts); 

•  5 blamed  themselves  (e.g., "I didn't  know  what  to expect," or 

"I  was  new  to  the job");  and 

•  8 attributed  the  difference  in actual  and  expected rating  simply  to 

the  subjective nature  of appraisal  ratings. 

Regression  analyses were  performed  in order  to determine  whether 
employees who  blamed  external sources  (i.e., either  their  supervisor, 
their  organization,  or  the  appraisal  system) for  lower-than-expected 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

441 


appraisal  ratings  were  more  likely than  others  to experience a subse­
quent  drop  in work  attitudes  and  effort. 

Each dependent  measure  was  controlled by  the  pre-appraisal  assess­
ment  of the variable into the  regression  equation  first. The effect of 
blaming  an  external source on each dependent  measure  was  assessed 
by  entering  it  (represented  as a dummy-coded  variable-blames external 
source  = 1, does  not blame  = 0) into  the  regression equation  after  the 
relevant  pre-appraisal  control variable, and  assessing the  change in R-
squared.  Those who  made  an external  attribution  for  their  lower-than-
expected  appraisal  rating  were  not significantly more  likely than  other 
employees  to suffer  a drop  in work-related  attitudes  or  subsequent 
effort  on  the job. Thus, there  were  no  significant  increases in explained 
criterion variance when  a  "blames external source" variable  was 
entered  into  the  regression  equations. 

Evaluations  of P MS  Effectiveness 

Respondents'  ratings  of the  effectiveness of the  PMS in  achieving its 
stated  objectives,  obtained  in  the  "post-appraisal"  survey, varied  by 
objective. Approximately  half  of the  respondents  rated  the  PMS as at 
least somewhat  effective in "providing  staff  with  clear, measurable 
targets"  (55%),  "improving  communication  between  staff  and  supervi­
sors"  (51%),  "clarifying  staff  roles"  (48%),  and  "increasing commitment 
and  accountability to work  projects and  improved  customer  relations" 
(45%).  Smaller proportions  of staff  reported  the PMS as being  at least 
somewhat  effective on  the  three  remaining  objectives:  "increasing 
managers'  support  for  staff  in achieving performance  objectives and in 
personal  development"  (41%),  "developing  mutual  understanding  and 
agreement  between  staff  and  managers  on  the  organization's  direction" 
(33%),  and  "providing  an  incentive for  performance"  (18%). 

Summaries  of employees' responses  to  the  questions  in  the  post-
appraisal  survey  asking  for concerns about  the  PMS and  suggestions 
for  improving  it are presented  in Tables 4 and  5. Both  the  concerns and 
the  suggestions  mentioned  most  frequently  involved  the  fairness  of the 
rating  process and  the bonus  system. 

Discussion 

Taken  together,  results  of the  time-series measures,  ratings  of the  effec­
tiveness of the  PMS in achieving its stated  objectives,  and  respondents' 
qualitative  responses  to  the  questions  about  their  concerns and  sugges­
tions  for  improvements,  all suggested  that  the performance  planning/ 
goal-setting  component  of the  system  had  favorable  consequences for at 
least some employee attitudes.  For the  lower performing  employee 

442 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  No. 3  Fall 1999 


Table  4. 

Summary  of Responses  to the question, " W h at  concerns, if any, do you 
have  about  the  PMS"? 

Response  category 

Sub-category 

"Unfairness  of the process" 

Ν for 

Ν for 

Category  Sub-cat. 

67 

20 
7 
6 
5 
4 
4 
21 

10 
7 
4 
5 

"Inconsistency  of ratings  across the  organizahon" 
"System  fails to encompass  entire job" 
"Ratings are  unduly  influenced  by  upper-level  managers" 
"Rating process  too subjective" 
"System  subject to  abuse" 
"System  favors  people  doing  'high  profile'  tasks" 
(Other  concerns about  unfairness) 

"Problems with  the bonus  system" 

"Weak  link between  performance  and  bonus" 
"Bonus fails to provide  a performance  incentive" 
"Bonus  is driving  performance  ratings" 
(Other  concerns about  the bonus  component) 

"System  fosters  competition  at  the expense  of  teamwork" 

"Produces  bad  feelings among  people  with  lower  ratings" 

"Insufficient  information  provided  about  rating/bonus  process" 

(Other suggestions, either shared  by less than  five 
respondents,  or unintelligible) 

26 

17 

6 

7 

51 

Total :  174 

Note:  S o me  r e s p o n d e n ts  v o i c ed  multiple  c o n c e r n s. 

group  this  component  brought  an  across-the-board  increase in  organi­
zational  commitment  and  increased  satisfaction and  cooperation  with 
one's supervisor.  Similarly, of the  seven  objectives of the  organization 
for  its PMS, the  one receiving the  highest  effectiveness ratings  one  year 
after  the start  of implementation  was  "providing  staff  with clear, 
measurable  targets," which  presumably  would  have  resulted  from  the 
performance  planning/goal-setting  component  of the system. Few of 
respondents'  concerns or suggestions  for improvement  involved  this 
aspect  of the PMS. 

Responses  to  the  appraisal  rating/bonus  pay  component  of the PMS, 
however,  were  substantially  less favorable. The majority  of concerns 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

443 


Table  5. 

Summary  of Responses  to  question, " W h at  suggestions, if any, do you 
have  for improving  the  PMS"? 

Response  category 

Sub-category 

"Improve  how  bonuses  are  awarded" 

Ν  for 

Ν for 

Category  Sub-cat. 

"Make section mgrs, not  top  mgmt  team, responsible for  setting" 
"Provide  clearer link  to  performance" 
"Separate bonus  distribution  from  performance  appraisal" 
(Other  suggestions  concerning awarding bonuses) 

"Improve  the  appraisal  rating  system" 

"Make  teamwork  a more significant  component" 
"Change  rating  scales" 
(Other  suggestions  to improve  rating  system) 

"Remove  'bonus'  component  from PMS" 

"Keep  remainder  of PMS" 
"Replace bonus  with  another  means  of  pay-for-performance" 
(Other  suggestions  concerning removal  of bonus) 

"Discontinue the  entire PMS" 

"Increase  frequency  of feedback  and  rewards" 

"Improve  consistency of implementation  across  organization" 

(Other suggestions, either  shared  by less than  five 
respondents,  or unintelligible) 

10 
9 
10 
13 

10 
5 
14 

6 
5 
2 

42 

29 

13 

5 

11 

9 

9 

N o t e:  S o me  r e s p o n d e n ts  v o i c ed  m u l t i p le  s u g g e s t i o n s. 

Total: 

118 

and  improvement  suggestions voiced by respondents  after  the first year 
of  operation  were  related  to unfairness  in ratings  and  bonus  distribu­
tions. Commitment  to the  organization  dropped  with  this phase  of the 
PMS,  slightly more  for  those whose performance  was  rated  highest. 
High-performing  individuals  also suffered  dramatic  drops in both satis­
faction  and  cooperation  with  their supervisors  following  appraisals. 
Finally, few  respondents  rated  the PMS as even  "somewhat  effective"  in 
providing  an  incentive for performance,  which  was  the primary  role of 
the  appraisal  rating/bonus  distribution  component  of the  system. 

Outcomes of introducing  the  PMS on  organizational  commitment  in the 
present  study were  consistent in some  respects, but  inconsistent in 

444 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall 1999 


others, with  Pearce and  Porter's^s results  from  a similar study.  In  that 
study  as well  as in  the present  one, employees were  primarily 
concerned  with  the  fairness of appraisal  ratings  and  pay-outs.  Pearce 
and  Porter  had  evaluated  effects  of the appraisal  component  only,  and 
so it is unclear whether  participants  in  their  study  had  increased levels 
of  commitment  following  the  objectives-setting component  of their 
PMS,  as found  in  the  present  study.  Furthermore,  contrary  to  both 
Gabris and  Mitchell's Matthew  Effect  theory^^ and  Pearce and  Porter's67 
finding  that  commitment  levels dropped  only for  lower-rated 
employees, both  high  and  low performers  in  the present  study  dropped 
slightly  in  their  organizational  commitment  after  appraisals,  but  there 
was  evidence of a greater  drop in  commitment — and  more so for 
supervisor-related  attitudes  — among  the  high  performers. 

One possible explanation  for  the  appraisal  having  negatively  affected 
attitudes  of high  performers  in  the  present  study  concerns the  organiza­
tion's  use  of bonus  payments,  rather  than  traditional  merit increases, 
and  the  openness  among  employees in sharing  pay  information,  due  in 
part  to  the  small size of the  organization.  With such  open  communica­
tion  about  bonuses  individuals  received, many  high-performing 
employees might  have been  discouraged  to learn  that  a peer(s) received 
a  slightly  larger bonus  when  they  had  worked  hard  and  believed  their 
own  high  performance  to be undisputable.  Lower-performing 
employees might  have been  less competitive and  concerned  about 
minor  differences  in ratings  and  bonus  payments. 

Due  to such  widespread  concerns over  the  fairness  of ratings  and 
bonuses  in  the  first  year, the  organization  dropped  the  bonus  compo­
nent  of the  system  and  adopted  in its place a more  traditional  merit-
pay  system, using  guide  charts. While this research program  was 
unable  to continue  and  assess responses  to the  change  in pay policy, 
subsequent  discussions with  the human  resource manager  suggest  that 
the  change calmed  many  concerns about  fairness  by making  it  more 
difficult  for employees  to compare performance-based  pay  distributions 
for  a particular  year. While it is easy for employees  to ask  a colleague 
what  bonus  he/she  received and  compare  it with  her/his  own,  it is 
more  difficult  to make  such  direct  comparisons  under  a  traditional 
merit-increase system, in which  individuals  move  up  steps  within  pay 
grades, since colleagues are  less likely  to start  on the  same step,  and 
because a substantial  increase for  one employee  in one year  might  be 
balanced  with  a similar increase for someone else the  next. 

While  the  recent development  of appraisal-based  bonus-pay  systems 
has  been seen as a promising  alternative  to traditional  merit-increase 
systems because it links pay  more directly  to recent  performance,^'^^ 
the present  study  highlights  a potential  problem  of making  it easier for 
employees  to make  direct comparisons  of yearly bonuses  with  each 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

445 


other, which  in  turn may  foster  feelings of unfairness  as  high-
performing  employees  fail  to see why  others  received  (even marginally) 
larger bonus  pay-outs  than  they  received. This problem  may be limited 
to  organizations  with  a culture  of openness  in  discussing  pay  and  may 
also be  a particular  problem  in public organizations, where  surveys 
have  suggested  that  staff  want  less in  the way  of pay  differences 
between  individuals  than  is wanted  in private-sector  firms.^o 

No  discernable effects  of introducing  the  PMS were  found  in  the 
present  study  for  either  subsequent  effort  or job satisfaction, two  pay-
for-performance  outcomes predicted  by equity  theory.71  Previous 
studies  on  the  effects  of merit-pay  systems  on subsequent  effort/moti­
vation/performance  and  job satisfaction have  shown  quite  mixed 
results, making  the  interpretation  of the  present  findings  difficult, but it 
is likely that  concerns over  the  fairness  of bonus  pay-outs  may  have 
over-shadowed  any possible motivating  and  job-satisfying  effects. 

Rating Expectations and  Blame Targets 

The present  study  did  not  support  the  theory  first  introduced  by 
MeyerS  that  the  introduction  of an  appraisal-based  pay  system  nega­
tively affects work-related  attitudes  and  motivation  through 
disappointed  appraisal  rating  expectations for most  staff. Consistent 
with  Meyer's theory, we  found  that  most  employees in  this  organiza­
tion  reported  receiving ratings  lower  than  they had  expected to receive. 
However,  disappointed  rating  expectations was  not  associated  with 
subsequent  drops in self-esteem, as predicted  by Meyer, or other  attitu-
dinal/effort  variables. Similarly, virtually  all employees who  received a 
lower-than-expected  appraisal  rating  blamed  either  their  supervisor,  the 
organization,  or  the  PMS, as Pearce and  Porter72 had  theorized,  but 
blaming  external  targets  (i.e.,  targets  other  than  oneself) was  not a 
salient predictor  of changes in attitudes  or  effort. 

In  the  present  study,  employees' comparisons  of their  actual  and 
expected  appraisal  ratings  played  an  insignificant role in  affecting  their 
subsequent  beliefs about  the  fairness  of the  PMS and  work-related  atti­
tudes,  while  employee-to-employee comparisons  of their  bonuses 
appeared  far  more  salient. We only studied  the  first  year of this organi­
zation's  implementation  of its PMS, so it was  not  possible to  determine 
whether  appraisal  rating  expectations would  have  played  an increas­
ingly  important  role for  employees' work-related  attitudes  after  the 
system  had  been in place a while. 

Possibly, employees' rating  expectations are little more  than  guesses in 
the  first  year  of a PMS.  In fact,  most  employees may not  even  have 
thought  about  an  expected rating  before being  asked  in  our  post-
appraisal  survey. However, high-performing  employee's learning  that a 

446 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall 1999 


peer  has just received  a performance-based  bonus  of even  a  few 
hundred  dollars  more  than  that  employee has  received —  particularly 
when  the  employee discerns no real difference  in their  effort  or  perfor­
mance over  the  past  year — may be cause for believing that  the  system 
is  unfair. 

Study  Limitations 

A few  limitations  of the present  study  should  be considered  while 
interpreting  the  findings.  First, the study  represented  a  single-group, 
time-series design.  It would  have been preferable  to have  included  a 
control  group,  but  this  was  not  possible for  this study,  given  that  the 
introduction  of the  PMS affected  everyone  in  the entire  organization  at 
the same  time. We were  also unable  to find  another,  comparable  organi­
zation with  no  appraisal-based  pay  system, willing  to participate  as a 
control  group. 

Without  a control  group,  it is impossible to entirely rule  out  the possi­
bilities  of time-based  changes in dependent  measures  due  to  threats  to 
internal  validity, particularly  history  and  testing.73 As a means of 
checking  on  the  threat  of a historical event  occurring  during the  study 
and  confounding  results,  we carefully monitored  the  organization,  with 
the  help  of the  human  resource manager  and  the project team  respon­
sible for  developing  the  PMS, for  any  changes that  could possibly  affect 
employees'  attitudes  or effort  and  found  none. For the  period  of this 
study,  the  organization  remained  stable except for  the  introduction of 
the  PMS,  and  so it is unlikely  (although  still possible) that  changes in 
attitudes  over  time were  due  to some  other event (history). 

Similarly, we  saw  no  evidence for  the  threat  of testing, in  that: 
(a) surveys  were  separated  by six month  intervals, quite  a long 
span  to expect a prior  survey  to affect  subsequent  survey  results;  and 
(b) changes  due  to pre-test  sensitization  could  be expected  to show  a 
similar  trend  over  time, and  across groups.  While the possibility of 
testing  cannot be completely ruled  out  in this study,  the  facts  that 
attitudinal  variables did  not  conform  to a consistent pattern  (e.g., 
increasing, decreasing) over  time, and  that  quite  different  patterns  were 
observed  for high-  and  low-performer  groups  over time, tend  to 
suggest  no  appreciable pre-test  sensitization. 

Another  limitation concerns our  finding  no significant  effects of 
receiving a lower-than-expected  appraisal  rating  and  of blaming  an 
external  target  for  a lower-than-expected  rating  on subsequent  attitudes 
and  effort.  The possibility of a Type II error  exists, due  to  insufficient 
statistical  power.  By regressing each post-appraisal  attitude/effort  vari­
able  first  on  its corresponding  pre-appraisal  measure  (to control for 
prior  levels of each variable), much  of the variance in dependent  vari-

Effects  of  Incroducing A  Performance  Management  System 

4 47 


ables  was  already  accounted  for, leaving little to be explained  further 
by  either  having  received a lower-than-expected  rating  or  having 
blamed  external sources for  a lower  rating. A much  larger  sample may 
have  found  statistically significant incremental contributions  for  these 
independent  variables, although  the  practical significance of such a 
finding  would  be minimal. 

Finally, it is unfortunate  that  the  present  study was  unable  to continue 
beyond  two  years, for  it is plausible  that  the effects  of annual  perfor­
mance planning/goal-setting  sessions and  appraisal-based  pay  are 
different  after  a system  has  settled  in for  at  least a couple  of years. In 
this study, both  the  organization  and  individual  respondents  would 
have  questioned  the  utility of continuing  six-monthly  surveys 
concerning a system  that had  been in place for  over  a year and  that had 
already  been altered  as a result  of study findings.  Furthermore,  it 
would  have  been  difficult  to disentangle  the  effects  of  planning/goal-
setting  sessions from  appraisal  ratings  and  bonus  payments,  given that, 
as in  many  other  organizations,  this firm  conducted  both  sessions 
simultaneously  after  the  first  year. 

Managerial  Implications 

In  light of previous  research  on  the effects  of introducing  appraisal-
based  merit-pay  in public sector organizations,  the  present  study casts 
further  doubt  on  the  efficacy  of such  systems in increasing employee 
subsequent  effort  and  improving  their  work-related  attitudes.  The 
appraisal/merit-pay  component  of the present  system  clearly had  dele­
terious  effects  on  staff  members'  organizational  commitment  and  atti­
tudes  toward  supervision,  particularly  among  high-performing 
employees. Thus, public sector organizations  considering  using 
appraisal-based  merit  pay  would  be wise  to carefully  consider  the 
research evidence developed  to  date. 

A related  finding  from  the present  study concerns the  use  of merit 
bonuses  systems. While these may  be viewed  as more firmly  linking 
pay  with  performance  than  traditional  merit  increase systems, results of 
the present  study suggest  that  they may  lead  to even  greater  percep­
tions of unfairness  in settings where  employees are very  concerned 
about  equity  and  where  pay  is discussed  among  employees  openly. 
Such settings  are probably  most  common in public-sector organizations. 

Finally, little past  research  has  evaluated  the effects  of the  performance-
planning/goal-setting  component  of performance  management 
systems, and  this study demonstrates  that  this aspect of PMS's  may 
have quite  a beneficial  impact  on  employees' subsequent  attitudes 
toward  supervision  and  organizational  commitment, particularly  for 
lower-performing  employees. However,  it is likely  the positive  effect  of 

448 

Public Personnel Managenient  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall 1999 


Notes 

this  component  of a PMS is limited  by  the  degree  of role  clarification 
and  performance  planning  already  engaged  in by  supervisors  and 
employees.  In  the  case of this  organization,  no  prior  performance  plan 
ning  system  was  in  use,  and  so  the  significant  improvement  in 
employees'  work-related  attitudes  after  the  performance-plarming/ 
goal-setting  sessions  may  have  been  less profound  had  the  introduction 
of  the  PMS followed  a history  of supervisor-employee  discussions  of 
performance  expectations. 

1 H ay  Group,  Inc.  The  Hay  report:  Compensation  and  benefits  strategies  for  1990  and  beyond. 

Philadelphia,  PA:  H ay  Group,  Inc, 1989. 

2 Hewitt  Associates.  Compensation 

trends  and  practices.  Lincolnshire,  IL:  Hewitt 

Associates,  1989. 

3  Locher,  H.A.  and  K.S.  Teel.  Appraisal  trends.  Personnel  ¡oiirnal  67(9):  139-145,  1988. 

•· Peck,  C.A.  Pay  and  performance:  The  interaction  of  compensation  and  performance 

appraisal. 

N ew  York:  The  Conference  Board,  1984. 

5  Wyatt Company.  The  1987  Wyatt  performance  management  survey.  Chicago: The  Wyatt 

Company,  1987. 

Maroney,  Β.P. and  M.R.  Buckely.  Does  research in  performance  appraisal  influence  the 
practice  of  performance appraisal? Regretfully  not!  Public  Personnel  Management  21: 
185-196,  1992. 

7  Heneman,  R.  L. Merit  pay:  Linking  pay  increases  to  performance  ratings.  Reading,  MA: 

Addison-Wesley,  1992. 

8  Lawler,  E.E.,  HI.  Pay  for  performance: Future  directions.  In  New  Perspectives  on 

Compensation,  edited  by  D.B.  Balkin  and  L.R. Gomez-Mejia.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: 
Prentice-Hall,  1987:  162-168. 

9  Locke, E.A.  and  P.  Latham.  A  theory  of goal  setting  and  task performance.  Englewood 

Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice Hall,  1990. 

10 Ibid. 

11 Rodgers,  R.  and  J. E. Hunter.  Impact of  m a n a g e m e nt  by  objectives  on  organizational 

productivity  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology  76: 322-336,  1991. 

12 Ilgen,  D.R.  and  J.R.  Hollenbeck.  The  structure of  work: Job design  and  roles.  Handbook 

of  Industrial  and  Organizational  Psychology,  2nd  Edihon,  Volume  2,  edited  by  M.D. 
Dunnette  and  L.M. Hough.  Palo  Alto,  CA:  Consulting  Psychologists  Press,  1991:  1 6 5-
208. 

•'Jackson,  S.E. and  R.S.  Schüler.  A  meta-analysis  and  conceptual  critique  of  research  on 
role  ambiguity  and  role  conflict  in  work  settings.  Organizational  Behavior  and  Human 
Decision  Processes  36: 16-78,  1985. 

!•> Locke,  E.A., D.B.  Feren,  V.M.  McCaleb, K.N.  Shaw,  and  A.T.  D e n ny  The  relative  effec­

tiveness  of  four  methods  of  motivating  employee  performance. In  Changes  in  Working 
Life,  edited  by  K.D.  Duncan,  M M.  Gruenberg,  and  D.  Walhs.  N ew  York:  Wiley, 1980: 
363-388. 

15 Vroom,  V.H.  Work  and  motivation.  N ew  York:  Wiley,  1964. 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance  Management  System 

449 


16 Luthans, F. and  R.  Kreitner. Organizational  Belmvior  Modification.  Glenview,  IL: Scott, 

Foresman  and  Company, 1975. 

i^Gerhart,  B. a nd  G.T.  Milkovich.  Employee  compensation:  Research and  practice.  In 

Handbook  of Industrial  and  Organizational  Psychology,  edited  by  M.D.  Dunnette  and L.M. 
H o u g h,  2nd  Edition,  Volume  3.  Palo  Alto,  CA: Consulting  Psychologists  Press, 1975: 
481-569. 

18  Ibid. 

19 H e n e m a n,  Merit  pay:  Linking  pay  increases  to  performance 

ratings. 

20 Milkovich,  G.T.  and  A.K.  Wigdor.  Pay for  performance:  Evaluating  performance  appraisal 

and  merit  pay.  Washington,  EXT: National  A c a d e my  Press, 1991. 

21  Vroom,  Work  and  motivation. 

22 Ibid. 

23  Blau,  P.  Exchange  and  power  in  social  life.  N ew  York:  Wiley, 1964. 

2* Gouldner,  A.W.  The  n o rm  of  reciprocity. American  Sociological  Review  25:  165-167,1960. 

25  Blau,  Exchange  and  power  in  social  life. 

26 Gouldner,  The  norm  of  reciprocity. 

27Homans,  G.C.  Social  behavior:  Its  elementary  forms.  N ew  York:  Harcourt,  Brace  & World, 

1961. 

28 H e n e m a n,  Merit pay:  Linking  pay  increases  to  performance 

ratings. 

29 Milkovich  and  Wigdor,  Pay for  performance:  Evaluating  performance  appraisal  and  merit 

p»y-

30 Pearce,  J.L.,  W.B. Stevenson,  and  J.L.  Perry.  Managerial  compensation  based  on  organi­

zational  performance: A  time  series  analysis  of  the  effects  of  merit pay.  Academy  of 
Management 

Journal  28(2):  2 6 1- 278, 1985 

31  Thierry, H.  P a y m e nt  by  results  systems:  A  review  of  research 1945-1985.  Applied 

Psychology:  An  International  Review  36(1):  91-108,  1987. 

32 Kahn,  L.M., and  P.D.  Sherer. Contingent  pay  and  managerial  performance.  Industrial 

and  Labour  Relations  Review  43: 107(S)-120(S), 1990. 

33  Pearce,  et  al..  Managerial  compensation  based  on  organizational  performance:  A  time  series 

analysis  of  the  effects  of  merit  pay. 

34  Schay,  B.W. Effects  of  performance-contingent p ay  on  employee  attitudes.  Public 

Personnel  Management 

17(2):  237-250,  1988. 

35  H ay  G r o u p,  Inc. CompensaHon  trends.  Compensation  Quarterly  3, October, 1986. 

3*  Lawler, E.E.,  III. P ay  for  performance: A  strategic analysis.  In  Compensation  and 

Benefits,  edited  by  L.R. Gomez-Mejea  Washington,  D.C.:  Bureau of  National  Affairs, 
1989. 

37 H e n e m a n,  Merit  pay:  Linking  pay  increases  to  performance 

ratings. 

38 Schay,  Effects  of performance-contingent 

pay  on  employee  attitudes. 

39 Jenkins,  G.D.,  Jr.  and  E . E. Lawler, III. Impact of  employee  participation in  pay  plan 

developnient.  Organizational  Behavior  and  Human  Performance  28:  1 1 1 - 1 2 8 , 1 9 8 1. 

40  Pearce,  J.L.  and  J.L.  Perry.  Federal merit  pay:  A  longitudinal  analysis.  Public 

Administration  Review  43(2):  315-325,  1983. 

450 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall 1999 


41 Pearce, et  al..  Managerial  compensation  based  on  organizational 

performance:  A  time  series 

analysis  of  the  effects  of  merit  pay. 

42 Pearce, J.L.  and  L.W. Porter. Employee  responses  to  formal  performance  appraisal 

feedback.  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology  71(2):  211-218,  1986. 

43 Gabris,  G.T.  and  K.  Mitchell.  The  impact  of  merit  raise  scores  on  employee  attitudes: 

The  Matthew  Effect  of  performance  appraisal.  Public  Personnel  Management 
1988. 

17:  369-385, 

44  Meyer,  H.H.  The  pay-for-performance  dilemma.  Organizational  Dynamics  3(3):  39-50, 

1975. 

45 Gardner,  D.G.,  J.L.  Pierce,  L.  Van  Dyne,  and  L.L. C u m m i n g s.  The  effect  of  pay  level  on 

self-esteem,  performance,  and  attitudes.  University  of  Minnesota-Duluth,  Working  Paper, 
1997. 

46  Ibid. 

47 Pearce and  Porter, Employee  responses  to  formal  performance  appraisal  feedback. 

48  Meyer,  The  pay-for-performance 

dilemma. 

49  Ibid. 

50 Pearce  and  Porter, Employee  responses  to  formal  performance  appraisal  feedback. 

51 Meyer,  The  pay-for-performance 

dilemma. 

52 Pearce  and  Porter, Employee  responses  to  formal  performance  appraisal  feedback. 

53Homans,  G.C.  Social  behavior:  Its  elementary  forms,  1961. 

54 Meyer,  The  pay-for-performance 

dilemma. 

55  Pearce  and  Perry, Federal  merit  pay:  A  longitudinal 

analysis. 

56 Pearce and  Porter, Employee  responses  to  formal  performance  appraisal  feedback. 

57 Milkovich  and  Wigdor,  Pay  for  performance:  Evaluating  performance  appraisal  and  merit 

pay-

58  Heneman,  Merit  pay:  Linking  pay  increases 

to  performance 

ratings. 

59  Lawler,  E.E.,  III.  Strategic  pay.  San  Francisco: Jossey-Bass,  1990. 

60 Wyatt  Company.  The  Wyatt  Communicator:  Results  of  the  1989  Wyalt  Performance 

Management  Survey,  Fourth  Quarter,  1989.  Chicago:  The  Wyatt  C o m p a n y,  1989. 

61 Mowday,  R.T., R.M.  Steers,  and  L.W. Porter. The  measurement  of  organizational 

commitment.  Journal  of  Vocational  Behavior  14:  2 2 4 - 2 4 7 , 1 9 7 9. 

62  Pierce,  J.L.,  D.G.  Gardner,  L.L. C u m m i n g s,  and  R.B.  Dunham.  Organization-based  self-

esteem:  Construct  definition,  measurement,  and  validation.  Academy  of  Management 
Journal  32:  622-648,  1989. 

63 H a c k m a n,  J.R. and  G.R.  Oldham.  Development  of  the  Job  Diagnostic  Survey.  Journal  of 

Applied  Psychology  60:  158-170,  1975. 

64 Schmitt,  N.W.  and  R.J. Klimoski.  Research  methods 

in  human  resource  management. 

CincinnaH,  O H:  South-  Western,  1991. 

65 Pearce and  Porter, Employee  responses  to  formal  performance  appraisal  feedback. 

66 Gabris  and  Mitchell,  The  impact  of  merit  raise  scores  on  employee  attitudes:  The  Matthew 

Effect  of  performance  appraisal. 

Effects  of  Introducing A  Performance Management  System 

451 


67 Pearce and  Porter,  Employee  responses  to  formal  performance appraisal  feedback. 

^  H e n e m a n,  Merit  pay:  Linlcing  pay  increases  to  performance 

ratings. 

S9  Lawler,  Strategic  pay. 

70 Milkovich  and  Wigdor,  Pay  for  performance:  Evaluating  performance  appraisal  and  merit 

pay-

71  A d a m s,  J.S.  Inequity  in  social  exchange.  In  Advances 

in  experimental  social  psychology  2: 

267-299,  edited  by  L.R. Berkowitz.  N ew  York:  Academic  Press, 1965. 

72 Meyer,  The  pay-for-performance 

dilemma. 

73 Pearce and  Porter,  E m p l o y ee  responses  to  formal  performance  appraisal  feedback. 

74 Cook,  T.D.  and  D.T.  Campbell.  Quasi-experimentation: 

Design  and  analysis  issues  for field 

settings.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin,  1979. 

Authors 

P a ul  J. Taylor,  P h . D. 
U n i v e r s i ty  of  W a i k a to 
H a m i l t o n,  N ew  Z e a l a nd 

P a ul  J. T a y l or  is  a  senior  l e c t u r er  of  i n d u s t r i a l / o r g a n i z a t i o n al  p s y c h o l o gy  at  the 
U n i v e r s i ty  of  W a i k a t o,  N ew  Z e a l a n d.  He  received  his  Ph.D.  from  T e m p le  University 
in  P h i l a d e l p h i a,  PA,  a nd  h as  c o n s u l t ed  w i th  firms  on  p e r f o r m a n ce  m a n a g e m e n t, 
selection,  a nd  training  t h r o u g h o ut  N o r th  A m e r i ca  a nd  N ew  Z e a l a n d.  His  current 
r e s e a r ch  interests  a re  the  a p p l i c a t i on  of  s t r u c t u r ed  e m p l o y m e nt  selection  methods 
a nd  training. 

J on  L.  P i e r c e,  P h . D. 
U n i v e r s i ty  of  M i n n e s o ta 
D u l u t h,  M i n n e s o ta 

J on  L.  P i e r ce  is  a  p r o f e s s or  of  o r g a n i z a t i on  and  m a n a g e m e nt  at  the  University  of 
M i n n e s o t a - D u l u t h.  He  r e c e i v ed  his  Ph.D.  f r om  the  U n i v e r s i ty  of  Wisconsin,  and 
r e c e n t ly  h ad  a  visiting  a p p o i n t m e nt  in  the  D e p a r t m e nt  of  P s y c h o l o gy  at  the 
U n i v e r s i ty  of  W a i k a t o.  H is  c u r r e nt r e s e a r ch  is  focused  on  self-esteem  in  the  organi­
z a t i o n al  c o n t e x t,  e m p l o y ee  o w n e r s h ip  a nd  its  o r g a n i z a t i o n al  b e h a v i or  effects,  and 
p s y c h o l o g i c al  o w n e r s h i p. 

452 

Public Personnel Management  Volume  28  N o. 3  Fall  1999 

