IJOPM
26,11

1176

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0144-3577.htm

Performance improvement

through supply chain

collaboration in Europe

Ann Vereecke

Vlerick Leuven Gent Management School, Gent, Belgium

Ghent University, Gent, Belgium, and

Vlerick Leuven Gent Management School, Gent, Belgium

Steve Muylle

Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to empirically test the relationship between supply chain (SC)
collaboration and performance improvement.
Design/methodology/approach – In keeping with the extant
literature, hypotheses were
developed incorporating dimensions of supplier and customer collaboration and performance
improvement. Factor analysis and linear statistical models for correlation and analysis of variance
were used to test the hypotheses with IMSS 2001 data on 374 ﬁrms from the engineering/assembly
industry across 11 European countries.
Findings – Only weak empirical support was found for the hypothesized positive relationships
between supplier (or customer) collaboration and performance improvement. There was partial
empirical support for the impact of collaboration, both with suppliers and customers, on rates of
improvement. For information exchange, performance improvement in respect of cost, ﬂexibility,
quality, and procurement was supported, whereas for structural collaboration, only improvement in
respect of ﬂexibility and procurement was supported. There was strong empirical support for the
hypothesized higher levels of collaboration among companies showing higher performance
improvement.
Research limitations/implications – Using cross-sectional
(versus longitudinal), perceptual
(rather than absolute) data, coming from a principal ﬁrm (rather than from each collaborative entity).
Practical implications – This study indicates that ﬁrms need to adopt a concerted approach to
collaboration both with suppliers and customers in order to reap maximum performance improvement
beneﬁts in the area of cost, ﬂexibility, quality, delivery, procurement, and time-to-market.
Originality/value – This study goes beyond analytical modeling and case-study research on the
relationship between SC collaboration and performance improvement and offers industry-based
empirical results on consolidated practical and theoretical insights.

Keywords Supply chain management, Partnership, Performance levels, Suppliers, Customers, Europe

Paper type Research paper

Introduction
Conventional wisdom among practitioners holds that companies enjoy signiﬁcant
performance improvements through supply chain (SC) collaboration. Likewise,
SC management textbooks are extolling the virtues of SC collaboration as an
important approach for boosting performance. Simchi-Levi et al. (2002, p. 5) argue that

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Janssen Pharmaceutica and Mo¨bius
Consulting in this research. They thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.

International Journal of Operations &
Production Management
Vol. 26 No. 11, 2006
pp. 1176-1198
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0144-3577
DOI 10.1108/01443570610705818

