Business Strategy and the Environment
Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
Published online 19 December 2006 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/bse.560

Sustainability Reporting in Norway – an Assessment 
of Performance in the Context of Legal 
Demands and Socio-Political Drivers

Irja Vormedal* and Audun Ruud
Centre for Development and the Environment, University of Oslo, Blindern, Norway

ABSTRACT
This article explores the inﬂuence of societal, political and regulatory characteristics and 
developments on the quality of corporate sustainability disclosures in Norway. The paper 
presents an assessment both of mandatory reporting under the Norwegian Accounting Act, 
and of voluntary reporting in annual and separate non-ﬁnancial reports, by the 100 largest 
ﬁrms in Norway. Our results reveal that only 10% of the companies comply with the legal 
requirements on environmental reporting, while only half of the ﬁrms comply with the legal 
reporting  provisions  on  working  environment  and  gender  equality.  The  vast  majority  of 
ﬁrms  also  report  unsatisfactorily  on  non-ﬁnancial  issues  in  the  voluntary  disclosures 
assessed. Analysing the causes of these results, we contend that the situation is character-
ized  by  (1)  an  apparent  lack  of  politi cal  and  social  drivers  for  sustainability  reporting  in 
Norway and (2) an absence of sufﬁcient monitoring and enforcement of the environmental 
reporting legislation on the part of Norwegian authorities. Copyright © 2006 John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment.

Received 25 May 2006; revised 30 August 2006; accepted 27 September 2006
Keywords: sustainability reporting; transparency; non-ﬁnancial disclosures; corporate social responsibility; Norway

Introduction

ONE  OF  THE  MOST  SIGNIFICANT  DEVELOPMENTS  IN  THE  FIELD  OF  CORPORATE  (SOCIAL)  RESPONSIBILITY HAS 

been the steady increase in the volume and size of corporate non-ﬁnancial disclosures over the past 
decades  (Gray  et  al.,  2001;  Kolk,  2003,  2004;  KMPG,  2005a;  Owen,  2006).  While  the  ﬁrst  wave  of 
reporting in the 1990s was characterized by the growth of ‘pure’ environmental disclosures, companies 
have increasingly expanded their focus to reporting on sustainability more broadly (Wheeler and Elkington, 2001; 
Kolk, 2003, 2004; Tregidga and Milne, 2006). The trend to report on social, environmental, ethical and ﬁnancial 
issues in an integrated manner is increasingly referred to as ‘sustainability reporting’ (Owen, 2006): a deﬁnition 
that may also be associated with reporting along the ‘triple bottom line’ (Elkington, 1999; Wheeler and Elkington, 
2001).

This article evaluates sustainability reporting practices of the 100 largest companies in Norway. The results are 
discussed  in  relation  to  various  sets  of  ‘drivers’  for  reporting,  which  forms  a  framework  for  understanding  the 

* Correspondence to: Irja Vormedal, Research Fellow, Centre for Development and the Environment, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1116, Blindern 
NO-0317, Norway. E-mail: i.h.vormedal@sum.uio.no

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment


208 

I. Vormedal and A. Ruud

level and quality of sustainability disclosures by Norwegian ﬁrms. The ﬁrst section presents a review of the litera-
ture  on  sustainability  reporting  drivers,  and  gives  an  account  of  the  presence  and  absence  of  such  drivers  in  a 
Norwegian context. Subsequently, we present the research methodology and the results of the empirical assess-
ment of mandatory and voluntary corporate reporting. In the next section, we explore the relationship between 
non-ﬁnancial disclosures and corporate characteristics such as size, sector and degree of internationalization in 
our sample. Finally, we present some tentative conclusions regarding the relationship between social, political and 
regulatory structures and sustainability reporting in Norway.

Corporate Sustainability Reporting

The growth of sustainability reporting can be explained with reference to a range of market-based, societal, politi-
cal,  regulatory  and  ethical  drivers  for  non-ﬁnancial  disclosures.  First,  pressure  on  companies  to  disclose  non-
ﬁnancial information is exerted directly through the market mechanism (Solomon and Lewis, 2002). Evidence of 
market drivers can be found in the growing number of ethical, social and environmental investment funds, which 
has generated an emergent demand for sustainability disclosures on the part of stockbrokers and analysts in recent 
years (Holden Meehan, 1999; Slater and Gilbert, 2004).

Progress in the ﬁeld also stems from the inﬂuence of a number of societal drivers (Solomon and Lewis, 2002). 
Stakeholder theory provides one account of the role of social forces. According to this approach, the main impetus 
to  the  growth  of  sustainability  reporting  is  the  pressure  on  companies  to  disclose  information  on  their  social, 
environmental and ethical performance from stakeholder groups (Noci, 2000; Andriof et al., 2002, 2003). The 
recognition of stakeholder needs and demands by business, it is assumed, will thus automatically generate higher 
(and for some satisfactory) levels and quality of sustainability disclosures (Maltby, 1997). A stakeholder is com-
monly deﬁned as ‘any group or individual who can affect or is affected by the achievement of an organisation’s 
purpose’ (Freeman, 1984, p. 52). These may include internal stakeholders such as shareholders, employees and 
trade unions and external stakeholders such as customers, suppliers and other partners, competitors, government 
and  regulators,  non-governmental  organizations  and  interest  groups,  and  local  and  international  communities 
(Bendell, 2003). Stakeholder theory can be viewed as descriptive, instrumental and normative in character. It is 
descriptive in that it attempts to explain how the relationship between ﬁrms and stakeholders is managed, that is, 
how ﬁrms recognize and respond to the wishes of interested parties. It is instrumental in terms of arguing that 
ﬁrms  who  communicate  effectively  with  stakeholders  will  be  more  successful  than  those  that  do  not.  Finally, 
stakeholder theory can be essentially normative: positing that management should – for ethical reasons – respect 
and respond to stakeholder needs and demands (Donaldson and Preston, 1995).

A complimentary perspective on the role of social drivers is provided by legitimacy theory. Legitimacy theory 
argues that voluntary non-ﬁnancial disclosures are a function of the need for business to legiti mize behaviour and 
justify its existence. Reporting thus becomes an important element in upholding a good reputation and a ‘licence 
to operate’ from society (Gray et al., 2001; Solomon and Lewis, 2002; Adams and Frost, 2006).

Furthermore, attempts to account for the growth of sustainability reporting frequently also refer to the role of 
political and regulatory drivers (Solomon and Lewis, 2002; Kolk et al., 2001; Kolk, 2003, 2004). In recent years, 
corporate reporting has been high on the political agenda in many countries. In the European Union, although 
efforts  to  make  reporting  mandatory  have  failed  for  the  time  being  (Ethical  Corporation,  2005a),  expectations 
towards business to be transparent by disclosing information about their social and environmental performance 
have  been  repeatedly  stressed  by  the  Commission  (EC,  2002;  ComEC,  2006).  In  Britain  the  role  of  reporting 
has been central to the political debate on corporate responsibility (see UK Government, 2004). In 2000, Prime 
Minister Blair explicitly challenged leading UK ﬁrms to disclose information on their environmental performance: 
‘I am issuing a challenge, today to all of the top 350 companies to publish annual environmental reports by the 
end of 2001’ (Blair, 2000, in Solomon and Lewis, 2002). The UK Government has also been actively promoting 
sustainability  reporting,  and  has  issued  a  guidance  document  for  environmental  reporting1  (UK  Government, 
2004).

1

 See http://www.csr.gov.uk/environmentalreporting.shtml.

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


Sustainability Reporting in Norway 

209

Internationally, the emergence of standard-setting institutions for corporate responsibility, sustainability report-
ing and environmental management systems has also fuelled the growth of non-ﬁnancial disclosures. The Global 
Reporting Initiative (GRI) represents perhaps the most important driver in this sense. The aim of the GRI has 
been to induce a process of standardization and harmonization for disclosures by developing a universally accepted 
framework for sustainability reporting. The framework offers a valuable compliment to national social and envi-
ronmental regulations, and is part of an emerging system of ‘soft law’ for sustainability reporting (Gilbert, 2002). 
The European Union’s voluntary Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) also requires participating ﬁrms 
to produce an annual environmental statement (Gouldson, 2005). The UN Global Compact, furthermore, requires 
its signatories to regularly communicate their progress in the implementation of the 10 GC principles2 throughout 
their work stream, and strongly encourage reporting according to the GRI standards.

Country speciﬁc regulatory developments also inﬂuence the level and quality of reporting. Some countries have 
introduced legal reporting requirements in some form. In Europe, some 250 Dutch ﬁrms are required to disclose 
environmental information to the government (Kolk, 2003; Mathis and de Bruijn, 2006), while Danish companies 
are required to produce annual green accounts (Holgaard and Herreborg Jørgensen, 2005), and to disclose infor-
mation regarding impact on, and measures taken to manage and mitigate impacts on, the external environment.3 
Swedish and Norwegian companies are also legally mandated to disclose non-ﬁnancial information in the board 
of directors’ reports in the annual accounts (Nyquist, 2003). While all Norwegian-registered ﬁrms are liable under 
the  Norwegian  Accounting  Act  (regnskapsloven4),  the  Swedish  Accounting  Act  (åredovisningslagen5)  only  requires 
companies to report when disclosures on the external or working environment are deemed necessary to attain an 
understanding of the company’s development, position and results.

Finally, the growth of reporting also relates to developments in the ﬁeld of business ethics and corporate account-
ability. The notion that ﬁrms are accountable not only to their shareholders but also to their stakeholders – includ-
ing the environment and future generations – has been increasingly accepted by company boards in recent years. 
In their study of environmental reporting drivers, Solomon and Lewis (2002) found that ethics and accountability 
appear to be the overriding incentives driving voluntary corporate disclosures. In fact, the majority of company 
respondents list ethics as the most important incentive for sustainability reporting. Thus it appears that a relational 
view  of  the  ﬁrm  is  increasingly  recognized  in  corporate  management,  in  contrast  to  the  prevailing  view  of  the 
‘corporate-centric’  paradigm,  in  which  the  ﬁrm  is  seen  as  an  entity  existing  alongside,  not  within,  society  (see 
Freeman, 2002; Andriof et al., 2003).

The literature on social and environmental disclosures is relatively consistent in acknowledging a relationship 
between sustainability disclosures on the one hand and nationality, corporate size/proﬁt and industry sector on 
the other (see Gray et al., 2001). In addition, the degree of internationalization has been identiﬁed as a factor that 
may inﬂuence the level and quality of reporting (Kolk et al., 2001). Nationality refers to the speciﬁc market, societal, 
political and regulatory characteristics and developments in a ﬁrms’ home country (see Kolk et al., 2001), that is, 
country-speciﬁc combinations of the various drivers accounted for above. Kolk et al. (2001) and Kolk (2003) contend 
that sectoral characteristics are also likely to be of high importance for reporting. In two studies of environmental 
reporting  by  the  Global  Fortune  250  multinational  companies,  the  authors  identify  a  relationship  between  the 
direct environmental impact of a sector and the degree of environmental reporting. Furthermore, several studies 
show that company size/proﬁt is likely to inﬂuence the level and extent of reporting, in that reporting is generally 
more prevalent amongst larger ﬁrms (Adams et al., 1998; Sinclair and Walton, 2003; Gray et al., 2001).

Sustainability Reporting in Norway

A number of factors and developments may be identiﬁed as having a potential inﬂuence on the progress of sus-
tainability  reporting  in  Norway.  This  section  presents  an  overview  of  the  speciﬁc  combination  of  drivers  –  or 
absence of the same – that currently exist in the Norwegian context.

2
 See http://www.globalcompact.org/AboutTheGC/TheTenPrinciples/index.html.
3
 The Danish Accounting Act (Årsregnskabsloven) is available at http://www.retsinformation.dk/_GETDOCI_/ACCN/A20040019629-REGL 
(in Danish only).
4
 Available at http://www.lovdata.no/all/tl-19980717-056-003.html#3-3 (in Norwegian only).
 Available at http://lagen.nu/1995:1554 (in Swedish only).

5

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


210 

I. Vormedal and A. Ruud

It is likely that the growing interest in socially responsible investment (SRI) on the part of Norwegian investors 
in recent years (Bellona, 2004) has provoked more companies to disclose social and environmental information. 
The establishment of the Ethical Investment Council for the Norwegian State Pension Fund in 2004 – which has 
also set precedence internationally – represents one important development that may contribute to building busi-
ness awareness and interest in the role of SRI (Morgenbladet, 2005). The council’s mandate is to judge whether 
the fund’s investments are in conﬂict with the established ethical investment criteria.6 The recommendations are 
subsequently  utilized  by  the  Department  of  Finance  to  exclude  companies  whose  activity  is  in  breach  of  the 
council’s guidelines for the investment universe (Ethical Council, 2006).

An important social driver for reporting in Norway has been the National Environmental and Social Reporting 
Awards. These were established in 1994 by a group of various ﬁnancial and business stakeholders with the aim 
of  strengthening  non-ﬁnancial  reporting  in  Norway,  and  have  been  administered  by  GRIP  (the  state-supported 
Foundation  for  Sustainable  Production  and  Consumption).  The  reporting  awards  have,  however,  received  little 
attention from the media, and their impact on corporate reporting has been questioned by many. In fact, a recent 
impact assessment of the awards revealed that the majority of Norwegian companies do not consider them to be 
an  important  driver  for  reporting.  In  consequence,  the  board  of  the  award  has  recently  decided  to  wrap  up  its 
activity (GRIP, 2006).

In line with the stakeholder-theory approach, we can expect the quality and extent of reporting to be related to 
the level of societal (stakeholder) pressure on companies to disclose information on their social and environmen-
tal performance. However, according to Ørstavik (2006) from ‘ForUM’ – the chief NGO network organization in 
Norway, with a membership of more than 50 environment and development NGOs, the level of civil-society pres-
sure towards companies to implement corporate responsibility (CR) policies, and to report on their environmental 
and  social  performance,  has  been  signiﬁcantly  poor  compared  with  other  countries.  Indeed,  ForUM’s  lobbying 
activity in the CR ﬁeld has ﬁrst and foremost been targeted at government, not business. Only very recently has 
sustainability reporting been explicitly on their agenda (Ørstavik, 2006). The only Norwegian NGO with an explicit 
mandate to monitor the activity of Norwegian corporations is NorWatch, a branch of The Future in Our Hands 
(FIVH). The aim of NorWatch has been to scrutinize the activity of Norwegian TNCs abroad, to voice the opinions 
of peoples affected by the operations of Norwegian TNCs in developing countries and to exert pressure on these 
ﬁrms by mobilizing public opinion through the media (Ehrenclou, 2006).

Furthermore, the Norwegian media has been insufﬁciently concerned with corporate responsibility and report-
ing. While the newspapers Dagens Næringsliv and Morgenbladet have published occasional articles on these issues 
in recent years, the low level of publications on the subject stands in striking contrast to many other countries 
such  as  the  UK  and  the  US.  In  addition,  there  has  been  a  relatively  low  level  of  interest  in  green  and  ethical 
products on the part of Norwegian consumers, and no noteworthy civil-society organization working to promote 
corporate accountability and green consumerism in Norway. Thus it is evident that many of the societal drivers 
that have been identiﬁed by international research in the area appear to be lacking in Norway. This is also pointed 
out  by  KPMG,  which  argues  that  Norwegian  ﬁrms  are  less  under  the  scrutiny  of  investors,  NGOs,  the  media, 
consumers, suppliers etc. than appears to be the case in other countries (KPMG, 2005b).

While corporate responsibility and reporting has not been entirely absent from the political agenda in Norway, 
no  national  policy  on  these  issues  exists  to  date.  The  most  noteworthy  political  initiative  on  CR  has  been  the 
establishment  of  Kompakt,  a  consultative  body  and  discussion  forum  for  CR  administered  by  the  Ministry  of 
Foreign  Affairs  (MFA).  The  Kompakt  mandate  is  to  inform  the  Government  on  questions  regarding  corporate 
responsibility and Norwegian economic activity in developing countries. Members of Kompakt represent Norwe-
gian business, civil society, academia and interest organizations (MFA, 2006). Kompakt has produced a number 
of reports and guidelines for companies, yet these publications focus primarily on business and social conduct in 
developing countries (Munkelien et al., 2005), and have thus been of limited value to progress in the CR ﬁeld.

Conceivably,  the  most  apparent  reporting  driver  in  Norway  is  regulatory.  The  ﬁrst  legal  provisions  on  non-
ﬁnancial reporting were adopted with the 1977 Accounting Act, which required the board of directors of all publicly 
registered ﬁrms in Norway to report on their pollution of the external environment. The Act was radically tightened 
in 1998, requiring the board of directors to report on measures taken to manage and mitigate any ‘not insigniﬁcant’ 

6

 See http://odin.dep.no/etikkradet/norsk/retningslinjer/bn.html (in Norwegian only).

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


Sustainability Reporting in Norway 

211

impacts on the external environment, and on the working environment in the company (Ruud, 2005). In 2003, a 
third legal provision was introduced, stipulating that the board of directors must also report on gender equality 
within  the  company.  The  ﬁrst  legal  provision  states  that  ‘Information  concerning  current  activities,  including 
production inputs and products that could cause a not insigniﬁcant impact on the external environment, shall be 
provided. Information on the types of environmental effect that the different aspects of the operation have or could 
have, and what measures have been implemented, or are planned to be implemented, to prevent or reduce nega-
tive environmental effects shall be provided’ (Norwegian Accounting Act, Section 3-3a, Subsection 11). The second 
legal provision states that ‘Information on the working environment and a summary of implemented measures 
that are signiﬁcant to the working environment shall be provided. Information pertaining to injuries and accidents 
shall be provided separately. Separate information pertaining to absences due to illness shall in addition be pro-
vided by companies legally bound to keep accounting records who have a minimum of 5 man-labour years in the 
course  of  the  ﬁnancial  year’  (Norwegian  Accounting  Act,  Section  3-3a,  Subsection  9).  The  third  legal  provision 
states that ‘An account of the actual state of gender equality in the enterprise shall be provided. An account of 
measures implemented and measures planned to promote gender equality and to prevent discrimination contrary 
to  the  Gender  Equality  Act  shall  be  provided’  (Norwegian  Accounting  Act,  Section  3-3a,  Subsection  10  –  our 
translations).

The wording of the Act clearly leaves the way open for signiﬁcant differences of interpretation. In particular, 
the wording of the environmental requirement – stating that the impacts to be reported are more than ‘insigniﬁcant’ 
– provides, on the one hand, what appears to be a very low threshold: but it is also a very vague threshold that 
companies can interpret to their advantage if so inclined (Ruud and Larsen, 2002, 2003; Munkelien et al., 2005). 
It has also been pointed out that the provisions of the Accounting Act have not been sufﬁciently monitored, as 
external accountants are not required to check the disclosures provided by the companies under the provisions. 
Nor  has  the  responsibility  for  monitoring  environmental  reporting  under  the  Act  been  placed  elsewhere,  for 
example with the Norwegian Pollution Control Authority (SFT) (Ruud and Larsen, 2003).

In sum, there are prima facie reasons for anticipating that the speciﬁc combination of market-based, societal, 
political and regulatory drivers emphasized above will signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the level, extent and quality of sus-
tainability reporting in Norway. The next section outlines the methodology and the empirical work conducted to 
determine the extent to which this actually is the case.

Research Methodology

The primary aim of the project of which the present study is a part has been to examine the quality of the growing 
number of sustainability reports produced in recent years by Norwegian companies.7 While several studies have 
focused on the volume of reporting (see for example KPMG, 2005a, 2005b; Kolk, 2003, 2004; Sinclair and Walton, 
2003), our aim has been to critically examine the contents of such publications.

The study evaluates the reporting practices of the 100 largest companies in Norway for the ﬁnancial year 2004. 
We measure size according to annual turnover.8 It should be noted that two of the companies from the original 
list  were  excluded  from  the  assessment  as  they  were  in  fact  registered  abroad.  The  actual  number  of  entities 
included in the study is, therefore, 98.

An increasing number of ﬁrms now supplement paper-based reports with information on their web-sites (Sus-
tainAbility, 2004a). We recognize the beneﬁts of utilizing the internet for non-ﬁnancial reporting. Indeed, web-
based reporting can more easily meet the growing demands for more customized information, and more efﬁciently 
address key target groups. It also enables frequent updates, and facilitates two-way stakeholder communication 
(Noci, 2000; Isenmann and Lenz, 2002; Wheeler and Elkington, 2001; Adams and Frost, 2006).

We have, however, decided to assess only paper-based reports in this study. This is because, ﬁrst, many corpo-
rate web-sites are still surprisingly inaccessible and difﬁcult to navigate (see also Wheeler and Elkington, 2001). 

7
 The project – ‘CSR Reporting in Norway’ – has been ﬁnanced by the Research Council of Norway as part of the Programme for Research 
and Documentation for a Sustainable Society (ProSus) at the Centre for Development and the Environment, University of Oslo. The head of 
the project is Senior Researcher Audun Ruud.
8
 The selection of companies is based on a list provided by the Norwegian newspaper Dagens Næringsliv.

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


212 

I. Vormedal and A. Ruud

According to the researchers at SustainAbility, some web-sites proved ‘voluminous to the point where our analysts 
sometimes wondered whether they might become too vast, equivalent to corporate ‘black holes’ – with virtually 
inﬁnite  gravitational  conditions  from  which  data-hunters  would  ﬁnd  no  escape’  (SustainAbility,  2004a,  p.  26). 
Second,  much  of  the  information  that  is  provided  on  line  is  not  dated  (KPMG,  2005b).  As  our  assessment  of 
reporting is speciﬁcally targeted at the ﬁnancial year 2004, we made the choice not to review all the on-line infor-
mation provided by each of the 100 companies included in our sample. Finally, information that is provided on 
line can be changed, added to or removed at any point in time, which makes it less reliable than printed informa-
tion. It should be noted, however, that if a company explicitly refers to on-line information in their reports, we do 
include this information in the evaluation. Some companies provide on-line reports only, as was the case with AS 
Norske Shell, which is also included in the assessment. This did not pose difﬁculties for the research team, as 
these on-line reports were explicitly limited to the ﬁnancial year 2004.

The empirical evaluation of sustainability reporting is separated into three main parts. First, we investigate the 
extent to which companies report in accordance with the reporting requirements of the Norwegian Accounting 
Act.  The  ﬁrst  part  of  the  study  thus  evaluates  the  content  of  the  board  of  directors’  report,  where  companies  are 
required to disclose information on the external environment, the working environment and gender equality. The 
board of directors’ report is that part of the annual report that is signed by the board of directors and sent, with 
the annual accounts, to the ofﬁcial Register of Annual Company Accounts in Brønnøysund. The board is legally 
responsible for the information submitted.

The second part of the empirical assessment evaluates the contents of the annual reports, while the third part 
evaluates the contents of the separate (non-ﬁnancial) reports. These may include pure environmental reports, social 
reports  or  integrated  triple-bottom-line  reports.  We  realize  that  the  methodology  employed  –  which  divides  the 
evaluation  into  three  separate  parts  –  can  be  critically  discussed.  Some  value  is  clearly  lost  since  sustainability 
reporting is not evaluated as a whole, regardless of where the information is found. We felt it to be very important, 
however, that the evaluation clearly distinguished between the ‘harder’ and ‘softer’ legal prescriptions for reporting. 
Norway is a country unique in its demands for mandatory reporting by the board of directors, and we felt that an 
analysis of this was too important to ‘submerge’ in a more general reporting assessment.

Furthermore, we chose to study annual reports and separate reports independently, because we wanted to inves-
tigate  the  extent  to  which  Norwegian  companies  tend  to  integrate  sustainability  information  with  traditional 
ﬁnancial reporting. It should be noted that, while the assessment of reports is made in separate sections, we also 
discuss  the  results  jointly.  Importantly,  we  examine  whether  companies  that  report  well  in  annual  reports  also 
report well in separate reports and vice versa. Indeed, we were confronted by the question of whether it is ‘satisfac-
tory’ for a company to report through only one channel to avoid duplication.

Mandatory Reporting

We evaluate the board of directors’ report with respect to the legal requirements of the Norwegian Accounting Act, 
Section 3-3, and the contents of the annual report with respect to Subsections 9, 10 and 11.9 Our operationalization 
of what the Act requires in terms of speciﬁc information was based on recommendations and viewpoints from 
the Confederation of Norwegian Enterprises (NHO), the Norwegian Accounting Standards Board (NRS) and the 
Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombudsman. As indicated, the wording of the provision on the external environ-
ment is speciﬁcally imprecise to make it difﬁcult for ﬁrms to interpret the exact type of information to be included 
(Ruud and Larsen, 2002). However, both the Norwegian Accounting Standards Board and the NHO have written 
guidelines and recommendations addressed speciﬁcally to the type of information the companies must provide. 
According  to  the  NHO,  information  on  (1)  production  inputs  (including  chemicals)  and  their  environmental 
impacts, (2) emissions and waste from production and their environmental impacts, (3) environmental impacts 
due  to  use  and  scrapping  of  products  and  (4)  implemented  or  planned  measures  for  preventing  or  reducing 
negative environmental effects must be included in the board of directors’ report. We have used the NHO recom-
mendations as a starting point to establish a minimum norm for being deemed in compliance with the law. Our 

9

 The Norwegian Accounting Act is available at http://www.lovdata.no/all/tl-19980717-056-003.html#3-3 [14 November 2005].

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


Sustainability Reporting in Norway 

213

External environment 
 
 
Working environment 
Gender equality 

Identify measures and provide some quantitative information regarding resource management: e.g. 
    energy consumption, emissions, waste, recycling and transport. Industrial ﬁrms must also report 
    on environmental conditions related to production.
Information on total absence due to illness, accidents and injuries.
Information on gender distribution and an identiﬁcation of measures in place/plan to implement.

Table 1.  Minimum criteria for compliance with the reporting requirements of the Accounting Act

Category 0: 
not mentioned
Category 1: 
mentioned 
 
Category 2: 
insufﬁcient 
Category 3: 
satisfactory
Category 4: 
very satisfactory 

The company does not mention the external environment/working environment/gender equality.

The company mentions external environment/working environment/gender equality, but information 
    provided is minimal is not linked explicitly to the ﬁrm’s core activities. Alternatively, the themes are 
    dismissed as irrelevant.
The company reports in accordance with the legal requirements, but the information lacks one or more 
    required points (e.g. measures, ﬁgures).
The company reports on all relevant points (meets the minimum legal requirements).

The company provides comprehensive and accurate reporting in accordance with – and beyond – the 
    minimum legal requirements.

Table 2.  Scoring system, board of directors’ reports

minimum criterion is that companies must identify some measures taken with respect to resource management 
– for example, energy consumption, emissions, waste, recycling and transport – and include some quantitative 
information on these indicators. In addition, companies that produce material products must report on the condi-
tions related to the production. These criteria are based on a somewhat more lenient interpretation of the law than 
that provided by the NHO.

In contrast to the environmental requirement, the wording of the provision on working environment is relatively 
self-explanatory and precise. To be deemed in compliance with the law, we have set the inclusion of the following 
information as a minimum: total absence due to illness, and information on accidents and injuries.

Finally, the wording of the provision on gender equality is similarly unambiguous. The NHO and the Equality 
and Anti-Discrimination Ombudsman recommend that companies should account for the gender balance at both 
a general and managerial level, in salaries and for other factors relating to recruitment and further training/educa-
tion of employees. Our minimum requirement to be deemed in compliance with the law is that companies must 
include  information  on  gender  distribution,  and  list  what  measures  they  have  in  place  or  plan  to  implement. 
Because a key purpose of reporting is to provide transparency to stakeholders, we also accept statements of the 
following  type:  ‘We  have  no  measures  in  place  with  respect  to  gender  equality’.  An  overview  of  our  minimum 
criteria for being deemed in compliance with the law is given in Table 1.

The disclosures of the companies relating to these standards are then scored in accordance with ﬁve categories. 
Table  2  illustrates  the  criteria  for  each  category.  The  companies  which  receive  the  score  ‘satisfactory’  or  ‘very 
satisfactory’ are deemed in compliance with the law.

Voluntary Reporting

The assessment of voluntary reporting in annual and separate reports utilizes a somewhat different methodology. 
The aim here was to develop a framework that allowed us to systematically investigate what non-ﬁnancial themes 

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


214 

I. Vormedal and A. Ruud

the companies report (well) on, and what aspects are left out. The development of the methodology was inspired 
by the SustainAbility framework for assessing the content of corporate sustainability reports (see SustainAbility, 
2004b). However, the SustainAbility framework was developed with the aim of assessing the reporting practices 
of the ‘global reporters’: that is, best-practice companies at a global level. In the Norwegian context – where most 
companies are still relatively small on an international scale – the criteria set by SustainAbility for good quality 
reporting were deemed to be both too extensive and too demanding on the companies. We chose, therefore, to 
create a more simpliﬁed framework, which acknowledged the idea of the ‘triple bottom line’ (TBL – Elkington, 
1999), and which included the most important and essential elements of the corporate responsibility and sustain-
ability discourse.

We have utilized four overarching categories in the assessment of the non-ﬁnancial information: general cor-
porate responsibility, management systems, codes of conduct and supply chain management. Each category has 
an environmental, social and economic dimension in line with the TBL concept. The economic dimension does 
not  refer  to  traditional  ﬁnancial  reporting,  but  to  business  ethics  and  socio-economic  impact  on  society,  such  as 
corruption,  value  creation,  competence  building,  innovation  and  entrepreneurship.  In  the  assessment  of  each 
company’s reports, we thus look for information in accordance with the criteria of each category, as illustrated in 
Table 3. While this methodology does not formally distinguish different criteria for different industrial sectors, the 
coding  applied  did  not  require  companies  to  provide  information  on  activities  that  were  irrelevant  to  their 
business to attain a good score.

We  label  the  ﬁrst  category  ‘general  CR’  (corporate  responsibility).  This  is  the  most  wide-ranging  category, 
intended  to  capture  the  general  impression  a  company  gives  of  CR  policy  and  practice.  With  reference  to  this 
category we examine reporting on core non-ﬁnancial challenges and activities, and on the company’s goals and 
performance with respect to these. The category covers issues such as energy consumption, waste, emissions and 
transport (environmental dimension); working environment, health and safety, gender equality, stakeholder dia-
logue, civil society collaboration and human rights (social dimension) and the economic impact on stakeholders 
and business ethics (economic dimension).

The second category, ‘management systems’, refers to management systems and control mechanisms in place 
to ensure that a company’s corporate responsibility and sustainability policies are sufﬁciently monitored, and that 
deviations are uncovered and rectiﬁed. More speciﬁcally, we investigate whether the company has various types 
of certiﬁcation system in place. The environmental dimension might include the ISO 14000 series, EMAS or other 
environmental management systems. The social dimension includes, for example, management systems for inter-
nal  and  external  stakeholders,  health  and  safety  or  human  rights.  Finally,  the  economic  dimension  refers  to 
corporate governance or business ethics systems.

General corporate 
    responsibility (CR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management systems 
 
Codes of conduct 
 
Supply chain management 
 

Reporting on key policies, strategies and management practices in the CR ﬁeld, including 
    information on company performance with respect to set targets
Environment: e.g. energy consumption, waste, recycling, discharges, emissions, biodiversity 
    and transport
Social responsibility: e.g. working environment, employee satisfaction and training, health and 
    safety, gender equality (internal issues); stakeholder dialogue, civil society (NGO) 
    collaboration, community liaison, philanthropy and human rights (external issues)
Economy: economic impact on stakeholders and business ethics, corporate governance, 
    anti-corruption
Reporting on environmental, social and economic management systems and control 
    mechanisms in place to ensure that CR is sufﬁciently monitored in the company
Reporting on the implementation of environmental, social and economic codes of conduct 
    (guidelines) in the company
Reporting on the company’s environmental, social and economic requirements towards 
    suppliers on CR issues

Table 3.  Evaluation criteria for annual reports and separate reports

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


Sustainability Reporting in Norway 

215

Category 0: 
‘not mentioned’
Category 1: 
‘mentioned’ 
 
Category 2: 
‘insufﬁcient’ 
Category 3: 
‘satisfactory’ 
 
Category 4: 
‘very satisfactory’ 

Neither of the relevant non-ﬁnancial themes is mentioned in the report.

The information provided is minimal and generalized. Furthermore, the information appears isolated 
    from the traditional activity (policy and operations) of the ﬁrm in question. Alternatively, the themes 
    are dismissed as irrelevant.
The non-ﬁnancial information provided is linked to the operations of the ﬁrm, but the reporting has 
    major deﬁciencies with respect to content and presentation, and lacks sufﬁcient detail.
Sufﬁcient provision of relevant non-ﬁnancial information. The theme is described and analysed within 
the context of the ﬁrm’s operations. Central problems, challenges and solutions are candidly considered. 
    The content and presentation of the information provided, however, is somewhat deﬁcient.
The company’s efforts and achievements with respect to the themes in question are analysed 
systematically and comprehensively, and in an integrated manner.

Table 4.  Scoring system, annual reports and separate reports

The third category, ‘codes of conduct’, refers to the implementation of sustainability and corporate responsibil-
ity codes of conduct (established guidelines) in the companies. This can include guidelines on the environment, 
corruption,  HSE  (health,  security  and  environment)  or  employment  conditions.  Such  guidelines  should  be  as 
speciﬁc as possible. Finally, the fourth category, ‘supply chain management’, refers to a company’s own require-
ments towards its suppliers on environmental, social and socio-economic/ethical issues. This might involve setting 
particular standard requirements on e.g. recycling and chemicals (environmental dimension), on working condi-
tions and human rights (social dimension) and on business ethics or socio-economic impact (economic dimension) 
towards suppliers. The companies are then awarded a score, which indicates the extent and quality of information 
in relation to the categories and criteria illustrated above.

The scoring system consists of ﬁve categories, as illustrated in Table 4.
We recognize that our categories are not all inclusive, and that there might be other themes that also indicate 
good sustainability reporting that are not included here. Also, judging ‘good quality reporting’ on the basis of these 
criteria  necessarily  involves  some  level  of  interpretation  and  subjectivity  on  the  part  of  our  research  team.  To 
enhance the reliability of the judgements, all reports were scored independently by two researchers, who subse-
quently  jointly  compared  the  results.  Usually,  the  scores  were  consistent.  If  not,  the  researchers  arrived  on  a 
consensus result through discussion, in which the project leader was involved. Notwithstanding the limitations to 
the methodology, we feel that the categories and results are highly valid with respect to an overview of the extent 
and quality of sustainability reporting by the 100 largest companies in Norway.

Results

Mandatory Reporting in the Board of Directors’ Report

Figure 1 illustrates the total percentage of ‘satisfactory’ and ‘very satisfactory’ reporting, that is, the percentage of 
companies deemed in compliance with the law. The results reveal that the vast majority of the companies included 
in  our  sample  fail  to  abide  by  the  legal  requirements  of  the  Act.  In  terms  of  providing  information  regarding 
impacts on the external environment – and the measures taken to manage and mitigate such impacts – only 10% 
of the companies report satisfactorily or better. Not withstanding this poor result, all of the companies do at least 
‘mention’ the external environment in the board of directors’ report. With respect to the provision for the working 
environment, 53% of the companies report at least satisfactorily, while 49% report satisfactorily or better on the 
status of gender equality. Only 1% of the companies do not mention working environment or gender equality in 
the board of directors’ report. In total, as many as 94% of the companies do not fulﬁl one or more of the legal 
requirements.

None of the companies included in our sample receive the maximum score of 12 points in the evaluation of 
mandatory reporting. However, some companies exhibit good practice. Three companies – BP Norway (petroleum/

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


216 

I. Vormedal and A. Ruud

Figure  1.  Legally  mandated  reporting  in  the  board  of  directors’  report.  Total  ‘satisfactory’  and  ‘very  satisfactory’  reporting 
(N = 98)

energy), Cermaq (ﬁshing) and NCC Construction (construction) – receive 11 out of 12 points, while four companies 
– ENI Norway (petroleum/energy), Conoco Phillips (petroleum/energy), Norges Gruppen (food) and Norske Shell 
(petroleum/energy) – receive 10 points. One example of very satisfactory environmental reporting is provided by 
ENI. The report includes information on company strategies and revisions related to the external environment, 
and on transpired accidents with possible environmental effects. Statistics on waste, energy consumption, rate of 
recovery for waste (from ofﬁce premises), discharges, emissions, chemical spills and waste from the Norwegian 
continental shelf are included. In addition, the report informs on ongoing research projects aimed at improving 
environmental conditions in connection with petroleum activities.

A score of 9 (3 + 3 + 3) points on environment, working environment and gender equality respectively is deemed 
necessary to be deemed in compliance with the law. A score of 7 is the average score in our sample. It is thus clear 
that the majority of the 100 largest Norwegian companies indeed fail to fully comply with the legal non-ﬁnancial 
reporting requirements of the Act.

Voluntary Reporting in Annual Reports

The results of our assessment of voluntary reporting similarly demonstrate that the majority of the companies fail 
to report satisfactorily. Figure 2 illustrates the total percentage of ‘satisfactory’ and ‘very satisfactory’ reporting in 
annual reports.

For the indicator ‘general CR’ – which evaluates companies reporting on CR policy and performance in general 
– 30% of the companies report at least satisfactorily with respect to social responsibility, including 9% who report 
very satisfactorily. 26% report satisfactorily, including 10% who attain the score very satisfactory, on the external 
environment. It should be noted that the analysis reveals a considerable variance between the internal dimension 
(HSE  and  training)  and  the  external  dimension  (relations  to  external  stakeholders/NGOs,  human  rights,  local/
indigenous people, sponsoring and charity etc.) of social responsibility. While 46% of the companies report satis-
factorily or better on internal social issues, only 14% report satisfactorily on external social issues. In fact, 60% of 
the companies do not even mention external social issues in their reports. Furthermore, only 8% report satisfac-
torily or better on the economic dimension (business ethics and the overall economic impact on society), with only 
2% reporting very satisfactorily. 49% do not mention issues related to the economic dimension in their report.

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


Sustainability Reporting in Norway 

217

Figure 2.  Annual reports: percentage ‘satisfactory’ and ‘very satisfactory’ reporting (N = 98)

As regards reporting on ‘management systems’, the results are somewhat poorer. On environmental manage-
ment systems such as ISO 14000 and EMAS, only 9% report satisfactorily, including 2% who report very satis-
factorily. In this category, 44% made no mention of environmental management systems. On social management 
systems, 13% report satisfactorily, including 2% who received the score very satisfactory. Finally, on the economic 
dimension, only 7% reported satisfactorily, and not a single company reported very satisfactorily. Furthermore, 
59% did not mention economic management systems.

With respect to ‘codes of conduct’, the results are outstandingly weak. In fact not a single company reported 
satisfactorily  or  better  on  both  the  environmental  and  the  social  dimension  of  this  variable.  Furthermore,  over 
90% of the companies did not mention environmental or social codes of conduct in their reports. Eight per cent, 
however, report satisfactorily on the economic dimension, such as codes of conduct for business ethics. Yet 83% 
did not even mention economic codes in their report.

On the variable ‘supply chain management’ results are equally poor. One per cent report very satisfactorily on 
both the environmental and social dimensions, but over 80% did not even mention these issues. On the economic 
dimension, not a single company reported satisfactorily or better, and 97% failed to mention the subject at all.

The  three  annual  reports  that  received  highest  scores  –  25  points  each  –  were  issued  by  Statoil  (petroleum/
energy), Norsk Hydro (energy/light metals) and Statkraft (energy). Furthermore, Norske Skog (paper), Yara Inter-
national (plant nutrients), Telenor (telecom), DnB NOR (ﬁnance), Mesta (construction), The Norske Veritas (DNV) 
(risk management) and the Norges Gruppen (food) all report fairly well and receive a minimum score of 20. The 
average score for companies, however, is only 10.5 out of 52 possible points.

Voluntary Reporting in Separate Reports

A growing number of companies world-wide publish separate sustainability reports. However, only 14 of the 100 
companies in our sample issue such reports. The content of reports varies signiﬁcantly. Some companies provide 
comprehensive  triple-bottom-line  reports;  some  provide  purely  environmental  reports;  while  others  account  for 
environmental and HSE issues combined.

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


218 

I. Vormedal and A. Ruud

Figure 3.  Separate sustainability reports: ‘satisfactory’ and ‘very satisfactory’ reporting (N = 14)

The results shown in Figure 3 indicate that on the variable ‘general CR’ as many as 12 of the companies report 
at least satisfactorily, including eight companies who report very satisfactorily, on the environmental dimension. 
With respect to social responsibility, eight companies report satisfactorily, including three who obtain the score 
very satisfactory. Here we do not observe a notable divergence between external and internal issues on the social 
dimension,  as  was  the  case  in  the  annual  reports.  The  trend  to  report  better  on  internal  issues  is  no  longer 
signiﬁcant, and actually slightly reversed. Eight companies report satisfactorily, including two with the score very 
satisfactory, on internal issues, while nine companies report satisfactorily, including four who report very satisfac-
torily, on external issues. Yet four companies do not mention external social issues, while only one fails to report 
on  internal  social  issues.  On  the  economic  dimension,  only  four  companies  report  satisfactorily  and  only  one 
obtains the score very satisfactory. As many as seven companies do not mention issues related to the economic 
dimension.

With respect to reporting on ‘management systems’, eight companies report satisfactorily, including six who 
report very satisfactorily, on the environmental dimension. On social management systems, six report satisfactorily, 
comprising two who report very satisfactorily. Four companies, furthermore, do not mention social management 
systems. On the economic dimension only four companies report satisfactorily. Not a single company obtains the 
score  very  satisfactory  here,  and  as  many  as  nine  companies  make  no  mention  of  management  systems  for 
business ethics or socio-economic issues.

As  for  ‘codes  of  conduct’,  the  results  are  much  weaker.  Only  one  company  attains  the  score  satisfactory,  no 
company obtains very satisfactory, while 11 do not mention environmental codes of conduct in their report. On 
the social dimension, similarly, only one company receives the score satisfactory, while 10 do not even mention 
social codes. As regards codes related to the economic dimension, the two companies who report satisfactorily or 
better receive the score very satisfactory; likewise, 10 companies do not mention this theme.

On  the  variable  ‘supply  chain  management’,  results  are  equally  poor.  As  regards  environmental  demands  to 
suppliers, only one company reports very satisfactorily, while seven do not mention this issue in their report. On 
the social dimension, only a single company report is satisfactory, no company reports very satisfactorily, and nine 
companies  do  not  mention  social  demands  to  suppliers.  On  economic  supply  chain  management,  not  a  single 
company obtains the score satisfactory or better, and as many as 13 companies do not even mention this issue.

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


Sustainability Reporting in Norway 

219

Trends in Reporting

A comparison of the ﬁrms’ total scores in relation to the separate and annual reports shows that only two compa-
nies who report through both channels report better in the annual than in the separate report. It is also clear that 
the  percentage  of  good  quality  reporting  is,  overall,  much  higher  in  separate  than  in  annual  reports.  Only  two 
companies, Statoil and Telenor, attain high scores in both their reports. Yet, only ﬁve of the 14 companies obtain 
high scores for their separate report and a signiﬁcantly lower score for the annual report. These companies are 
the Kongsberg Group, the Tine Group, Storebrand, the Varner Group and Orkla. Thus if the ﬁgures for annual 
and  separate  reports  were  integrated  the  total  level  of  satisfactory  reporting  for  the  total  100  companies  would 
increase slightly. Furthermore, six of the companies who obtain high scores in their annual report do not issue 
separate reports. Therefore, while the total number of companies who issue separate reports is low (14), one might 
argue that another six should not be expected to do so, based on their good reporting in the annual report.

On the whole, the result demonstrates that the majority of Norwegian ﬁrms report unsatisfactorily according to 
our criteria. As regards mandatory reporting, it is indeed alarming that as many as 90% of the companies are not 
in compliance with the law on environmental reporting; while only approximately half of the companies comply 
with the provisions on working environment and gender equality. With regard to voluntary reporting, the results 
are equally unimpressive. While some companies exhibit best practice, the vast majority of companies do not attain 
the score satisfactory or better. Overall, reporting on the economic dimension of the triple bottom line, that is on 
various aspects of business ethics and socio-economic impact, is particularly poor. In addition, almost none of the 
companies provides satisfactory levels of information as regards codes of conduct and supply chain management. 
It is also evident that companies report notably poorer on external as opposed to internal social issues.

Exploring the Inﬂuence of Size, Sector and Degree of Internationalization

Several studies have identiﬁed a link between company size,10 sector afﬁliation, degree of internationalization and 
non-ﬁnancial reporting (for an overview, see for example Gray et al., 2001). This section examines the relationships 
between the variables.

Following  Adams  et  al.  (1998),  we  can  expect  reporting  to  be  more  prevalent  among  the  larger  and  more 
proﬁtable ﬁrms in our sample. However, a ranking of companies according to size and total score does not show 
a concentration of high scores among the larger companies, but a relatively even distribution of high scores among 
the total sample. In fact, some of the smallest companies attain scores as high as some of the very largest ﬁrms. 
Thus the results do not indicate a clear link between size and high reporting scores.

As regards the relationship between sector and reporting, Kolk et al. (2001) and Kolk (2003) have identiﬁed a 
link between sectors with a direct environmental impact and the degree of environmental reporting. ‘Low report-
ing’ sectors are typically of non-industrial afﬁliation, such as banks, insurance, telecommunications, food/bever-
ages,  trade/retail  and  other  services.  ‘High  reporting’  sectors  are  identiﬁed  as  pharmaceuticals,  mining,  paper, 
chemicals, transport, motor vehicles/parts, computer/electronics, petroleum reﬁning, metals/manufacturing and 
utilities (Kolk et al., 2001; Kolk, 2003). Is such a link traceable in the Norwegian sample?

Based on the identiﬁcation of sector afﬁliation of each company on the score ranking list, we have calculated 
the average scores of each sector represented. It is clear that ﬁrms from the petroleum/energy sector obtain an 
average score that is notably higher than the other sectors. Looking at the top 30 companies on ranking, this sector 
is also clearly overrepresented relative to other sectors, making up nearly a third of the forerunners. Otherwise, 
we do not trace an obvious link between high reporting scores and sector. Several companies from non-industrial 
sectors such as food/beverage and ﬁnance perform equally well as or better than some companies from industrial 
sectors such as construction and pharmaceuticals. Notwithstanding the overrepresentation of petroleum/energy 
ﬁrms, our ﬁndings therefore do not indicate a clear relationship between sector and sustainability reporting.

Regarding degree of internationalization, it has been hypothesized in the literature that this variable is likely 
to inﬂuence the level and quality of reporting positively (Gray et al., 2001). Looking at the 30 top companies of 
our  sample,  it  appears  that  over  two-thirds  have  some  degree  of  international  activity.  Among  the  very  top  10 

10

 Size is measured in terms of annual turnover (proﬁt).

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


220 

I. Vormedal and A. Ruud

companies, eight have a well known international proﬁle and an activity that is heavily based in other countries. 
This is also the typical proﬁle of companies from the petroleum/energy sector, which is the only sector that really 
stands out with their good practice reporting. The results thus indicate that there might be a link between degree 
of internationalization and sustainability reporting.

In addition, it is evident that the top performers of our sample are the companies with a renowned brand and 
public proﬁle, both at a national and international level. In contrast, the companies with the lowest scores have a 
proﬁle that is much less well known.

Conclusions

It is widely asserted that the Norwegian private sector, in concert with its Scandinavian neighbours, enjoys a solid 
reputation for being at the forefront of the corporate responsibility movement. Indeed, Scandinavian companies 
often  rank  at  the  top  of  corporate  sustainability  league  tables,  and  have  been  among  the  ﬁrst  to  join  corporate 
responsibility initiatives such as the Global Compact and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development 
(Ethical  Corporation,  2005b,  Midttun  et  al.,  2006).  Yet  our  assessment  of  the  sustainability  reporting  practices 
demonstrates that when it comes to both mandatory and voluntary non-ﬁnancial disclosures the alleged best prac-
tice of Norwegian companies appears to be strongly overstated.

Following Kolk et al. (2001) and Kolk (2003), we can expect the level and quality of sustainability disclosures to 
be linked to nationality, that is, the speciﬁc market, societal, political and legal characteristics and developments 
in a ﬁrm’s home country. It is noteworthy that a number of the key drivers for reporting that have been identiﬁed 
in the literature appear to be absent from the Norwegian case. In particular, many of the social and political drivers 
that are assumed to inﬂuence reporting are not currently present. On the one hand the Norwegian government 
has failed to develop any signiﬁcant policy framework for corporate responsibility and reporting, and on the other 
the Norwegian media and civil society appear to be insufﬁciently engaged with these issues. These factors appear 
to have relieved many Norwegian businesses of much of the public scrutiny that has been present in an interna-
tional  context.  Against  this  background,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  our  results  indicate  a  link  between  a  well 
known  international  proﬁle  and  high  reporting  scores.  Thus  one  might  assert  that  stakeholder  theory,  which 
anticipates the level and quality of reporting to be connected to the level of stakeholder pressure, appears to hold 
true for the Norwegian case.

Finally,  one  would  certainly  have  expected  the  existence  of  legal  requirements  for  non-ﬁnancial  reporting  to 
serve as a major driving force in the development of reporting in Norway. Yet, as our assessment demonstrates, 
only 10% of the companies in the sample are deemed to be in compliance with the law on environmental report-
ing, while only half comply with the provisions on working environment and gender equality. It is indeed striking 
how few of the ﬁrms take their legal liability seriously. Much of the responsibility for the regulatory vacuum that 
currently exists with regards to reporting on the external environment, however, can be placed with the govern-
ment. In particular, the vagueness in the wording of the environmental provision (information ‘that could cause 
a not insigniﬁcant impact on the external environment’) may have provided a loophole for companies. The ﬁndings 
also indicate a clear lack of follow-up on the part of Norwegian authorities, which have clearly been insufﬁciently 
concerned with monitoring compliance. Further progress on achieving more consequential and transparent envi-
ronmental reporting obviously requires a stronger joint effort by national authorities and leading ﬁrms. Whereas 
the target group for corporate responsibility in Norway is business management, the ultimate responsibility rests 
with those national authorities entrusted with the implementation of the law.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  two  anonymous  referees  for  their  very  constructive  comments  on  the  ﬁrst  draft  of 
this  paper.  We  also  thank  Miss  Karoline  Ehrenclou  for  her  research  assistance,  and  Professor  William  M.  Lafferty  for  his 
continued help and support.

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


Sustainability Reporting in Norway 

221

References

Adams CA, Frost GR. 2006. Accessibility and functionality of the corporate web site: implications for sustainability reporting. Business Strategy 

and the Environment 15: 275–287.

Adams  CA,  Hill  WY,  Robert  CB.  1998.  Corporate  social  reporting  practices  in  Western  Europe:  legitimating  corporate  behaviour?  British 

Accounting Review 30(1): 1–21.

Andriof  J,  Waddock  S,  Husted  B,  Sutherland  Rahman  S.  2002.  Unfolding  Stakeholder  Thinking:  Theory,  Responsibility  and  Engagement. 

Greenleaf: Shefﬁ eld.

Bendell  J.  2003.  Talking  for  Change?  Reﬂ ections  on  effective  stakeholder  dialogue.  In  Unfolding  Stakeholder  Thinking  2:  Relationships, 

Communication, Reporting and Performance, Andriof J, Waddoc S, Husted B, Sutherland Rahman S (eds). Greenleaf: Shefﬁeld.

Ball A, Owen DL, Gray R. 2000. External transparency or internal capture? The role of third-party statements in adding value to corporate 

environmental reports. Business Strategy and the Environment 9: 1–23.

Bellona.  2004.  Stadig  Økende  Interesser  for  SRI  Investeringer.  http://www.bellona.no/norwegian_import_area/oekonomi/kapital/fou/32492 

[15 August 2006].

Commission  of  the  European  Communities  (ComEC).  2006.  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  European  Parliament,  the  Council 
and the European Economic and Social Committee. Implementing the Partnership for Growth and Jobs: Making Europe a Pole of Excellence on 
Corporate Social Responsibility. European Commission: Brussels.

Donaldson  T.  Preston  LE.  1995.  The  stakeholder  theory  of  the  corporation:  concepts,  evidence  and  implications.  Academy  of  Management 

Review 20(1): 65–91.

Ehrenclou K. 2006. Corporate Social Responsibility and the Inﬂuence of Non-Governmental Organizations – Tactics, Mechanisms and Legitimacy, 

Master Thesis, Centre for Development and the Environment, University of Oslo.

Elkington J. 1999. Cannibals with Forks: the Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business. Oxford: Capstone.
Ethical Corporation. 2005a. Why Mandatory Reporting has Fallen from the EU Agenda. www.ethicalcorp.com/content_print.asp?ContentID=3833 

[17 August 2005].

Ethical Corporation. 2005b. Corporate Responsibility Progress in Scandinavia. Ethical Corporation, www.ethicalcorp.com
Ethical Council (Etikkrådet). 2006. Etikkrådet. http://odin.dep.no/etikkradet/norsk/ [15 August 2006].
European Commission (EC). 2002. Communication from the Commission Concerning Corporate Social Responsibility: a Business Contribution to 

Sustainable Development. European Commission: Brussels.

Freeman RE. 1984. Strategic Mangement: A Stakeholder Approach. Boston: MA: Pitman.
Freeman  RE.  2002.  Foreword.  In  Unfolding  Stakeholder  Thinking:  Theory,  Responsibility  and  Engagement,  Andriof  J,  Waddoc  S,  Husted  B, 

Sutherland Rahman S. (eds). Greenleaf: Shefﬁeld. 7–8.

Gilbert S. 2002. The Transparency Evolution. Environmental Law Institute: Washington, DC. Reprinted with permission from The Environmental 

Forum Nov/Dec.

Gouldson  A.  2005.  Voluntary  regulation  and  industrial  capacities  for  environmental  improvement:  the  case  of  the  EU  eco-audit  regulation 
(EMAS) in the United Kingdom. In Industrial Transformation: Environmental Policy Innovation in the United States and Europe, de Bruijn 
T, Norberg-Bohm V (eds). MIT Press: London. 229–252.

Gray R, Javad M, Power DM, Sinclair DC. 2001. Social and environmental disclosure and corporate characteristics: a research note and exten-

sion. Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 28(3/4): 327–356.

GRIP. 2006. Prisen for Beste Rapportering på Samfunnsansvar og Miljø Avvikles, letter from Helge Fredriksen to GRIP’s contacts. http://www.

grip.no/Miljorapportering/pris/nedleggelse.pdf. [20 August 2006]

Holden Meehan. 1999. The Millennium Guide to Ethical and Environmental Investment. Holden Meehan: Bristol.
Holgaard JE, Herreborg Jørgensen T. 2005. A decade of mandatory environmental reporting in Denmark. European Environment 15: 362–373.
Isenmann R, Lenz C. 2002. Internet use for corporate environmental reporting: current challenges – technical beneﬁts – practical guidance. 

Business Strategy and the Environment 11: 181–202.

Kolk A. 2003. Trends in sustainability reporting by the Fortune Global 250. Business Strategy and the Environment 12: 279–291.
Kolk  A.  2004.  A  decade  of  sustainability  reporting:  developments  and  signiﬁcance.  International  Journal  of  Environment  and  Sustainable 

Development 3(1): 51–64.

Kolk A, Walhain S, van de Wateringen S. 2001. Environmental reporting by the Fortune Global 250: exploring the inﬂuence of nationality and 

sector. Business Strategy and the Environment 10: 15–28.

KPMG. 2005a. KPMG International Survey of Corporate Responsibility Reporting 2005. http://www.kpmg.no/download/202733/115800/KPMG

%20CR%20Survey%202005.pdf [1 March 2006].

KPMG. 2005b. KPMGs Undersøkelse av Selvskapers Ikke-Finansielle Rapportering 2005. KPMG SustainAbility Services: Oslo.
Maltby J. 1997. Setting its own standards and meeting those standards: voluntarism versus regulation in environmental reporting. Business 

Strategy and the Environment 6: 83–92.

Mathis A, de Bruijn T. 2006. Corporate Social Responsibility Reporting in the Netherlands. An Assessment of the Transparency of the Largest Firms. 

ProSus, Centre for Environment and Development, University of Oslo.

Midttun A, Gautesen K, Gjølberg M. 2006. The political economy of CSR in Western Europe. Corporate Governance Volume 6, Number 4. 

Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA). 2006. Næringslivets Samfunnsansvar – Nasjonale Tiltak. Kompakt. http://www.dep.no/ud/norsk/tema/mr/

ansvar/tiltak/bn.html [16 August 2006].

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse


222 

I. Vormedal and A. Ruud

Morgenbladet.  2005.  Et  historisk  oppdrag  fra  det  norske  folk.  Morgenbladet  10  June.  http://www.morgenbladet.no/apps/pbcs.dll/

article?AID=/20050610/OAKTUELT001/106100020/0/OAKTUELT001 [15 August 2006].

Munkelien EB, Goyer PR, Fratczak I. 2005. CSR in the Scandinavian countries. A review of voluntary versus regulated. In Corporate Social 

Responsibility, Accountability and Governance: Global Perspectives, Demirag I (ed.). Greenleaf: Shefﬁeld. 182–197.

Noci G. 2000. Environmental reporting in Italy: current practice and future developments. Business Strategy and the Environment 9: 211–223.
Norwegian Accounting Act (Lov om Årsregnskap m.v. Regnskapsloven). http://www.lovdata.no/all/tl-19980717-056-003.html#3-3 [1 December 

2005].

Nyquist S. 2003. The legislation of environmental disclosures in three Nordic Countries – a comparison. Business Strategy and the Environment 

12: 12–25.

Ørstavik G. 2006. Interview. Oslo, 15 August.
Owen D. 2006. Emerging issues in sustainability reporting. Business Strategy and the Environment 15: 217–218.
Ruud  A.  2005.  Corporate  environmental  reporting  in  Norway:  beyond  emission  control?  In  Industrial  Transformation:  Environmental  Policy 

Innovation in the United States and Europe, de Bruijn T, Nordberg-Bohm V (eds). MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 335–361.

Ruud A, Larsen O. 2002. Miljørapportering in Årsberetningen: Følger Norske Bedrifter Regnskapslovens Pålegg? Report 8/02, ProSus, Centre for 

Development and the Environment, University of Oslo.

Ruud A, Larsen O. 2003. Miljørapportering i Større Norske Foretak: Fungerer Regnskapsloven Etter Intensjonen? Report 5/03, ProSus, Centre for 

Development and the Environment, University of Oslo.

Sinclair P, Walton J. 2003. Environmental reporting within the forest and paper industry. Business Strategy and the Environment 12: 326–337.
Slater A, Glibert S. 2004. The evolution of business reporting: make room for sustainability disclosure. Environmental Quality Management 

October. pp 41–48.

Solomon  A,  Lewis  L.  2002.  Incentives  and  disincentives  for  corporate  environmental  disclosure.  Business  Strategy  and  the  Environment  11: 

154–169.

SustainAbility. 2004a. Risk and Opportunity. Best Practice in Non-Financial Reporting. SustainAbility: London.
SustainAbility.  2004b.  The  global  reporters.  Sustainability  Reporting  Assessment  Methodology  June  2004.  http://www.sustainability.com/ 

[1 December 2005].

Tregidga H, Milne MJ. 2006. From sustainable management to sustainable development: a longitudinal analysis of a leading New Zealand 

environmental reporter. Business Strategy and the Environment 15: 219–241.

UK Government. 2004. Corporate Social Responsibility – A Government Update. Department of Trade and Industry. www.csr.gov.uk. [15 August 

2006]

Wheeler  D,  Elkington  J.  2001.  The  end  of  the  corporate  environmental  report?  or  the  advent  of  cybernetic  sustainability  reporting  and 

communication. Business Strategy and the Environment 10: 1–14.

Copyright © 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and ERP Environment 
 

Bus. Strat. Env. 18, 207–222 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bse

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

