GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT
Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

The Impact Of High Involvement
Work Processes on
Organizational Effectiveness

A SECOND-ORDER LATENT VARIABLE APPROACH

ROBERT J. VANDENBERG
HETTIE A. RICHARDSON
The University of Georgia
LORRINA J. EASTMAN
LOMA, Inc.

Using a second-order latent variable approach with 3,570 participants across 49 organizations,
the current study examined the impact of high involvement work processes upon organizational
effectiveness. Using a structural model of higher order influences, and taking into consideration
mixed-level effects, the analyses supported a model in which a collection of organizational prac-
tices positively influenced high involvement work processes. In turn, the high involvement
processes influenced organizational effectiveness (defined through return on equity [ROE] and
turnover) both directly and indirectly through positive influence on employee morale. The impli-
cations of these findings for expanding this perspective of high involvement are presented as well
as issues needing immediate attention in the research literature.

Increased global and domestic competition and the perception that success
partially stems from an emphasis on employee involvement practices, has led
to continued interest among managers and researchers in various forms of
inclusionary practices and processes. This interest is driven primarily from

The authors wish to thank Charles E. Lance for his assistance in the analysis, and to thank the
editor and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful input. Support for this research was pro-
vided in part through a grant to the first author from Life Office Management Association
(LOMA), Inc., Atlanta, GA. The views expressed herein are those of the authors, and are not nec-
essarily those held by LOMA, Inc. and its agents. A version of this manuscript was presented at
the 1997 Southern Management Association meetings in Atlanta, GA. Dr. Lorrina Eastman is no
longer at LOMA, Inc., but is currently with Holiday Inn. Please address all correspondence to
the first author.

Group & Organization Management, Vol. 24 No. 3, September 1999 300-339
© 1999 Sage Publications, Inc.
300


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

301

the view that employee involvement has a positive effect on organizational
performance. In fact, this view has become the foundation for many contem-
porary managerial practices, such as participative decision making, quality
circles, and gainsharing. Once implemented, these practices are expected to
lead to increased product or service quality, greater innovation, stronger
employee motivation, lower cost but higher speed production, and lower
employee absenteeism and turnover (Lawler, 1986, 1992, 1996; Lawler, Led-
ford, & Mohrman, 1989; Leana & Florkowski, 1992).

Correspondingly, many views and perspectives regarding the definition of
involvement, how to create involvement, and how to operationalize involve-
ment in research have emerged over the past several years (e.g., Cotton, Voll-
rath, Froggatt, Lengnick-Hall, & Jennings, 1988; Lawler, 1986, 1992, 1996;
Leana, Locke, & Schweiger, 1990; Locke & Schweiger, 1979; Miller &
Monge, 1986; Wagner, 1994). However, no single approach to creating
involvement has emerged as the definitive approach (Glew, O’Leary-Kelly,
Griffin, & Van Fleet, 1995; Klein, Major, & Ralls, 1998). The approach to
employee involvement applied in the current study is referred to as high
involvement work processes (HIWP) (Lawler, 1986, 1992, 1996). Descrip-
tive studies aside, not much rigorous research has been directed specifically
toward HIWP and its key premises. Yet, the concepts encompassed by HIWP
are frequently cited in the academic and practitioner literature. The general
purpose of the current study was to strengthen our confidence in HIWP as a
framework for operationalizing employee involvement processes within
organizations.

Using a study by Riordan and Vandenberg (in press) on HIWP as a spring-
board, we sought to address two critical issues important to building confi-
dence in HIWP as a viable perspective for explaining employee involvement.
First, the synergy among the underlying attributes of HIWP, rather than the
influences of each individual attribute, is presumed to exert an influence upon
organizational effectiveness. Whereas Riordan and Vandenberg treated the
four core attributes of HIWP individually (i.e., at the first-order level), one
goal of the current study was to determine (a) if, indeed, the HIWP attributes
may be treated at a higher order, synergistic level, and (b) if so, whether the
influences of HIWP on organizational effectiveness may also be mapped at
this level.

The second issue was to examine some of the contingent conditions
affecting HIWP. The Riordan and Vandenberg (in press) study treated the
attributes underlying HIWP in isolation from their organizational context. It
is unlikely, however, that the attributes exist in a vacuum (Lawler, 1996). That
is, the HIWP attributes are embedded in a broader set of organizational prac-
tices that collectively promote and support the high involvement processes


302 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

(Huselid, 1995). As such, the present study sought to address this by (a) iden-
tifying a set of business practices that would be conceptually relevant as ante-
cedents to HIWP, (b) operationalizing the so-called “collectiveness” among
the set of antecedent business practices, and (c) determining whether the
practices as a whole impact the higher order nature of HIWP.

To these ends, we begin this article with a short overview of high involve-
ment work processes (HIWP) and proceed to a review of the conceptual
framework in which HIWP is embedded. This review highlights the need to
extend the analysis of HIWP and provides the logic for the current
hypotheses.

HIGH INVOLVEMENT WORK PROCESSES

Even a cursory glance at the studies falling under the general rubric of
involvement demonstrates that the majority of studies to date have narrowly
focused on one form of involvement: participative decision making (PDM)
(e.g., Leana & Florkowski, 1992; Wagner, 1994). These studies have almost
exclusively operationalized PDM as the independent variable by making
note of purportedly characteristic organizational-level practices and then
relating these practices to effectiveness (Cotton et al., 1988; Dachler & Wil-
pert, 1978; Locke & Schweiger, 1979). Although resulting in some important
findings through the years, this approach of going from organizational prac-
tices to the outcomes only indirectly acknowledges the role of the individual
in involvement processes. It assumes that the organizational practices are
proxies for individual feelings toward involvement, and the individual’s
acceptance of those practices as guiding principles. In reality however, this
approach has not been an accurate test. An accurate test of involvement
would operationalize involvement through the individual. This type of opera-
tionalization recognizes that the individual employee must perceive that the
opportunity for involvement exists and that the employee must endorse it by
actually putting involvement into practice in his or her day-to-day work rou-
tine (Lawler, 1986, 1992, 1996). In short, an organization may have an abun-
dance of written policies concerning involvement, and top management may
even believe it is practiced, but these policies and beliefs are meaningless
until the individual perceives them as something important to his or her
organizational well-being.

The HIWP perspective provides a viable means of bringing the individual
into the research picture. This is because the HIWP perspective does not
ascribe itself to a specific program or practice, such as PDM or quality circles
alone (e.g., Connor, 1992; Cotton et al., 1988). Instead, by drawing heavily


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

303

on the works of Galbraith (1973) and Lawler (1986, 1992, 1996; Lawler,
Mohrman, & Ledford, 1995), the focus of HIWP is on four mutually reinforc-
ing attributes. These attributes are (a) the power to act and make decisions
about work in all its aspects; (b) information about processes, quality, cus-
tomer feedback, event and business results; (c) rewards tied to business
results and growth in capability and contribution; and (d) knowledge of the
work, the business, and the total work system.

HIWP also emphasizes the individual and whether the attributes are the
exclusive privilege of only a few organizational members or broadly con-
ferred across all members of the organization (Lawler, 1996). As Galbraith
(1973) noted, power, information, reward, and knowledge (PIRK) are found
in all organizations but are traditionally concentrated at the upper levels of
management. Accordingly, the mere existence of the attributes is not enough.
For involvement to be high, the four attributes must be broadly focused at all
levels of the organization (Lawler, 1986, 1992, 1996), that is, employees
must consider the PIRK attributes as operational characteristics of their jobs.
Furthermore, the HIWP perspective avoids the unnecessary hairsplitting
that results from arguing over how much decision making (i.e., influence)
one is allowed, over which range of issues, and as the result of which type of
intervention. This is alleviated because HIWP relies on subjective beliefs. As
noted in recent research, the strength of subjective beliefs about events exerts
a much more powerful influence over individuals’ and organizational effec-
tiveness than does objective assessments of those same events (see Cable &
Judge, 1996; Judge & Cable, 1997; Riordan, 1995). Hence, even if a
researcher finds a variety of involving practices in place within an organiza-
tion, those practices will have little effect unless the pertinent individuals
manifest them in some form and put them to use in their own ways.

UNDERLYING CONCEPTS AND MODELS

Lawler (1991) was very broad in articulating the impact of HIWP. His
general claims, including, “The advantages of the involvement approach are
said to include higher quality products and services, less absenteeism, less
turnover, better decision making, and better problem solving, in short, greater
organizational effectiveness” (p. 578), implied no attempt to succinctly spec-
ify how and through what means HIWP could exert these influences. Recog-
nizing this shortcoming, Riordan and Vandenberg (in press) provided an ini-
tial conceptual basis for articulating the effects of HIWP on specific
outcomes. They observed that there is some expectation in these claims for
HIWP to exert influences upon a number of individual-level variables,


304 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

including job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover inten-
tions, which they collectively referred to as employee morale (i.e., HIWP
should result in stronger morale). They further noted that greater morale is
also expected to directly impact organizational effectiveness. Such claims
may seem obscure in relation to HIWP. However, Riordan and Vandenberg
noted that a precedent for such claims (i.e., influences from involvement to
morale and from morale to organizational effectiveness) already existed in
the participation/involvement literature in the form of a motivational model
of influence (e.g., need satisfaction model; Klein et al., 1998; Latham, Win-
ters, & Locke, 1994; Miller & Monge, 1986).

Originally associated with the “human relations” school (e.g., McGregor,
1960), the need satisfaction model links various forms of involvement to out-
comes through affective mechanisms (Miller & Monge, 1986). Specifically,
the motivational model predicts that one means through which involvement
improves organizational effectiveness is by increasing workers’ satisfaction
and other affective reactions. Thus, in the case of HIWP, the act of providing
employees with important information and repeated chances for self-
improvement (e.g., through the provision of and reward for engaging in
knowledge-gaining opportunities) will enable even lower level employees to
begin to satisfy higher order needs, such as those for challenge, indepen-
dence, responsibility, support and recognition. These needs will be further
satisfied by providing employees with the autonomy and responsibility asso-
ciated with power, as well as by rewarding employees for using their power
and seeking greater knowledge and information. Need fulfillment also stimu-
lates generally higher levels of morale (Hackman & Lawler, 1979; James,
James, & Ashe, 1990; Locke, 1976; Macy, Peterson, & Norton, 1989; Miller
& Monge, 1986). In turn, this stronger morale results in improved
organizational-level performance (as evidenced by lower turnover, higher
productivity, and higher financial performance) because employees can ful-
fill their own needs by working harder to achieve organizational goals
(French, Israel, & As, 1960).

In addition, Riordan and Vandenberg (in press) pointed out that within the
broad claims concerning HIWP, there was also an expectation for a direct
influence of HIWP on organizational-level variables such as turnover, pro-
ductivity, and financial performance. Again, the authors illustrated that the
precedence for such direct effects already existed in what has been referred to
as a cognitive model of influence (e.g., Klein et al., 1998; Leana & Flor-
kowski, 1992; Miller & Monge, 1986; Skully, Kirkpatrick, & Locke, 1995).
Within this model of influence, HIWP allows organizations to take greater
advantage of the skills and abilities their employees already have. Namely,
the cognitive model assumes employees know the most about how to perform


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

305

their jobs. Through involvement, employees perform their jobs as they see fit.
Therefore, performance should be better than when workers’ actions are dic-
tated by someone with less relevant experience or knowledge (Latham et al.,
1994; Wagner, Leana, Locke, & Schweiger, 1997). Again, involvement as
defined through the attributes of HIWP is expected to continuously promote
individual knowledge, skills, and experience, assets that have direct eco-
nomic value to organizations because they enable the organization to be pro-
ductive and adaptable (Becker, 1964; Flamholtz & Lacey, 1981; Jackson &
Schuler, 1995).

MUTUALLY REINFORCING ATTRIBUTES

Riordan and Vandenberg’s (in press) results demonstrated that the PIRK
attributes may be operationalized through individuals’perspectives. Further-
more, they found support for the general premise that high levels of the PIRK
attributes are associated with strong morale and that organizations with high
levels of PIRK had lower turnover and stronger financial performance than
organizations with lower levels of PIRK. They pointed out several research
needs to further increase confidence in HIWP as a research framework. Most
important was the implication that to truly mirror the conceptual basis of the
four attributes (PIRK), the attributes should not be considered in isolation
from each other, but should be treated as a collective set of mutually reinforc-
ing attributes. This view was clearly stated by Lawler (1986):

Power without knowledge, information, and rewards is likely to lead to poor
decisions. Information and knowledge without power leads to frustration
because people cannot use their expertise. Rewards for organizational per-
formance without power, knowledge, and information lead to frustration and
lack of motivation because people cannot influence the rewards. Information,
knowledge, and power without rewards for organizational performance are
dangerous because nothing will ensure that people will exercise their power in
ways that will contribute to organizational effectiveness. (p. 42)

The literature was ambiguous, however, as to how this characteristic may
be operationalized (Lawler, 1996). Although Riordan and Vandenberg (in
press) examined the influences of the individual attributes and their interac-
tions on the effectiveness variables, they noted that their approach did not
really capture what was meant by the mutually reinforcing nature of these
attributes. In an effort to do so, we operationalized the synergistic nature of
the PIRK attributes as a higher order construct. Higher order constructs have
been used in other situations where the meaning of a conceptual entity cannot


306 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

be captured through its individual components, but must be captured through
the common forces underlying those components (Bretz, Ash, & Dreher,
1989; Gerbing, Hamilton, & Freeman, 1994; James & James, 1989; James et al.,
1990). For purposes of hypothesis development and discussion in the follow-
ing section, we will refer to this higher order construct as “involvement.”

CONTINGENT CONDITIONS

The model presented in Figure 1 is intended to facilitate discussion of the
current study. The left side of the model in Figure 1 reflects that involvement
does not arise spontaneously. Its existence and continued reinforcement must
be driven by a number of business practices (Ledford & Lawler, 1994; Mohr-
man & Lawler, 1993; Pill & MacDuffie, 1996). The original HIWP literature
has been quite vague as to how this is accomplished. That is, it only argues
that creating an involving environment may not be attributed to any one busi-
ness or HRM practice, but instead is the synergy among many practices that
creates the impetus needed to make the PIRK attributes a frame of reference
for the individual worker (Lawler, 1996). To identify an initial set of business
practices, therefore, we turned to the research on high performance work sys-
tems which has focused on “bundles” of HR practices (e.g., Arthur, 1994;
Delaney, Lewin, & Ichniowski, 1989; Huselid, 1995; MacDuffie, 1995; Pfef-
fer, 1994), and on participative decision making (PDM) (Cotton et al., 1988;
Wagner, 1994).

Unfortunately, we found that most of the high performance and PDM lit-
eratures suffer from one of two problems. First, many studies in the PDM lit-
erature have examined practices in isolation from one another (Cotton et al.,
1988). As Ledford and Lawler (1994) note, however, no one practice is likely
to result in a significant impact on any organization-level outcome. The sec-
ond problem is that a lot of research has included a wide range of practices
without theoretically justifying those selected (e.g., Arthur, 1994; Delaney et al.,
1989; Huselid, 1995, Huselid, Jackson, & Schuler, 1997; MacDuffie, 1995).
The difficulty with this approach is that the more practices included, the
greater the explained variance is likely to be for any outcome. Thus, the inclu-
sion of too disparate a variety of practices reduces the precision of the model
being tested, and is neither theoretically valid nor practically useful.

Because the present study attempted to identify a group of related prac-
tices that were antecedent to involvement, we also faced this second problem
in our research. Not only were there hundreds of practices that could be
included, but there were even more combinations of those practices which
could conceivably act as the frame of reference for stimulating involvement


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

307

Figure 1: Conceptual Model

practices among employees. Therefore, we sought to include practices that
were theoretically consistent with Lawler’s work, and to limit the range of
practices to only those which would logically promote more than one of the
involvement attributes. To this end, five categories of practices were hypothe-
sized as antecedent to involvement: (a) work design, (b) incentive practices, (c)
flexibility, (d) training opportunities, and (e) direction setting (see Figure 1).

Work design. In discussing the thousands of employee interviews he con-
ducted during the course of his research, Lawler (1996) stated that there was
one topic that always came up: the nature of the work that individuals do.
From this, he concluded that work design must move away from the tradi-
tional, control-oriented view that jobs represent fixed sets of tasks outlined in
job descriptions. Rather, if involvement is to be achieved, employees must be
challenged to adapt to a changing environment and empowered to decide for
themselves how their work should best be undertaken (Neal & Tromley,
1995).

According to Lawler (1996), one approach to achieving this type of work
design is job enrichment, which suggests that jobs should be meaningful, pro-
vide employees with control, and allow for adequate feedback (Hackman &
Lawler, 1971). Coincidentally, several authors have included job design,
developmental feedback, and self-managed work teams in their conception
of high performance work processes (Arthur, 1994; Delaney et al., 1989;
Huselid, 1995, Huselid et al., 1997; MacDuffie, 1995). Therefore, within the
category of work design, we included three types of work design practices:


308 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

(a) the use of teams (cross-functional, self-directed, and task forces), (b)
360-degree feedback, and (c) broadbanding.

Incentive practices. Incentives have long been explored in the PDM litera-
ture as a means of improving employee attitudes and performance (Lawler &
Jenkins, 1992).1 The present model of high involvement argues that incentive
practices must support the mechanisms for providing power, information,
and knowledge, as well as employees’ perceptions that they are being
rewarded for the effective use of power, information, and knowledge. Of
course, involvement requires balance between both individual and group
activities, and therefore between individual and group incentives. While indi-
vidual performance-based incentives emphasize personal accountability,
group- or team-based incentives are necessary to facilitate employee interac-
tion and the lateral exchange of information (Lawler, 1996; Neal & Tromley,
1995; Pfeffer, 1995). They also help to minimize disruptive employee com-
petition and enhance cooperation among employees (Gomez-Mejia &
Balkin, 1992; Lawler, 1993; Pearce, 1987). Similar to this, a combination of
long- and short-term incentives helps keep employees focused on organiza-
tional objectives while reinforcing their motivation and hard work (Deckop,
1987; Gomez-Mejia & Welbourne, 1988).

Irregardless of the mixture of rewards chosen, the involving nature of the
incentive system must be perceived throughout the organization. The prac-
tices described above must not be reserved only for upper management, they
must also be offered to lower level employees. Therefore, not only does the
present study include company-, individual-, team-, long-term, and short-
term-based incentive practices as possible antecedents of high involvement,
it also considers the levels at which these incentives are offered.

Flexibility. Flexibility-related practices can also be considered as a non-
traditional form of incentive. Involvement requires employees to work harder
in many ways (e.g., to take on more responsibility and to do more for the
organization). Although the motivational model suggests employees will do
so because the increased involvement allows them to fulfill their own higher
order needs, there remains the possibility that increased involvement will be
viewed negatively because it also increases conflicts with employees’outside
lives (e.g., care for children or elders). Providing employees with options can
minimize these commitment-robbing conflicts and reinforce the entire
involvement system by allowing employees very personal decision-making
power. For example, Kossek and Nichol (1992) found that the provision of
on-site childcare can significantly impact employees’ attitudes and


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

309

membership behaviors by freeing them from concerns regarding childcare
issues during work hours.

Not only can the provision of flexibility be considered as a form of incen-
tive or motivational tool, but it also relates directly to the provision of power,
particularly the power to decide when and how work should be done. For
instance, flextime, telecommuting, and part-time tracks allow employees to
work around dependents’ schedules, choose the hours when they are most
productive, and to manage their work in the way they feel is most effective.
Other forms of flexibility such as job sharing promote knowledge and skill
diffusion as well as more a comprehensive understanding of the overall
organization. Flexibility practices such as telecommuting and flextime pro-
vide one way of reducing the vertical hierarchy that often impedes the devel-
opment of organization-wide involvement (Lawler, 1996). Similar to this, the
more flexibility options an organization provides to its employees, the more
options the organization will have in designing jobs and tasks.

Training opportunities. To create an environment in which important
information is freely communicated and in which employees are knowledge-
able and perceptive of opportunities for further self development, various
forms of training will logically also be key to an organization’s array of busi-
ness practices (Koch & McGrath, 1996). Training helps create firm-specific
human assets which are strongly linked to a firm’s core competencies (Praha-
lad & Hamel, 1990). Thus, as the benefits of training accumulate over time,
they become part of the “bundle” of practices that can drive firm perform-
ance. Different types of training can play an important role in creating and
reinforcing high involvement work processes. It has been argued that in order
for involvement to succeed, organizations must use training to demonstrate
their commitment to employees and the degree to which they value employee
contributions (Marchington, Wilkinson, Ackers, & Goodman, 1994). This is
because involvement requires employees to gain new skills they did not have
or need previously. An obvious example of the latter, especially given the
individualistic nature of American culture, is training centered on working in
teams and team-building skills. Similarly, the ability to effectively handle
power and complex decision-making environments may require training in
problem-solving skills. Lawler (1993) argues that employees often need
training in participation itself. For example, employees may need empower-
ment training in order to comfortably and competently take advantage of the
power they have been provided and to perceive the power attribute as
positive.

Likewise, the nature of training may simply be to explain what high per-
formance is and why it is being used (Neal & Tromley, 1995). Because


310 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

involvement is not expected to be an easy or stress-free endeavor, training is
an obvious vehicle for providing employees with knowledge and information
regarding stress, change, and performance management. Training in these
areas further reinforces positive perceptions of involvement.

Direction sharing. The underlying premise of the model presented in this
study is that employees in high involvement organizations work harder and
more proficiently for the organization than do employees in less involving
organizations. If this effort is directed toward the wrong ends, however, it is
not likely to benefit the organization and will result in frustration for employ-
ees and managers alike.

Consequently, mechanisms must be in place that communicate the organi-
zation’s intended direction or goals to the employees. The link between a
worker’s job and the organization’s goals must also be made clear to every
employee. Important direction-sharing practices that reinforce involvement
include formal development plans and the establishment of clear perform-
ance objectives for each employee. These formal plans communicate to
employees the knowledge they must gain to effectively fulfill their roles
within the organization. At the same time, these practices complement incen-
tive practices by establishing criteria on which to base incentives.

Summary. Embedded in the rationale explaining why HIWP is contingent
on the business practices is the notion of synergy or commonality. Imple-
menting the rationale of Huselid (1995), Pfeffer (1995), and others (e.g.,
Arthur, 1994; Delaney et al., 1989), this synergistic characteristic rests on the
premise that the organizational-level practices themselves are linked together
and driven from a common philosophy or overarching strategy. It is this
“common face” among the practices that exerts an influence. Traditionally,
however, previous authors have relied on one person’s responses to a number
of business practice items and have summed the responses to operationalize
the synergy. They have then related this summed score to organizational out-
comes. Rather than summed scores, an alternative is to ensure that, beyond
their first-order factors, there is a higher order factor representing the synergy
or common face among the business practices (Gerbing et al., 1994). Further-
more, this common face represents consistency across all such practices as it
presents itself to organizational members. If these practices are indeed rein-
forcing involvement, we should observe an association between the higher
order business practice construct and the higher order construct representing
involvement. Thus, our first hypothesis was the following:


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

311

Hypothesis 1: A “higher order” business or contingent practices construct (from
responses of an upper-level manager) will positively influence the “involve-
ment” construct underlying the PIRK attributes (as perceived by organiza-
tional members).

INDIVIDUAL MORALE AND

ORGANIZATIONAL EFFECTIVENESS

Similar to Riordan and Vandenberg’s (in press) study, the current study
included two categories of outcome variables: (a) individual morale; and (b)
organizational effectiveness. For the same reasons articulated earlier,
involvement was expected to positively influence organizational effective-
ness through a direct channel or mode, and also through an indirect channel,
via its positive influence on employee morale (what Riordan and Vandenberg
referred to respectively as the “cognitive” and “motivational” models). A
major difference of the present study was in how the expected associations
were tested. In a quest to make general statements about effects, we also cre-
ated a higher order variable among the individual first-order variables to cre-
ate an index of worker “morale.” Another higher order variable from the
organizational effectiveness indices was created as an indicator of overall
effectiveness. The conceptual rationale for each higher order variable
follows.

Practitioners have long been interested in a “commodity” called employee
morale. However, when pressed for a definition, they have difficulty narrow-
ing it down to a single entity and often find it easier to describe morale in
many ways (e.g., employees are happy, committed, motivated, and will stick
around). In other words, practitioners agree that there is a global “commod-
ity” called employee morale, that it is good for the organization in general,
and that they should seek ways to improve it.

For decades, it has been an academic research practice to delineate among
the single entities comprising morale (e.g., job satisfaction vs. organizational
commitment) and to isolate their effects. The picture that is emerging from
this research is consistent with the view of practitioners. Specifically, there is
overlap among our operationalizations of key “morale” constructs that can-
not be attributed to random error. This is the case among the three individual-
level indices (job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover
intentions) used in the current study (Mowday, Porter, & Steers, 1982; Van-
denberg & Lance, 1992). Common sense tells us that if an organization has
high workforce morale, some indicants of that morale would be expressions


312 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

of high job satisfaction, high organizational commitment and low turnover
intention. With this in mind, we also created a higher order latent morale vari-
able among the job satisfaction, organizational commitment, and turnover
intentions measures. Thus, for the reasons stated earlier (per Riordan & Van-
denberg, in press), the second hypothesis was the following:

Hypothesis 2: Involvement should positively influence workforce morale as
defined through the higher order construct underlying job satisfaction, organ-
izational commitment, and turnover intentions.

Using a similar logic, practitioners also agree that organizational effec-
tiveness is important, but again are hard pressed to point to a single entity
when asked to define it. Common sense suggests that a truly effective organi-
zation is one that is financially sound, productive, characterized by low turn-
over, a producer of high quality goods and services, and so forth. “Effective-
ness” is a driving force or common frame of reference underlying all of these
latter variables. This view seems to be consistent with the empirical research
as well (see House, Rousseau, & Thomas-Hunt, 1995; Klein, Dansereau, &
Hall, 1994; Ostroff, 1992, 1993; Rousseau, 1985), namely, researchers agree
that when operationalizing effectiveness one should use multiple indices and
attempt to draw some common conclusion concerning effectiveness from
these indices. In the current study, we used this rationale to create a higher
order effectiveness construct from our organizational-level indices of finan-
cial performance and employee turnover.

We had two hypotheses concerning influences on effectiveness. The first
comes from the earlier arguments justifying why a direct influence from
involvement to effectiveness would be expected (i.e., the cognitive or
working-smarter model). Several researchers have found empirical evidence
that processes congruent with HIWP impact both turnover and organiza-
tional performance (Arthur, 1992, 1994; Borman, 1991; Gerhart & Milko-
vich, 1992; Huselid, 1995; McEvoy & Cascio, 1985). Thus, we expected this
relationship to hold for the present study as well. Consequently, the third
hypothesis was

Hypothesis 3: The involvement construct will have a direct and positive influence
on the overall level of organizational effectiveness as defined by a higher order
construct representing employee turnover and return on equity.

The second hypothesis concerning effectiveness was derived from the ear-
lier arguments for an indirect mode of influence through involvement’s impact
upon employee morale, and expectations that higher morale would result in
increased organizational effectiveness. Thus, the fourth hypothesis was


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

313

Hypothesis 4: Workforce morale will directly and positively influence overall

organizational effectiveness.

METHOD

RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS

The participants were 3,570 employees from 49 life insurance companies
located in the United States and Canada. Within each company, participants
were randomly selected using a stratified scheme so that all organizational
levels were represented in the database. The target was to sample 20% of
employees at each organization, and among those sampled, the response rate
was 100%. The majority of participants in the final database had been with
their companies 5 or more years (66%), were from the nonmanagerial ranks
(71%), were female (72%), were older than 30 years (75%), possessed at
least some college-level education (75%), and were Caucasian (88%).

MEASURES

The measures can be grouped into four sets and were derived from three
independent sources. The first set was completed only by the heads of human
resources in each of the organizations and consisted of those items defining
the five business practice categories or contingent conditions: (a) work
design, (b) incentive practices, (c) flexibility, (d) training opportunities, and
(e) direction setting. The specific items and the alpha coefficients for each
variable are presented in the appendix. In creating these items, we had to take
into consideration the organizational rank of the individuals completing
these measures. We could not present them with a lengthy survey, and the
items had to be written in a form that these managers could easily relate to.
Thus, we had to limit the number of items. Nonetheless, the selected mea-
sures were based in large part on the research literature. This limitation,
however, may explain the less than stellar reliability coefficients for direc-
tion setting and work design. In cases of experimental items such as the cur-
rent ones, some researchers have argued that while coefficients at the level
of those for direction setting and work design may be acceptable for that spe-
cific study, there is still a need to refine the measures in the future (Bernardi,
1994).

The second set of measures was completed by the 3,570 participants and
consisted of those items defining the attributes of power, information,
reward, and knowledge. The items and the alpha coefficients for each of the
attributes are presented in Table 1.


314 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

Items from the Power, Information, Reward, and Knowledge Scales

TABLE 1

Power (a = .89)

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

I have sufficient authority to fulfill my job responsibilities.
I have enough input in deciding how to accomplish my work.
I am encouraged to participate in decisions that affect me.
I have enough freedom over how I do my job.
I have enough authority to make decisions necessary to provide quality customer
service.

6. For the most part, I am encouraged to participate in and make decisions that affect my

day-to-day activities.

7. All in all, I am given enough authority to act and make decisions about my work.

Information (a = .88)

1. Company policies and procedures are clearly communicated to employees.
2. Management gives sufficient notice to employees prior to making changes in policies

and procedures.

3. Most of the time I receive sufficient notice of changes that affect my work group.
4. Management takes time to explain to employees the reasoning behind critical decisions

that are made.

5. Management is adequately informed of the important issues in my department.
6. Management makes a sufficient effort to get the opinions and feelings of people who

work here.

7. Management tends to stay informed of employee needs.
8. The channels of employee communication with top management are effective.
9. Top management communicates a clear organizational mission and how each division

contributes to achieving that mission.

10. Employees of this company work toward common organizational goals.

Reward (a = .86)

1. My performance evaluations within the past few years have been helpful to me in my

professional development.

2. There is a strong link between how well I perform my job and the likelihood of my

receiving recognition and praise.

3. There is a strong link between how well I perform my job and the likelihood of my

receiving a raise in pay/salary.

4. There is a strong link between how well I perform my job and the likelihood of my

receiving high performance appraisal ratings.

5. Generally, I feel this company rewards employees who make an extra effort.
I am satisfied with the amount of recognition I receive when I do a good job.
6.
7.
If I perform my job well, I am likely to be promoted.

Knowledge (a = .90)

1.

I am given a real opportunity to improve my skills at this company through education
and training programs.
I have had sufficient job-related training.

2.
3. My supervisor helped me acquire additional job-related training when I have needed it.
4.
5.

I receive ongoing training, which enables me to do my job better.
I am satisfied with the number of training and development programs available to me.


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

315

TABLE 1 Continued

I am satisfied with the quality of training and development programs available to me.

6.
7. The training and educational activities I have received enabled me to perform my job

more effectively.

8. Overall, I am satisfied with my training opportunities.

The items in Table 1 represent those used by Riordan and Vandenberg (in
press) as well as new items developed to strengthen the original measures.
Items originally written to operationalize the knowledge and information
attributes failed to load into separate factors. This happened primarily
because respondents experienced difficulty distinguishing knowledge items
from the items tapping the content domain for information. In an attempt to
separate the two attributes more, knowledge items in the current survey
focused narrowly upon the formal mechanisms employed by organizations to
maintain job and business knowledge. This view of knowledge is consistent
with descriptive studies of employee involvement processes (Lawler et al.,
1995). As evidenced by a maximum likelihood factor analysis of the items,
the modifications were completely supported (results are not reported here
but available upon request from the authors). All responses were on a 4-point
Likert agree/disagree format.

The third set of measures was completed by the 3,570 employees and con-
sisted of the employee morale variables: (a) organizational commitment, (b)
job satisfaction, and (c) turnover intentions. Riordan and Vandenberg (in
press) also used these measures. The organizational commitment measure
(a = .91) included 6 items mirroring those in the Organizational Commit-
ment Questionnaire (Mowday, Steers, & Porter, 1979; e.g., “If asked, I would
be willing to make an extra effort to help this company”; “I am proud to be an
employee of this company”; etc.). Job satisfaction was the summed score of
two items based on a measure by Cammann, Fichman, Jenkins, and Klesch
(1979; a = .74): “Considering everything, how satisfied are you with (a) your
job, and (b) this company as a place to work?” Turnover intention was a single
item, “I plan to look for a job with another company within a year.” This
measure of turnover intention has been used in previously published studies
in which its hypothesized associations with turnover were empirically sup-
ported (Vandenberg & Scarpello, 1990; Vandenberg, Self, & Seo, 1994),
thereby providing one index of its criterion-related validity. Additionally, for
this study the aggregated score within an organization on this item correlated
.55 with the actual overall turnover rate of the organization (.54 in Riordan &
Vandenberg, in press). A 4-point agree/disagree response anchor was used


316 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

with all items except the two satisfaction items, which had a 4-point satisfac-
tion/dissatisfaction response anchor.

The fourth set of measures was obtained from records, and it defined
organizational effectiveness. The set consisted of two objective measures.
The first measure was the overall employee turnover rate within the organiza-
tion as obtained from personnel records. Turnover has been used in previous
studies (Huselid, 1995) as one index of organizational effectiveness, where
lower turnover indicates greater effectiveness. Its use as an effectiveness
index is based on the premise that there are costs associated with turnover that
impacts the whole organization (Hom & Griffeth, 1995). Some of the obvi-
ous costs are replacement (recruiting, selection, and hiring), training, lost
productivity, downtime before the replacement operates at potential, and its
negative impact upon the morale and motivation of the employees who are
left behind. Though the costs vary across industries and occupations, Hom
and Griffeth (1995) estimated that they range anywhere from $3,441 to
$16,484 per turnover incident. The second organizational effectiveness
measure was return on equity (ROE) for the year following data collection,
and was obtained from the Best Insurance Reports—Life/Health (A.M. Best
Company, 1995). As defined in Best, ROE is “net operating gain (after taxes)
as a percentage of prior year capital and surplus,” and thus, “measures
insurance earnings in relation to the company’s policyholders surplus base”
(p. xix). ROE has also been used in previous studies and provides an indica-
tion of a firm’s efficiency and resource utilization (Chakravarthy, 1986;
Keats, 1988, Keats & Hitt, 1988). ROE as reported in Best is a standardized
measure that takes into account organizational assets. As such, ROE values
are directly comparable from one firm to the next.

ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE

Prior to conducting the analyses of substantive interest, all of the measures
underlying the five business practices were standardized to their respective
means and unit variance. This operation put all measures on a common met-
ric before summing them (Cohen & Cohen, 1983). Similar to this, in our
desire to isolate the influences of interest as much as possible, the four attri-
bute measures and the measures of commitment, satisfaction, and turnover
intention were controlled along a number of dimensions using the residual-
ized procedure outlined in Cohen and Cohen (1983, pp. 487-518). Briefly, all
of the items underlying the measures were regressed first on gender, age, edu-
cation, race, job level, job tenure, organizational tenure, and organizational
size. The residuals of the items from this analysis were then output to a sepa-
rate database. Subsequent analyses used these residuals, giving us greater


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

317

confidence that observed variations were due to variations along the con-
structs of interest, and not possible variations in sampling or organizational
characteristics. We also regressed ROE and turnover onto organizational
size. Because larger organizations may experience greater turnover (Hom &
Griffeth, 1995) and have stronger returns on equity, this step removed any
variance within those measures due to this possibility.

To facilitate discussion of the analyses, the analytical analog to the con-

ceptual model in Figure 1 is presented in Figure 2.

Before addressing the analyses per se, we must discuss the levels-of-
analysis issue as it pertains to the test of the model in Figure 2 (House et al.,
1995; Klein et al., 1994; Rousseau, 1985). The difficulty was testing a struc-
tural equation model with higher order latent variables, while recognizing the
differences in levels underlying the conceptual premises. That is, the test of
association from the contingent variables to the HIWP attributes is from the
organization-level to the individual-level. Similar to this, the test of the
parameter from the attributes to effectiveness is individual-level to
organization-level, as is the test from morale to effectiveness. Given both the
use of causal model analysis and the use of mixed levels, the situation is ana-
lytically complex and beyond the capabilities of hierarchical linear modeling
(Bryk & Raudenbush, 1992).

Consulting with Charles E. Lance in February and December of 1997, we
eliminated aggregation of the individual variables as a possible solution for a
number of reasons, including (a) aggregation spuriously inflates observed
associations (Ostroff, 1993); and (b) most importantly, it is simply not a
reflection of the stated conceptual premises of this study (see House et al.,
1995, & Klein et al., 1994, for the importance of the analysis matching the
conceptual arguments). The technique that we settled upon is actually not
new to the research literatures where mixed levels are an issue (see in particu-
lar, James, Demaree, & Hater, 1980, and Rousseau, 1985; but also, Lance et al.,
1998; Lance, Hedge, & Alley, 1989; Lance & James, 1997). We assigned val-
ues of the organizational-level variables to each person within the organiza-
tion. The argument, simply stated, is that any observed association between
an organization variable and an individual variable (e.g., the five business
practices to the HIWP attributes in this case) is due to between-organization
differences, because the within-group variance on the organizational-level
variables is a constant within each organization. Therefore, a primary precon-
dition in the application of this technique rests on the premise that there are
statistically significant differences between organizations (James et al.,
1980). A pretest for using this technique, consequently, was a MANOVA on
the individual-level variables (in the current study, the four HIWP attributes
and the three morale indices), using organization as the between-groups


3
1
8

Figure 2: Tested Model


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

319

factor (this is the classic ICC1, Ostroff, 1992, 1993). The MANOVA was sta-
tistically significant, F (48, 3521) = 8.71, p < .0001, indicating the presence
of organizational-level differences along the seven individual-level vari-
ables, with 22% of the common variance among the seven variables
accounted for by organization (approximations to eta square in a multivariate
test can be achieved through the use of canonical variates). To strengthen
arguments further, one can estimate the proportion of the variance (22%) that
was due to the use of the current organizational-level variables (the five busi-
ness practice indices and the two organizational effectiveness indices), as
opposed to those organizational-level variables not included in the model. In
this study, fully 41% of the between-group variance (.09/.22) may be attrib-
uted to the included set of organizational-level variables. When entering the
main test of the hypotheses, we felt very confident that we were truly repre-
senting the mixed-level premises underlying the conceptual framework by
assigning the values of the organizational-level variables to the organiza-
tional members.2

The analysis of the model in Figure 2 was conducted using LISREL 8
(Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1996), and the variance/covariance matrix. As seen in
Figure 2, each of the paths from the first-order latent variables to their corre-
sponding manifest variables were fixed to the square root of the reliability for
that measure. Similarly, the first-order residual terms were fixed at the quan-
tity one minus the reliability times the variance of the measure (Vandenberg &
Scarpello, 1990; Williams & Hazer, 1986). For all variables except turnover
intentions, turnover rate, and ROE, the alpha coefficient was used. A reliabil-
ity value of .60 was used for the single-item turnover intentions measure (see
Vandenberg & Scarpello, 1990, for the full rationale). We assumed that turn-
over rate and ROE values were measured without error. Consequently, their
first-order latent-to-manifest paths were fixed to a value of 1.0, whereas their
residual error terms were fixed to zero.

Interpretation of the individual parameters required the overall fit of the
second-order model to the data to be adequate. Support for fit may be inferred
at two levels. The first level simply addresses whether the first-order latent
variables possess statistically significant loadings with the second-order
latent factors, and whether the second-order loadings are directionally con-
sistent with conceptual premises (i.e., turnover intentions and turnover
behavior should have negative loadings, and the remaining parameters
should be positive; see Figure 2). Given evidence for the second-order factor
model, the next level of support is inferred from the fit indices. As recom-
mended, we used a pattern of four fit indices (both statistical and descriptive;
excellent reviews on this issue may be found in Bollen, 1989; Hu & Bentler,


320 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

1993; Marsh, Balla, & Hau, 1996; Medsker, Williams, & Holahan, 1994;
Tanaka, 1993).

The first index was the chi-square test of model fit. Ideally, a statistically
nonsignificant chi-square value should be observed to infer good fit. As noted
in several studies, inferring fit from just the chi-square test is ill-advised
because a statistically significant chi-square value can be obtained even when
all of the other indices indicate that the specified model provides an excellent
fit to the data. This derives from the fact that the chi-square test is very sensi-
tive to even minor deviations between the observed and reproduced data
matrices, and is quite susceptible to sample size influences (Bollen & Long,
1993; Marsh, Balla, & McDonald, 1988). As Hu and Bentler (1993) note, “At
larger sample sizes power is so high that even models with only trivial mis-
specifications are likely to be rejected” (p. 96).

The second and third fit indices were the Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)
(Tucker & Lewis, 1973), and the Relative Noncentrality Index (RNI)
(McDonald & Marsh, 1990). The selection of these two over other fit indices
was based on Marsh and colleagues’ (1996) comprehensive review of avail-
able indices. Unlike other fit indices, the TLI and RNI are not systematically
related to sample size, and both reflect systematic variation in model misspe-
cifications. The difference between them is that the TLI (but not the RNI)
appropriately penalized model complexity, and appropriately rewarded
model parsimony. Although their values may fluctuate outside of this range
under some situations, the TLI and RNI typically vary between 0 and 1.0 with
values above .90 indicative of well-fitting models.

The fourth fit index was the root mean square error of approximation
(RMSEA) (Steiger, 1990). Unlike the other indices, the RMSEA does not
require a null model in its calculation and does not conflict with the require-
ments for parsimony (Browne & Cudeck, 1993; Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1996).
The RMSEA addresses, “How well would the model, with unknown, but
optimally chosen parameter values fit the population covariance matrix if it
were available?” (Browne & Cudeck, 1993, pp. 137-138). Ideally, there should
be no error, but realistically, “values up to .08 represent reasonable errors of
approximation in the population” (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1996, p. 124).

The parameters representing the main hypotheses were evaluated using
the reported t values associated with each of the paths between the second-
order latent constructs. Specifically, Hypothesis 1 (impact of business prac-
tices on involvement) was represented through GA6, and Hypothesis 2
(impact of HIWP on morale) was represented through BE10. Hypothesis 3
(the direct impact of involvement upon effectiveness) was tested in BE11, and
finally, Hypothesis 4 (impact of employee morale upon effectiveness) was


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

321

represented through BE12. The general expectation was that all of the parame-
ter estimates would be positive and statistically significant.

At the request of one reviewer, we also freed the parameters between the
first-order business practice indices and the two first-order organizational
effectiveness indices. These parameters are not, however, indicated in Figure 2.
This analysis served two purposes. First, it acted as a control in the sense that
the systematic sources of variation due to the relationship between the
organizational-level variables (practices and the organizational effective-
ness) were accounted for during the tests of the conceptual associations
among the higher order variables in the model. Thus, we could have greater
confidence in the validity of the findings of conceptual interest in the sense
that they were not spuriously inflated due to direct (but unaccounted for)
associations among the organizational-level variables. The second purpose
was pragmatic in nature. As noted by the reviewer, there are practical impli-
cations of examining to what degree and in what direction the practices pre-
dict the turnover and financial performance indices.

RESULTS

The correlations and covariances among the variables in Figure 2 and the
obtained parameter estimates in the test of the structural model are presented
in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

The variance/covariance matrix in Table 2 was used to test the model.
Examining the top part of Table 3, results were supportive of second-order
model fit in that all of the second-order factor loadings were strong, statisti-
cally significant, and directionally consistent with expectations (turnover
intention and turnover had negative loadings). From this perspective, model
fit was supported in the sense that a higher order latent construct appeared to
underlie the a priori groupings of the first-order latent variables. Less suppor-
tive of model fit was the statistical index of model fit, the chi-square test (c =
396.01, df = 63, p < .001). Its statistical significance was offset by two consid-
erations. First, the large sample size made the chi-square test extremely sensi-
tive to even minor model misspecifications. Second and more important, the
descriptive indices of fit were very supportive of a well-fitting model. The
RMSEA (.04), and the TLI (.97) and RNI (.98) were well within their thresh-
olds for inferring good fit (RMSEA < .08; TLI and RNI > .90).

To supplement these findings, we also examined the goodness-of-fit index
(GFI) and its counterpart adjusted for model parsimony (AGFI) (Jöreskog &
Sörbom, 1996). These two indices compare “the sum of squares of the


3
2
2

Means and the Correlation and Variance/Covariance Matrices

TABLE 2

Correlations, Variance, and Covariances

Variable

Means

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

1. Flexibility
2. Incentive practices
3. Direction setting
4. Training
5. Work design
6. Power
7. Information
8. Reward
9. Knowledge
10. Organizational commitment
11. Job satisfaction
12. Turnover intention
13. Turnover
14. Return on equity

.72
.06
0

.60
.50
.03
.08
–.11
–.04
–.01
–.01
0

.26
.04

(26.48) 9.31

.39

.26
–.05
.38
1.08
.30

.42 (18.78) 3.28
.48
.47
.57
.01
.06
.03
.02
.06
.04
–.03
–.08
.11

8.15
.37 (4.17) 4.66
.30
.40
–.01
.00
–.02
–.06
–.08
–.06
.06
.10
–.08

5.00 14.98 12.81
7.59
3.97
.37 (38.78) 14.12
.52 (18.82)
.45
.05
.05
.10
.08
.03
.03
.09
.03
.06
.03
.03
.04
–.04
–.01
–.30
–.06
–.11
.02

1.45
–.03
.74
2.95
.63
.02 (14.33) 8.04
.03
.01
.03
.02
.01
–.03
–.09
.04

1.24
.59
–.48 –1.13 –1.37
.22
.25
1.58
.75
.27
–.13
7.71
6.04
0.11
8.43
.49 (19.25) 7.40
.48
.50
–.32
–.10
.03

–.14 –2.74
.25
.20
–.33
–.02
.07
–.21 –12.14
.30
–.09 –2.60
.03
–.87 –1.91
2.03
2.65 –1.11 –4.99
2.56 –1.17 –2.91
2.11 –1.01 –3.29
.42 (16.12) 3.31 –1.88 –3.78
.41
.70 (1.38) –.50 –1.17
–.57
–.28
.67
–.15
–.12
.07
.07

4.65
2.75 –3.04
–.75 –1.89
.97
1.42
1.27
2.54
1.14
2.46
2.51
.78
(.69)
–.61
.13 (40.97) –8.51
–.09
–.16 (70.30)

.30
2.36
.64
6.83
.46 (21.08) 11.04 10.59
.55 (18.79) 0.35
.47
.53
.41
.49
.40
.46
.49
–.29
–.28
–.17
–.08
.04
.07

–.52
–.16
.08

NOTE: N = 3570; parenthetical values are variances; values below diagonals are correlatives; values above are covariances; absolute correlations above .03
are significant at p < .05.


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

323

TABLE 3

Obtained Parameter Estimates

Parameter from Figure 2

Estimate (standard error)

t-value

Second-Order Factor Loadings

GA1
GA2
GA3
GA4
GA5
BE1
BE2
BE3
BE4
BE5
BE6
BE7
BE8
BE9

GA6
BE10
BE11
BE12

.70 (.03)
.60 (.02)
.94 (—)
1.00 (.02)
.94
.67 (—)
.81 (.04)
.80 (.04)
.70 (.04)
.89 (—)
.96 (.01)
–.82 (.01)
.28 (—)
–.52 (.33)

Second-Order Structural Estimates

.06 (.01)
.76 (.03)
.11 (.06)
.19 (.04)

33.80
28.89
—
39.28
32.58
—
34.36
33.94
31.56
—
51.50
–38.40
—
–4.37

2.92
31.27
1.82
2.81

NOTE: The estimates are the standardized estimates, and consequently, dividing them by the
standard errors will not give the t value reported above. To obtain unstandardized estimates mul-
tiply the t value by its corresponding standard error. Underlined values are sized values which in
unstandardized form would be 1.0. Because our hypotheses were directional, we used the one-
tailed t value of 1.64 to infer statistical significance at p < .05. Thus, all obtained t values were
significant.

residuals based on the estimated model (discrepancies between the sample
covariance matrix and a covariance matrix predicted by the model’s parame-
ter estimates) to the sum of squares of the measured covariances, and indi-
cates how much of the sum of squares of the measured covariances has been
accounted for by the estimated model” (Medsker et al., 1994, p. 441). Both
the GFI and AGFI should equal or exceed .90, indicating that, at a maximum,
only 10% of the total sum of squares of the measured covariances could be
accounted for by the sum of squares of the residuals of the estimated model.
The GFI and AGFI in the current study were .98 and .97, respectively. Thus,
the model imposed on the data in Figure 2 had reduced the total sum of
squares of the measured covariances by 97% to 98%.


324 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

Hypothesis 1 was the expectation that the array of business practices, as a
whole, would influence the second-order involvement construct. The
parameter (GA6) representing this hypothesis was positive and statistically
significant (see Table 3). Similar support was obtained for other hypotheses
as well. Hypotheses 2 and 4 stated that both the path from the second-order
involvement construct to the second-order morale construct (BE10), and the
path from the latter variable to overall organizational effectiveness (BE12)
should be positive and statistically significant. These expectations were fully
met. Finally, BE11, representing Hypothesis 3, was also positive and statisti-
cally significant.

Because a test of hypotheses between second-order latent variables is not
frequently seen in the literature, we would like to provide some guidance in
interpreting the latter findings. To do so, we will use the association from the
second-order involvement variable to the second-order effectiveness vari-
able. Recall that the two indicator variables of the second-order effectiveness
variable were the first-order ROE latent variable (i.e, an effective organiza-
tion would have higher returns on equity and hence a positive loading), and
the first-order turnover latent variable (i.e., an effective organization would
have lower employee turnover and hence a negative loading). As such, any-
thing that positively influences effectiveness as a higher order construct will
also change the strength of the relationship of the higher order variable with
its lower order components. In this context, we can say that the greater the
strength of involvement (as seen in higher levels of the PIRK attributes), the
greater the effectiveness of the organization, with effectiveness being collec-
tively reflected in higher returns on equity and lower levels of turnover. Simi-
lar to this, (Hypothesis 2) the greater the strength of involvement, the stronger
the morale of the organization’s workforce as collectively seen in higher lev-
els of job satisfaction and commitment, and lower turnover intentions. Carry-
ing this logic into Hypothesis 4, the stronger the workforce morale, the
stronger the organization’s effectiveness as represented through high ROE
and low employee turnover. Finally, support for Hypothesis 1 meant that
across the organizations, the greater the synergy among the five business
practices, the stronger the presence of involvement as perceived by the indi-
vidual employees.

For comparison purposes, three other models were analyzed: (a) a model
which estimated only the paths from the second-order involvement variable
to the second-order morale variable, and from the latter variable to organiza-
tional effectiveness (the motivational mode of influence); (b) a model in
which only the path from the second-order involvement variable to organiza-
tional effectiveness was estimated (the cognitive mode of influence); and (c)
a model in which no influences of the second-order involvement variables


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

325

TABLE 4

Model Comparisons

Model

c 2 (df)

2 (D df)

p < .025 c 2 Threshold

Hypothesized
No direct effect on
effectiveness
No effect on morale and
from morale to effectiveness
No effects at all between
second-order latent variables

396.01 (63)

NA

406.62 (64)

10.61 (1)

2178.58 (65)

1782.57 (2)

2266.18 (66)

1870.17 (3)

5.02

7.38

9.35

NOTE: NA = not applicable. We used p < .025 as the threshold to account for the inflated alpha
levels resulting from multiple comparisons. In all cases, the D
2 exceeded its critical threshold
value for inferring statistical significance.

were permitted upon organizational effectiveness (i.e., only the direct effects
from the business practices to the organizational effectiveness were permit-
ted). Each of the supplementary models was compared to the target model
(test of Figure 2) using a test of differences in chi-square values (Steiger,
Shapiro, & Browne, 1985). The overall expectation was that these three mod-
els would result in a statistically significant worsening of fit relative to the tar-
get model. The chi-square differences are presented in Table 4.

As seen in Table 4, all of the other models resulted in a statistically signifi-
cant (p < .025) worsening of fit (all differences were greater than the thresh-
old values). Of particular importance was the third model. The fact that it fit
the data worse than the proposed model indicated that we lose a great deal of
information by not considering the individual and simply testing the associa-
tions from business practices to the outcome variables (a practice underlying
the vast majority of designs in involvement and participative research).
Again, the individual is the one who must interpret the business practices and
policies in his or her own way, and it is through this interpretation that those
practices and policies are operationalized.

With respect to the direct association from the five first-order business
practices to the two first-order organizational effectiveness variables, the pat-
tern of findings were quite interesting and are presented in Table 5.

Beginning with organizational turnover, only incentive practices and
training possessed significant influences. Of interest, is the fact that incentive
practices appeared to be associated with higher levels of turnover, while
training opportunities were associated with lower levels of turnover. Of the
two, training opportunities had the stronger influence across the 49 organiza-
tions, and indeed appeared to more than counter the effects of incentive prac-
tices (i.e., its standardized estimate was more than twice the size of the other

D
c
c

326 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

TABLE 5

Estimates of the Direct Impact of

Business Practices on ROE and Turnover

Effectiveness
Criteria

Statistics

Flexibility

Contingent Business Practices
Incentive
Practices

Direction
Sharing

Work
Training Design

Turnover

ROE

Parameter
SE
t value
Parameter
SE
t value

–.07
.18
–.47
.76
.47
2.53

.23
.04
8.63
–.17
.07
–4.42

–.08
.63
–.38
–1.86
2.78
–2.74

–.49
.03
–14.94
–.05
.07
–.96

.24
.45
.80
1.21
1.59
1.47

NOTE: ROE = return on equity. The parameter estimates are the standardized values. Please see
the note in Table 4 for the implications. All t values > or = to – 1.64 were statistically significant.

estimate). In some respects, the findings for incentive practices were not that
surprising. Other studies have also shown that North Americans do not prefer
pay systems oriented away from rewarding individual efforts (Bretz et al.,
1989; Cable & Judge, 1994), and attribute this dislike to deep-rooted cultural
influences. The effect of training opportunities was quite encouraging.
Results indicated that the more frequently organizations attempt to promote
the skills (see Appendix) needed to work in an involvement environment, or
to provide knowledge about the business, the less likely individuals are to
leave that organization. This finding may be due to several reasons, including
strengthening the psychological contract of the individual with the organiza-
tion (Rousseau, 1995) and fulfilling many of the psychological needs of indi-
viduals in the execution of their jobs (Hackman & Oldham, 1980).

Table 5 also shows that three practices were important in the prediction of
ROE. The small, but negative association of incentive practices to ROE may
simply reflect the reality that incentive compensation systems are more
expensive than traditional compensation practices (Lawler & Jenkins, 1992).
That is, unlike traditional systems, a larger percentage of organizational prof-
its are being utilized to reward performance. The positive influence of flexi-
bility on ROE, however, was very encouraging. Again, the reader is referred
to the appendix, but this finding indicates that the more an organization
invests in programs to help create a better balance between work and non-
work (child care, elder care, job sharing, etc.), the greater the returns on
equity for that organization. Perhaps individuals feel a greater sense of obli-
gation to that organization, and as such, put forth much greater efforts, which
collectively results in greater firm profitability. The negative association of


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

327

direction sharing to ROE is inexplicable to us. Perhaps in the companies of
the current sample, the types of direction sharing practices indicated in the
appendix were interpreted as remedial activities on the part of the respon-
dents. That is, these types of activities may only be engaged in when people
are performing at less than desired levels. Thus, the more often they occur, the
less well performing are the organizational members, and the poorer the
financial performance of those organizations.

DISCUSSION

The goal of this study was to examine the perspective on employee
involvement advanced by Lawler and his colleagues (Lawler, 1986, 1992,
1996; Lawler et al., 1992). At the core of this perspective are four mutually
reinforcing attributes: power, information, reward, and knowledge. To the
degree in which these attributes are spread throughout the organization and
are not only the privilege of a few individuals, the organization can be said to
promote a HIWP. Greater organizational effectiveness is expected to the
degree that this condition is met. The current study supported the latter
assertions.

We found the four attributes could be meaningfully measured at the indi-
vidual level. Furthermore, when treating the four attributes as indicators of a
higher order “involvement” latent variable, we found the involvement vari-
able possessed both a direct influence upon organizational effectiveness and
an indirect influence through its impact on employee morale. We also sup-
ported the notion that the high involvement attributes do not exist in a vac-
uum, but are themselves a function of an array of reinforcing business prac-
tices. Unlike previous involvement research (particularly the participative
decision-making literature), we included the individual in our overall model.
The status quo for much past research has been to directly associate business
practices (as operationalizations of involvement or participation) with
organizational-level outcome variables. Our analyses showed that a model
like the status quo (practices to outcomes) is incomplete, and that meaningful
amounts of organizational effectiveness may remain unaccounted for by
doing so.

The current study combined with Riordan & Vandenberg’s (in press)
study, and considered in conjunction with the more descriptive studies con-
ducted by Lawler and colleagues (1995), notes that a consistent picture is
emerging. These studies indicate that high involvement work processes posi-
tively influence organizational effectiveness. Lawler and colleagues docu-
mented the productivity differences between organizations with and without


328 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

involvement. The current study shows that, in addition, we should expect dif-
ferences in financial performance and in costly personnel issues such as turn-
over. From a research perspective, a view of the processes governing these
outcomes is also emerging. It appears that the attributes of high involvement
operate upon effectiveness by both promoting workforce motivation and
facilitating the application of employee knowledge, skills, and abilities
directly onto organizational issues.

IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTITIONERS

As previously indicated, this study demonstrates that substantial practical
benefits can be achieved when organizations are involving. The morale of the
workforce is much stronger, in the sense that they are more psychologically
attached to the organization and possess greater satisfaction from work. In
turn, they are less likely to state an intention of leaving the organization in the
near future, and appear to behave consistently with that intention. The fact
that turnover is lower and ROE is higher in organizations with high involve-
ment means that these organizations also enjoy substantial financial gains.
These benefits are clearly desirable for most practitioners, and many
organizations will likely find the pursuit of involvement worthwhile. Unfor-
tunately, the current study also demonstrates that implementing high involve-
ment and thereby reaping its benefits is not as simple as instituting a single
practice (as much previous literature would seem to imply). An organization
must take the steps necessary to develop the perception among the majority
of its employees that they are, indeed, involved. In addition, not only will it be
necessary for organizations to engender perceptions of involvement in lower
level employees, but upper level management support must also be achieved
so that managers will willingly and consistently share the PIRK they already
enjoy. This level of change goes far beyond merely instituting practices and,
instead, requires the construction of a culture or climate of involvement.

As other authors have noted, however, the planned creation of a culture is
one of the most difficult challenges an organization can undertake (Schein,
1992). Nonetheless, researchers (e.g., Neal & Tromley, 1995; Prahalad &
Hamel, 1990) have also noted that because they are difficult to imitate, cer-
tain cultures can be a significant source of competitive advantage, suggesting
another benefit of successfully implementing high involvement. Because of
these issues, organizations implementing involvement should be aware that
the process is likely to be lengthy and possibly even costly until the appropri-
ate culture is achieved. Naturally, achieving such changes in perceptions may
be easier in organizations that already have more inclusive and less


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

329

bureaucratic cultures. An organization should probably consider the degree
of change necessary and its present condition prior to embarking on the
process. For example, organizations experiencing very poor financial situa-
tions may not have the resources or time required to create sufficient change.
As our data and that of the researchers previously mentioned (Lawler et al.,
1995; Riordan & Vandenberg, in press) illustrates, many types of organiza-
tions can successfully develop perceptions of involvement among their
employees, and the practices used within organizations do influence such
perceptions. When attempting to implement high involvement, organizations
must recognize that the right combination of practices is necessary. The prac-
tices must mutually reinforce one another as well as the premises of involve-
ment. Although the appropriate practices may vary somewhat across organi-
zations, we were able to identify certain sets of practices that are consistent
with involvement, that positively influence employee perceptions of involve-
ment, and that may provide a starting point for organizations interested in
involvement. Because our findings cannot be considered definitive, however,
we would encourage all organizations to engage in careful self-analysis in
order to determine precisely which practices may be best for them. In addi-
tion, because employees’ perceptions appear to be so crucial to achieving the
desired effects, we would encourage organizations in the process of imple-
menting involvement to actively monitor their employees’ beliefs and opin-
ions, again recognizing that the desired results are not likely to immediately
surface.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH

There are a number of issues that still need to be addressed. Foremost
among them is the role of business and HRM practices in reinforcing the
institutionalization of the high involvement attributes. As noted in the results,
while statistically significant and meaningful (from the perspective that they
accounted for some proportion of between-organization differences in the
attributes), the impact of the selected practices in the current study was still
quite small (9%). Although Lawler (1996) was very clear in stating that high
involvement is the end result of a constellation of practices (a view consistent
with Huselid’s [1995] work in strategic HRM), and may not be attributed to
one or two practices, this stipulation limits both the research on and applica-
tion of high involvement work processes. For research, it is a limitation
because these practices represent the exogenous variables and are therefore
important to refining our explanations of the underlying processes. Practi-
cally speaking, it is a limitation because managers will want to know how


330 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

they can put high involvement into practice. A typology of practices that rein-
force the presence of high involvement work processes needs to be developed
and included in future tests of this perspective.

Similarly, we need to extend the research explaining the effects of high
involvement on the outcome variables. For example, there are a number of
potential mediating or moderating conditions between the individual percep-
tions of the attributes, and the organizational-level outcomes (Klein et al.,
1998). These conditions have always made it difficult to relate personal vari-
ables to organizational variables (James et al., 1980; Ostroff, 1993). One vari-
able in particular that should be included is individual performance. It would
seem that the most immediate impact of one’s perception of the attributes, as
well as one’s higher morale, should be on his or her performance. It would be
the collective performance of all individuals, therefore, that would be
expected to affect such organizational-level outcomes as ROE or productiv-
ity differences. Along these lines, a broader definition of organizational
effectiveness should be employed in the future. An obvious inclusion for
future research would be quality initiatives. Very often involvement and other
participatory practices are instituted to improve the quality of goods and ser-
vices (Lawler, 1994; Neal & Tromley, 1995; Pfeffer, 1994). It would be use-
ful, therefore, to determine if such effects are realized.

The current study also highlighted the necessity for researchers to care-
fully address the levels-of-analysis issue as it applies to the study of involve-
ment. Not doing so has serious implications for the design, analyses, and
interpretation of the findings (House et al., 1995; Klein et al., 1994, 1998;
Rousseau, 1985). Current conceptual premises called for the use of a mixed-
level design. In addition, the conceptual premises mandated a simultaneous
test of structural associations among a set of latent variables mapped at a
higher order level. Although our treatment of the mixed levels in the analysis
met all of the preconditions (James et al., 1980; Ostroff, 1992, 1993), it high-
lighted two important issues. First, the complexity of the design eliminated
the use of analytical packages such as hierarchical linear modeling (Bryk &
Raudenbush, 1992). Assigning organizational-level scores to individuals has
its own concerns, hence the importance of testing the preconditions for its use
before going onto the analyses of substantive interests. This technique is the
only one that permitted us to most closely operationalize the theory underly-
ing our premises, and it is on this basis that we felt confident in its use (i.e.,
rather than making the theory fit the statistical package).

The second issue raised concerns the predictive associations from
organizational-level to individual-level constructs and from the individual to
the organization. It has always been difficult to account for large amounts of
variance across levels (see Ostroff, 1992, 1993), and current findings simply


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

331

mirror that difficulty. As we confront “meso” paradigms such as the current
one more frequently, this issue will continue to arise, even though it is one we
have been struggling with for decades (House et al., 1995). On one hand, we
can rest easy knowing that, although small, the effects are present. On the
other hand, it calls for the continual refinement of both our analytical proce-
dures and the conceptual premises explaining the impact across levels. With
respect to the latter conceptual issue, another possibility is that involvement
is an isomorphic entity (Rousseau, 1985). Isomorphism in this context refers
to the notion that the effect of a construct is expected to be the same at many
levels. Conceptually, the expectations concerning the influences of involve-
ment upon effectiveness should not differ, regardless of whether involvement
is mapped at the individual level or at higher levels (e.g., groups, organiza-
tions). In some respects, Riordan and Vandenberg (in press) supported this
expectation at an organizational level.

In closing, the goal of the current study was to add to the existing evidence
that the HIWP perspective on involvement possesses merit. In many respects,
this goal was achieved. The goal of the study was not, however, to make
claims that this perspective is any more or less valid than the other perspec-
tives on involvement proposed over the years (Klein, et al., 1998). We pro-
pose that it does offer many potential advantages: For one, it includes the
individual in the conceptual premises; second, because it is not linked to spe-
cific practices, HIWP recognizes that competitive advantage from involve-
ment may come through many avenues; and finally, HIWP is actually an
encompassing perspective in that participation (the most commonly used
operationalization of involvement) is included through the attribute of power,
yet it recognizes that power by itself does not achieve involvement. Rather, it
takes the attributes of information, rewards, and knowledge, which work
together with power, to create the type of synergy necessary to claim that an
organization is truly involving.

FLEXIBILITY (a = .80)

APPENDIX

To help employees balance work and family/home responsibilities, which of these
options are offered at your company? (Please check all that apply) Note: Organiza-
tions were given a score ranging from 0 to 11.
___ Flextime
___ Job Sharing
___ Telecommuting


332 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

___ Extended leaves (more than 3 months)
___ Part-time tracks
___ Child care/referral
___ On-site child care
___ Sick child care, sick days for sick children
___ Elder care referral
___ Flexible spending accounts
___ Other: Please describe________________________

TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES (a = .82)

What kinds of training/education programs does your company offer to all employ-
ees? (Please check all that apply). Note: organizations were given a score ranging
from 0 to 11.
___ Industry/business knowledge
___ Company mission and values
___ Quality initiatives
___ Problem solving skills/techniques
___ Skills to build empowerment
___ Skills to build teams
___ Team concepts/working in groups
___ Coaching skills
___ Managing stress
___ Managing change
___ Managing performance

DIRECTION SETTING (a = .56)

1. Does your company have formal employee development plans? ___ Yes ___ No
2. During employee orientation, does your company emphasize company missions,
values, or objectives? ___ Yes ___ No
3. Do managers discuss performance objectives with employees at the beginning of
the review cycle? ___ Yes ___ No

INCENTIVE PRACTICES (a = .74)

1. Do all employees receive some reward based on how well the company performs?
___ Yes ___ No
2. Does your company incorporate incentive compensation? ___ Yes ___ No
3. If your company incorporates incentives, what is the lowest level of employee that
is eligible?


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

333

0 = Don’t Use Incentives
1 = Officers and Executives Only
2 = Managerial Positions and Above
3 = Key Jobs and Functions
4 = All Employees
4. Which categories best describe the types of incentives your company offers?
(Check all that apply.) Note: Organizations given a score from 0 to 3.
___ Long-term incentives
___ Individual short-term incentives/annual bonuses
___ Team or group incentives/annual bonuses

WORK DESIGN (a = .58)

Which of the following describes the types of teams used in your company? (Please
check all that apply) Note: Organizations given a score ranging from 0 to 3.
___ Self-directed teams
___ Cross-functional teams
___ Task forces
___ Don’t use teams

Does your company use 360 degree review?
1. Don’t use/not considering in the near future.
2. Planning for the near future (i.e., 1-3 years).
3. Currently in place.

Which best describes your company’s philosophy/practice regarding broadbanding?
1 = Haven’t considered it.
2 = Considered it but decided against.
3 = Currently considering it.
4 = Piloting it in some areas across the company.
5 = Implemented a system across the company.
What kinds of initiatives does your company take to challenge employees? (Please
check all that apply) Note: Organizations given a score ranging from 0 to 4.
___ Job rotation
___ Special job assignments
___ Task forces
___ Other: Please specify________________________
___ None


334 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

NOTES

1. It is important to note that “incentives,” as a category of business practices, refers specifi-
cally to the objective incentive practices used in a particular organization. This conceptualiza-
tion is quite distinct from that of “reward” as one of the PIRK attributes. In the latter case,
“reward” refers to employees’ perceptions that they are adequately and justly rewarded for their
actual and potential contributions to the organization.

2. We also conducted these analyses separately on the seven individual-level variables with
the same conclusions as previously reported; thus, univariate analyses supported the multivari-
ate analysis.

REFERENCES

A.M. Best Company. Best’s insurance reports—life-health insurance edition. (1995). Oldwick,

NJ: Author.

Arthur, J. B. (1992). The link between business strategy and industrial relations systems in

American steel minimills. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45, 488-506.

Arthur, J. B. (1994). Effects of human resource systems on manufacturing performance and turn-

over. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 670-687.

Becker, G. S. (1964). Human capital. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bernardi, R. A. (1994). Validating research results when Cronbach’s alpha is below .70: A meth-

odological procedure. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 54, 766-765.

Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural equations with latent variables. New York: John Wiley.
Bollen, K. A., & Long, J. S. (1993). Testing structural equation models. Newbury Park, CA:

Sage.

Borman, W. C. (1991). Job behavior, performance, and effectiveness. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M.
Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial organizational psychology (pp. 272-326). Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Bretz, R. D., Jr., Ash, R. A., Dreher, G. F. (1989). Do people make the place? An examination of

the attraction-selection-attrition hypothesis. Personnel Psychology, 42, 561-580.

Browne, M. W., & Cudeck, R. (1993). Alternative ways of assessing model fit. Sociological

Methods and Research, 21, 230-258.

Bryk, A. S., Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). Hierarchical linear modeling. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Cable, D. M., & Judge, T. A. (1994). Pay preferences and job search decisions: A person-

organization fit perspective. Personnel Psychology, 47, 317-348.

Cable, D. M., & Judge, T. A. (1996). Person-organization fit, job-choice decisions and organiza-

tional entry. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67, 294-311.

Cammann, C., Fichman, M., Jenkins, D., & Klesch, J. (1979). The Michigan organizational

assessment questionnaire. Unpublished manuscript, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan.

Chakravarthy, B. S. (1986). Measuring strategic performance. Strategic Management Journal,

7, 437-458.

Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple regression / correlation analysis for the behav-

ioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Connor, P. E. (1992). Decision-making participation patterns: The role of organizational con-

text. Academy of Management Journal, 35, 218-231.


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

335

Cotton, J. L., Vollrath, D. A., Froggatt, K. L., Lengnick-Hall, M. L., & Jennings, K. R. (1988).
Employee participation: Diverse forms and different outcomes. Academy of Management
Review, 13, 8-22.

Dachler, H. P., & Wilpert, B. (1978). Conceptual dimensions and boundaries of participation in

organizations: A critical evaluation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 23, 1-34.

Deckop, J. R. (1987). Top executive compensation and the pay-for-performance. In D. B. Balkin &
L. R. Gomez-Mejia (Eds.), New Perspectives on Compensation (pp. 285-293). Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Delaney, J. T., Lewin, D. & Ichniowski, C. (1989). Human resource policies and practices in

American firms. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

Flamholtz, E. G. & Lacey, J. M. (1981). Personnel management, human capital theory, and
human resources accounting. Los Angeles: Institution of Industrial Relations, University of
California.

French, J.R.P., Israel, J., & As, D. (1960). An experiment in a Norwegian factory: Interpersonal

dimensions in decision-making. Human Relations, 13, 3-19.

Galbraith, J. R. (1973). Designing complex organizations. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Gerbing, D. W., Hamilton, J. G., & Freeman, E. B. (1994). A large-scale second-order structural
equation model of the influence of management participation on organizational planning
benefits. Journal of Management, 20, 859-885.

Gerhart, F. & Milkovich, G. T. (1992). Employee compensation: Research and practice. In M. D.
Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial organizational psychology (pp. 481-
569). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Glew, D. J., O’Leary-Kelly, A. M., Griffin, R. W., & Van Fleet, D. D. (1995). Participation in
organizations: A review of the issues and proposed framework for future analysis. Journal of
Management, 21, 395-421.

Gomez-Mejia, L. R., & Balkin, D. B. (1992). Compensation, organizational strategy, and firm

performance. Cincinnatti, OH: South-Western.

Gomez-Mejia, L. R. & Welbourne, T. M. (1988). Compensation strategy: An overview and

future steps. Human Resource Planning, 11, 173-189.

Hackman, J. R. & Lawler, E. E. III. (1971). Employee reactions to job characteristics. Journal of

Applied Psychology, 55, 259-286.

Hackman, J. R., & Lawler, E. E. III. (1979). Job characteristics and motivation: A conceptual
framework. In L. E. Davis & J. C. Taylor (Eds.), Design of jobs. Santa Monica, CA:
Goodyear.

Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1980). Work redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Hom, P. & Giffith, R. W. (1995). Employee turnover. Cincinnati, OH: South-Western.
House, R., Rousseau, D. M., & Thomas-Hunt, M. (1995). The meso paradigm: A framework for
the integration of micro and macro organizational behavior. Research in Organizational
Behavior, 17, 71-114.

Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1995). Evaluating model fit. In R. H. Hoyle (Ed.), Structural equation

modeling: Concepts, issues, and applications (pp. 16-99). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Huselid, M. A. (1995). The impact of human resource management practices on turnover, pro-
ductivity, and corporate financial performance. Academy of Management Journal, 38,
635-672.

Huselid, M. A., Jackson, S. E., & Schuler, R. (1997). Technical and strategic human resource
management effectiveness as determinants of firm performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 40, 171-188.


336 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

Jackson, S. E., & Schuler, R. S. (1995). Understanding human resource management in the con-
text of organizations and their environments. Annual Review of Psychology, 46, 237-264.
James, L. A., Demaree, R. G., & Hater, J. J. (1980). A statistical rationale for relating situational
variables and individual differences. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 25,
354-365.

James, L. A., & James, L. R. (1989). Integrating work environment perceptions: Explorations

into the measurement of meaning. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 739-751.

James, L. R., James, L. A., & Ashe, D. K. (1990). The meaning of organizations: The role of cog-
nitions and values. In B. Schneider (Ed.), Organizational climate and culture (pp. 40-84).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Jöreskog, K. & Sörbom, D. (1996). LISREL 8: User’s reference guide. Chicago: Scientific Soft-

ware International.

Judge, T. A., & Cable, D. M. (1997). Applicant personality, organizational culture, and organiza-

tional attraction. Personnel Psychology, 50, 359-394.

Keats, B. W. (1988). The vertical construct validity of selected business economic performance

indicators. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 24, 151-160.

Keats, B. W., & Hitt, M. A. (1988). A causal model of linkages among environmental dimen-
sions, macro organizational characteristics, and performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 31, 570-598.

Klein, K. J., Dansereau, F., & Hall, R. J. (1994). Levels issues in theory development, data col-

lection, and analysis. Academy of Management Review, 19, 195-229.

Klein, K. J., Major, V. S., & Ralls, R. S. (1998). Worker participation: What, why, and whither.

Unpublished manuscript, University of Maryland, College Park.

Koch, M. J., & McGrath, R. G. (1996). Improving labor productivity: human resource manage-

ment policies do matter. Strategic Management Journal, 17, 335-354.

Kossek, E. E., & Nichol, V. (1992). The effects of on-site child-care on employee attitudes and

performance. Personnel Psychology, 45, 485-509.

Lance, C. E., Hedge, J. W., & Alley, W. E. (1989). Joint relationships of task proficiency with
aptitude, experience, and task difficulty: A cross-level interactional study. Human Perfor-
mance, 2, 249-272.

Lance, C. E., & James, L. R. (1997). c2: A proportion variance-accounted-for index for some

cross-level and person-situation research designs. Unpublished manuscript.

Lance, C. E., Parisi, A. G., Bennett, W. R., Teachout, M. S., Harville, D. L., & Welles, M. L.
(1998). Moderators of skill retention interval/performance decrement: Relationships in
eight U.S. Air Force enlisted specialties. Human Performance, 11, 103-124.

Latham, G. P., Winters, D. C., & Locke, E. A. (1994). Cognitive and motivational effects of par-

ticipation: A mediator study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 15, 49-63.

Lawler, E. E. III. (1986). High involvement management. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lawler, E. E. III. (1991). Participative management strategies. In J. W. Jones, B. D. Steffy, & D. W.
Bray (Eds.), Applying psychology in business: The handbook for managers and human
resource professionals (pp. 578-586). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Lawler, E. E. III. (1992). The ultimate advantage: Creating the high involvement organization.

San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lawler, E. E. III. (1993). Creating the high involvement organization. In J. R. Galbraith & E. E.
Lawler, III (Eds.), Organizing for the future: The new logic for managing complex organiza-
tions (pp. 172-193). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lawler, E. E. III. (1994). Total quality management and employee involvement: Are they com-

patible? Academy of Management Executive, 8, 68-76.


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

337

Lawler, E. E. III. (1996). From the ground up: Six principles for building the new logic corpora-

tion. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lawler, E. E. III, & Jenkins, G. D., Jr. (1992). Strategic reward systems. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M.
Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 1009-1055). Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Lawler, E. E. III, Ledford, G. E., Jr., & Mohrman, S. A. (1989). Employee involvement in Amer-

ica: A study of contemporary practice. Houston, TX: American Productivity Center.

Lawler, E. E. III, Mohrman, S. A., Ledford, G. E. Jr. (1995). Creating high performance organi-

zations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Leana, C. R., & Florkowski, G. W. (1992). Employee involvement programs: Integrating psy-
chological theory and management practice. Research in Personnel and Human Resources
Management, 10, 233-270.

Leana, C. R., Locke, E. A., & Schweiger, D. M. (1990). Fact and fiction in analyzing research on
participative decision making: A critique of Cotton, Vollrath, Froggatt, Lengnick-Hall, and
Jennings. Academy of Management Review, 15, 137-146.

Ledford, G. E., Jr. & Lawler, E. E. III. (1994). Research on employee participation: Beating a

dead horse? Academy of Management Review, 19, 633-636.

Locke, E. A. (1976). The nature and causes of job satisfaction. In M. D. Dunnette (Ed.), Hand-
book of industrial / organizational psychology (pp. 1297-1348). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Locke, E. A., & Schweiger, D. M. (1979). Participation in decision-making: One more look. In
B. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (pp. 265-339).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

MacDuffie, J. P. (1995). Human resource bundles and manufacturing performance: Organiza-
tional logic and flexible production systems in the world auto industry. Industrial Labor and
Relations Review, 48, 197-221.

Macy, B. A., Peterson, M. F., & Norton, L. W. (1989). A test of participation theory in a work re-
design field setting: Degree of participation and comparison site contrasts. Human Rela-
tions, 42, 1095-1165.

Marchington, M., Wilkinson, A., Ackers, P., & Goodman, J. (1994). Understanding the meaning

of participation: Views from the workplace. Human Relations, 47, 867-894.

Marsh, H. W., Balla, J. R., & Hau, K. (1996). An evaluation of incremental fit indices: A clarifi-
cation of mathematical and empirical properties. In G. A. Marcoulides & R. E. Schumacker
(Eds.), Advanced structural equation modeling: Issues and techniques (pp. 315-353). Mah-
wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Marsh, H. W., Balla, J. R., & McDonald, R. P. (1988). Goodness-of-fit indices in confirmatory

factor analysis: The effect of sample size. Psychological Bulletin, 102, 391-410.

McDonald, R. P. & Marsh, H. W. (1990). Choosing a multivariate model: Noncentrality and

goodness-of-fit. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 247-255.

McEvoy, G. M., & Cascio, W. F. (1985). Strategies for reducing employee turnover: A meta-

analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 342-353.

McGregor, D. (1960). The human side of enterprise. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Medsker, G. J., Williams, L. J., & Holahan, P. J. (1994). A review of current practices for evaluat-
ing causal models in organizational behavior and human resource management. Journal of
Management, 20, 439-464.

Miller, K. I., & Monge, P. R. (1986). Participation, satisfaction, and productivity: A meta-

analytic review. Academy of Management Journal, 29, 727-753.

Mohrman, S. A., & Lawler, E. E. III. (1993). Human resource management: Building a strategic
partnership. In J. R. Galbraith & E. E. Lawler, III (Eds.), Organizing for the future: The new
logic for managing complex organizations (pp. 229-255). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.


338 GROUP & ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT

Mowday, R. T., Porter, L. W., & Steers, R. M. (1982). Employee-Organization linkages: The psy-

chology of commitment, absenteeism and turnover. New York: Academic Press.

Mowday, R. T., Steers, R. M., & Porter, L. W. (1979). The measurement of organizational com-

mitment. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 14, 224-247.

Neal, J. A., & Tromley, C. L. (1995). From incremental change to retrofit: Creating high-

performance work systems. Academy of Management Executive, 9, 42-53.

Ostroff, C. (1992). The relationship between satisfaction, attitudes, and performance: An

organizational-level analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 963-974.

Ostroff, C. (1993). Comparing correlations based on individual-level and aggregated data. Jour-

nal of Applied Psychology, 78, 569-582.

Pearce, J. L. (1987). Why merit pay doesn’t work: Implications from organizational theory. In D. B.
Balkin & L. R. Gomez-Mejia (Eds.), New perspectives on compensation (pp. 169-178).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Pfeffer, J. (1994). Competitive advantage through people. Boston: Harvard Business School

Press.

Pfeffer, J. (1995). Producing sustainable competitive advantage through effective management

of people. Academy of Management Executive, 9, 55-69.

Pill, F. K., & MacDuffie, J. P. (1996). The adoption of high involvement work practices. Indus-

trial Relations, 35, 423-455.

Prahalad, C. K., & Hamel, G. (1990). The core competence of the corporation. Harvard Business

Review, 68, 79-91.

Riordan, C. M. (1995). The development and empirical examination of a model of relational
demography within work groups. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Georgia State Univer-
sity, Atlanta.

Riordan, C. M., & Vandenberg, R. J. (in press). Employee involvement and organizational effec-

tiveness: An organizational system perspective. Academy of Management Journal.

Rousseau, D. M. (1985). Issues of level in organizational research: Multi-level and cross-level

perspectives. Research in Organizational Behavior, 7, 1-37.

Rousseau, D. M. (1995). Psychological contracts in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Schein, E. H. (1992). Organizational culture and leadership (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-

Bass.

Skully, J. A., Kirkpatrick, S. A., & Locke, E. A. (1995). Locus of knowledge as a determinant of
the effects of participation on performance, affect, and perceptions. Organizational Behav-
ior and Human Decision Processes, 61, 276-288.

Steiger, J. H. (1990). Structural model evaluation and modification: An interval estimation

approach. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 25, 173-180.

Steiger, J. H., Shapiro, A., & Browne, M. W. (1985). On multivariate asymptotic distribution of

sequential chi square. Psychometrika, 50, 253-264.

Tanaka, J. S. (1993). Multifaceted conceptions of fit in structural equation models. In K. A.
Bollen & J. S. Long (Eds.), Testing structural equation models (pp. 10-39). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.

Tucker, L., & Lewis, C. (1973). A reliability coefficient for maximum likelihood factor analysis.

Psychometrika, 38, 1-10.

Vandenberg, R. J., & Lance, C. E. (1992). Examining the causal order of job satisfaction and

organizational commitment. Journal of Management, 18, 153-167.

Vandenberg, R. J., & Scarpello, V. (1990). The matching model: An examination of the

processes underlying realistic job previews. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 60-67.


Vandenberg et al. / WORK PROCESSES

339

Vandenberg, R. J., Self, R. M., & Seo, J. H. (1994). A critical examination of the internalization,
identification, and compliance commitment measures. Journal of Management, 20,
203-217.

Wagner, J. A. III. (1994). Participation’s effects on performance and satisfaction: A reconsidera-

tion of research evidence. Academy of Management Review, 19, 312-330.

Wagner, J. A. III, Leana, C. R., Locke, E. A., & Schweiger, D. M. (1997). Cognitive and motiva-
tional frameworks in U.S. research on participation: A meta-analysis of primary effects.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 18, 49-65.

Williams, L. J., & Hazer, J. R. (1986). Antecedents and consequences of satisfaction and com-
mitment in turnover models: A reanalysis using latent variable structural equation methods.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 219-231.

Robert J. Vandenberg is an associate professor of management at the Terry College of
Business, University of Georgia. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Georgia in
social psychology. His research interests include inclusionary practices and policies,
frame of reference issues in measurement design and development, and work adjustment.
He currently serves on the editorial boards of the Journal of Applied Psychology,
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, and Organizational Research
Methods.

Hettie A. Richardson is a doctoral student in organizational behavior and human
resource management at the Terry College of Business, University of Georgia. She is also
a predoctoral trainee at the Center for Research on Deviance and Behavioral Health, at
the Institute for Behavioral Research, University of Georgia. Her current research inter-
ests include inclusionary practices and processes, macro-level human resource manage-
ment, and healthcare administration.

Lorrina J. Eastman is a senior consultant for Human Resources Development at Holiday
Hospitality Corporation. She completed her doctorate in industrial/organizational psy-
chology at the University of Georgia. Her research interests include industrial gerontol-
ogy, survey research and management development.

