The Relationship Between Work Characteristics
and Employee Health and Well-Being: How Much
Complexity Do We Really Need?

Marc van Veldhoven
Tilburg University and SKB Center of Expertise on Health and Work

Toon W. Taris
Nijmegen University

Jan de Jonge
Utrecht University

Sjaak Broersen
SKB Center of Expertise on Health and Work

In comparison with R. A. Karasek and T. Theorell’s (1990) well-known
demand– control–support (DCS) model, recent models of the effects of work
characteristics on employee health and well-being are complex in regard to
the number of characteristics included, the speciﬁcity of the relationships,
and the situational speciﬁcity assumed. Data from 37,291 Dutch employees
were used to examine to what extent these 3 approaches are valid. Several
increasingly complex models of the relations among 7 work characteristics
were compared and cross validated in 4 branches of industry. Further, these
work characteristics were related to 3 outcome variables. A general model—
tentatively labeled the demand–skill–support model—provided the best ap-

Marc van Veldhoven, Department of Human Resource Studies, Tilburg University,
Tilburg, the Netherlands, and SKB Center of Expertise on Health and Work, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands; Toon W. Taris, Department of Work and Organizational Psychology, Nijmegen
University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Jan de Jonge, Department of Social and Organizational
Psychology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Sjaak Broersen, SKB Center of
Expertise on Health and Work, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Marc van Veldhoven, Jan de Jonge, and Sjaak Broersen were ﬁnancially supported by a
grant from the Dutch Organization for Scientiﬁc Research as part of the “Fatigue at Work”
research program.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Marc van Veldhoven,
Tilburg University, Department of Human Resource Studies, P.O. Box 90153, NL-5000 LE,
Tilburg, the Netherlands. E-mail: m.j.p.m.vanveldhoven@uvt.nl

International Journal of Stress Management
2005, Vol. 12, No. 1, 3–28

Copyright 2005 by the Educational Publishing Foundation
1072-5245/05/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/1072-5245.12.1.3

3


4

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

proximation of the relationships among work characteristics, health, and
well-being.

KEY WORDS: demand– control–support model; work characteristics; employee health; em-
ployee well-being

The relationship between work characteristics and employee health and
well-being has attracted considerable attention in the job stress literature.
Over the past 25 years, several conceptual models have been developed that
address the inﬂuence of work characteristics on the health and well-being of
working populations, sometimes as part of more elaborate models that
include variables on the person side as well (for overviews, see Cooper, 1998;
Koslowski, 1998; Parker & Wall, 1998). However, the introduction of new
conceptual models has also raised new questions, such as the following: How
many work characteristics must be included in a model to explain employee
health and well-being satisfactorily? Are relationships between work char-
acteristics and health/well-being outcomes speciﬁc (i.e., particular work
characteristics are linked to some outcome variables but not to others) rather
than nonspeciﬁc (i.e., the effects of work characteristics on outcomes are the
same, irrespective of the outcome studied)? Is the scope of a conceptual
model general (i.e., applicable to a wide range of professions) or situation
speciﬁc (i.e., applicable only to a limited number of similar professions)? All
of these queries can be placed under the umbrella of the issue concerning
increasing or decreasing complexity in job stress research, and the main
question here is: How much complexity do we really need in examining the
relationship between work characteristics and worker health and well-being?
The present article focuses on the amount of complexity involved in
modeling the relationship between work characteristics and employee health/
well-being. First we provide a short discussion of the demand– control–
support (DCS) model, considered one of the important starting points of
contemporary occupational health psychology. Then we present an overview
of several models recently formulated in reaction to the DCS model. In
comparison with the “baseline” DCS model, these models involve increasing
complexity in modeling the relationship between work characteristics and
outcomes in at least one of three ways: (a) number of work characteristics
included, (b) speciﬁcity of relationships considered, or (c) situational speci-
ﬁcity assumed. Finally, we describe an empirical study in which a series of
models with increasing complexity along these three lines were ﬁt to a large,
heterogeneous data set. Through such a design, questions can be answered
regarding the level and direction of complexity that are most promising when
modeling the relationship between work characteristics and employee health
and well-being.


Complexity of Job Stress Models

5

THE GROWING COMPLEXITY OF JOB STRESS MODELS:

A SELECTIVE REVIEW

During the 20th century, scientiﬁc interest in job stress developed
from a side issue in work organization and management to a speciﬁc
discipline known as occupational health psychology (Quick & Tetrick,
2003; Schabracq, Winnubst, & Cooper, 2002). With the development of
job design as a research ﬁeld in the second half of the 20th century came
theoretical models and research schools that focused on variables central
to job stress research; examples include the Tavistock Institute (Trist &
Bamforth, 1951), the two-factor theory (Herzberg, 1968), the job char-
acteristics model (Hackman & Oldham, 1980), and the Michigan school’s
person– environment ﬁt theory (reviewed in Edwards, Caplan, & Van
Harrison, 1998). It is not possible within the context of this article to do
justice to the entire history of job stress research (Barling & Grifﬁths,
2003; Kahn & Byosiere, 1992; Parker & Wall, 1998). Instead, we pick up
the thread somewhere around 1980.

In their overview of the history of occupational health psychology,
Barling and Grifﬁths (2003) mentioned Karasek’s (1979) article on the
demand– control model of job stress as one of the ﬁeld’s most inﬂuen-
tial reports. The same holds true for the publication of the model in its
later, more elaborated version, the DCS model (Karasek & Theorell,
1990). The demand– control model posits that the primary sources of
stress are to be found in two basic work characteristics: psychological job
demands and job decision latitude. According to the model, the jobs most
likely to bring about job-related stress reactions (such as fatigue and
psychosomatic complaints) are those that combine high demands and low
decision latitude. Conversely, the combination of low demands and high
decision latitude is presumed to result in an absence of adverse health
reactions.

The DCS model was developed to account for the joint effects of
three instead of two basic characteristics of work: job demands, job
control, and workplace social support. In this extended model, the strain
hypothesis was formulated separately for isolated and collective condi-
tions, and the processes were consequently redeﬁned. For instance, the
DCS model assumes that the most unfavorable health/well-being effects
are expected for a combination of high demands, low decision latitude,
and low social support. This combination is sometimes labeled iso-strain
(Johnson & Hall, 1988). Social support is assumed to buffer psycholog-
ical strain, depending on degree of social and emotional integration, help,
trust, and so forth.


6

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

BEYOND THE DCS MODEL

During the past two decades, the DCS model has perhaps been the most
important anchoring point for research on the situational impact of work on
employee health and well-being. However, this model has also generated
much discussion in the literature and has led to the development of a series
of alternative models. For instance, on the conceptual side, much discussion
has been generated by what Beehr, Glaser, Canali, and Wallwey (2001)
referred to as “the problematic nature of the variables used” (p. 117). This
discussion has focused in particular on the question of whether the scales
included in the Job Content Questionnaire (JCQ; Karasek, 1985; Karasek et
al., 1998) are actually in accord with the theoretical conceptualizations of the
DCS model. Karasek preferred “decision latitude,” a term that is broader than
the control concept and that also includes skill utilization aspects. Although
research involving the use of reﬁned and more focused concepts and mea-
sures of control has generally produced results similar to those observed with
the standard JCQ measures, this line of research unambiguously demon-
strates that it is especially important to distinguish between the concepts of
skill utilization and job control (Beehr et al., 2001; Schreurs & Taris, 1998;
Wall, Jackson, Mullarkey, & Parker, 1996).

Another important criticism of the DCS model concerns the lack of
robust conﬁrmation of the interaction hypothesis, for example, the “balance”
conceptualization of one work characteristic neutralizing the effect of an-
other. Van Der Doef and Maes (1999) reviewed the evidence for this
interaction hypothesis, and they found that only 15 of 31 studies supported
the hypothesis (see De Lange, Taris, Kompier, Houtman, & Bongers, 2003,
for similar ﬁndings). This suggests that the interactions proposed by Karasek
(1979) and by Karasek and Theorell (1990) are perhaps not the best way of
conceptualizing the joint effects of these work characteristics on worker
health and well-being.

These and other considerations have led to reconceptualizations of the
effects of demand– control-related factors, some of which operate within the
balance tradition (e.g., de Jonge & Dormann, 2003; Demerouti, Bakker,
Nachreiner, & Schaufeli, 2001) and others of which leave this tradition
behind (Warr, 1987, 1994). Also, Parker and her colleagues (Parker & Wall,
1998; Parker, Wall, & Cordery, 2001) have suggested that a more elaborate
model is more appropriate to the current state of the art in this research ﬁeld.
Their model contains a series of additional work characteristics that have
accumulated a considerable body of research evidence to support their
relevance. More important, Parker and her colleagues have pointed out that
alternative mechanisms between work characteristics and outcome variables
should be considered, as well as the situational and individual contingencies


Complexity of Job Stress Models

7

that moderate these relationships at multiple levels (individual, group, and
organization). Some of these additional work characteristics and research
issues are discussed subsequently.

DEALING WITH COMPLEXITY: THREE ISSUES

With the introduction of new conceptual models along the lines just
suggested, new questions arise. It is not our aim here to address all of the
issues raised by these new approaches. Instead, we focus on three topics that
are connected to the growing complexity of models: (a) What additional work
characteristics are essential, and how many additional work characteristics do
we need? (b) What amount of speciﬁcity in the relationships between work
characteristics and outcomes is required? and (c) To what degree should
models be tailored toward speciﬁc situations or professions?

Number of Work Characteristics: What Is Essential?

The present literature seems to converge on the opinion that the number
of variables considered in job stress models should be increased; there is
more to job stress than demands, control, and social support. However, the
jury is still out on this issue. Controversy exists regarding the questions of
which and how many variables should be added. For example, Parker et al.
(2001) mentioned—among others—the following work characteristics: en-
vironmental uncertainty, organizational factors, feedback, types of job de-
mands (e.g., cognitive, physical, and emotional), role conﬂict, opportunity for
skill acquisition, social contact, and team aspects. Warr (1987, 1994) em-
phasized the roles of environmental clarity, availability of money, physical
security, opportunity for interpersonal contact, and a valued social position.
Karasek and Theorell (1990) discussed how, in practical research contexts,
analyses involving the DCS model should be complemented with attention to
such topics as job security, participation, and physical demands of the job.
Given the wide range of possible candidate variables complementary to those
already contained in the DCS model, it is obviously important for research to
address the question of how many variables must be included in a general
model of the relationship between work characteristics and health/well-being
outcomes. Parsimony is a virtue for any credible and practically manageable
job stress model, meaning that we must examine how ﬁne the distinctions are
that we must make to arrive at a practically and scientiﬁcally useful job stress
model.


8

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

How Speciﬁc Are the Relationships Between Work Characteristics and

Outcomes?

One other option to increase complexity in job stress models is to assume
that speciﬁc work characteristics predict some outcomes but not others. Warr
(1987, 1994) formulated an interesting alternative to the general DCS model,
building his “vitamin” model on an increased amount of speciﬁcity in
relationships. This model can be interpreted, relative to the DCS model, as an
array of hypotheses that adds new important work characteristics; reformu-
lates “decision latitude” in terms of separate constructs for opportunities for
skill use, opportunity for control, and variety; and adds complexity in the
speciﬁc effects that work characteristics are expected to have on different
outcomes (e.g., linear or nonlinear effects in speciﬁc stressor–strain combi-
nations). For instance, Warr proposed that high external demand levels will
lead to strain, whereas high levels of variety will lead to lack of concentration
and bad performance and too much interpersonal contact will lead to crowd-
ing. The complexity of the vitamin model is far greater than that of most
other models, to such an extent that the full vitamin model has yet to be
empirically investigated, although parts of the model have received some
support from research (de Jonge & Schaufeli, 1998; van Veldhoven, 1996;
but see Jeurissen & Nyklicek, 2001).

Yet another model that elaborates the DCS tradition in the direction
of further speciﬁcity of relationships is de Jonge and Dormann’s (2003)
demand-induced strain compensation model. This model has been pro-
posed particularly with respect to explaining stress in human service jobs.
At the core of this model is the assumption that emotional demands are
most likely to be compensated by emotional resources, cognitive demands
are most likely to be compensated by cognitive resources, and physical
demands are most likely to be compensated by physical resources. In
addition, matches between, for example, emotional demands and re-
sources produce particular emotional outcomes, and so on. According to
this so-called “triple match principle,” the strongest interactive relation-
ships should be observed when job stress constructs are based on quali-
tatively identical dimensions and when speciﬁc interrelationships are
assumed among particular types of demands, resources, and outcomes
(see also Viswesvaran, Sanchez, & Fisher, 1999).

How Situation Speciﬁc Is the Model?

An important attribute of a general model is its applicability to a wide
range of contexts. No job stress model with such a general scope exists at


Complexity of Job Stress Models

9

present, but the issue is growing in importance in the job stress literature
(e.g., Houkes, Janssen, de Jonge, & Nijhuis, 2001). Sparks and Cooper
(1999) investigated the amount of situational speciﬁcity associated with
seven work characteristics in a large cross-sectional study focusing on 12
occupational groups. The characteristics examined were work control, career
and achievement, organizational structure and climate, intrinsic job factors,
home/work interface, organizational role, and relationships with others. The
impact of these work characteristics on workers’ health proved quite different
for each of the occupational groups. The authors suggested that “to under-
stand fully the work-strain relationship, research should incorporate a greater
range of variables which are speciﬁc to a particular workplace” (Sparks &
Cooper, 1999, p. 219). Although situational speciﬁcity is important as a
research issue, the downside of this direction of modeling is the possibility
that it will lead away from general stress models, which may still be quite
adequate in most situations.

Another interesting recent approach,

the job demands–resources
(JDR) model (Bakker, Demerouti, Taris, & Schreurs, 2003; Demerouti et
al., 2001), acknowledges the necessity of additional variables and situa-
tional speciﬁcity while at the same time sustaining the importance of
“general” constructs. The JDR model, rooted in the balance tradition of
job stress modeling, assumes that health and well-being are related to two
general categories of work characteristics: job demands and job resources.
Job demands in the JDR model refer to those physical, social, or orga-
nizational aspects of the job that require sustained physical or mental
effort and are therefore associated with certain physiological and psycho-
logical costs (e.g., exhaustion). Job resources refer to those physical,
psychological, social, or organizational aspects of the job that (a) are
functional in achieving work goals, (b) reduce job demands and the
associated physiological and psychological costs, or (c) stimulate per-
sonal growth and development. The core assumption of the JDR model is
that, whereas every job may involve its own particular causes of adverse
health/well-being, it is still possible to incorporate these elements in a
generally applicable and theory-based model.

Seeing where these models are leading, it is important to address the
question of just how much situational speciﬁcity is needed. Whereas it
may be quite obvious that a model developed speciﬁcally for a certain
occupational group (e.g.,
truck drivers; De Croon, 2003; De Croon,
Sluiter, Blonk, Broersen, & Frings-Dresen, 2004) is more appropriate
than other models in that particular context, it may still be a good option
to use a general model as a start for such a mission. Also, in the case of
research involving more heterogeneous data sets, only a general model
will be appropriate.


10

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

RESEARCH QUESTION AND HYPOTHESES

The key question addressed in the present study was how much complexity
is needed to address the relationship between work characteristics and employee
health and well-being. Increasing the complexity of job stress models will raise
issues in regard to (a) number of work characteristics, (b) speciﬁcity of relation-
ships, and (c) situational speciﬁcity. New and alternative lines of modeling have
been introduced that focus on more work characteristics and more assumptions
of speciﬁcity of relationships or assumptions of situational speciﬁcity. The key
question addressed in this article adds to the current state of the art in job stress
modeling. As Kasl (1998) has mentioned, it is worth studying the relative
contributions of different conceptual models to explanations of stress-related
outcomes, in view of their differences and complementary aspects.

We addressed the present research questions using a large, cross-sec-
tional data set representative of the Dutch workforce. The data set contained
a series of possibly relevant work characteristics, on the one hand, and
several subjective outcomes, on the other hand, and it included workers from
all branches of industry. We investigated seven work characteristics so that
we could reasonably assess the issue of how many variables are required or
relevant in predicting subjective outcomes. These seven work characteristics
were chosen in such a way that the DCS model, as well as several alternative
models, could be tested (including a model formulated along the lines of the
JDR model). These seven characteristics were necessary to enable compar-
isons between the models to be made.

The present study focused on three different outcome variables: work-
related fatigue,
task satisfaction, and organizational commitment. Some
speciﬁcity of predictors for these three different outcomes was expected at
the outset, on the basis of earlier studies involving comparable research
material (van Veldhoven, de Jonge, Broersen, Kompier, & Meijman, 2002).
In this way, our study contributes to the ongoing debate in the literature about
speciﬁcity of relationships (de Jonge & Dormann, 2003; Houkes & Janssen,
1999; Houkes et al., 2001; Janssen, Schaufeli, & Houkes, 1999; Lee & Ashforth,
1996; Taris, Schreurs, & Van Iersel-Van Silfhout, 2001). The wide range in
branches of industry in the data allowed us the opportunity to test whether certain
models perform better in the case of certain subgroups of the workforce.

METHOD

Participants

Questionnaire data were collected between 1995 and 1998 by Dutch
occupational health services personnel in practical research on psychosocial


Complexity of Job Stress Models

11

job conditions and job stress. Data from 69,090 respondents were collected
in more than 1,000 research projects conducted in various organizations, and
(selected) scales and items of the Dutch Questionnaire on the Experience and
Evaluation of Work (VBBA) were used (van Veldhoven & Meijman, 1994).
Because of the context in which data were collected, no direct ﬁgures on
response rates were available. From research experience with the question-
naire, we know that response rates in this setting typically range between
60% and 80%. For this study, we selected participants from the total database
for whom information was available regarding gender, age, education level,
and all of the measurement scales assessed here. This resulted in a study
population of 37,291 respondents (44.1% female; M age ⫽ 38.7 years, SD ⫽
9.4; education level: 6.4% only primary school, 26.3% lower level secondary
school, 34.9% higher level secondary education, 23.2% higher vocational
education, 9.2% university degree or equivalent).

Measures

All concepts were measured through the use of scales from the VBBA
(van Veldhoven & Meijman, 1994), which was developed on the conceptual
basis of the JCQ (Karasek, 1985) with the goal of improved psychometric
quality. The VBBA is widely used in Dutch occupational health services and
in applied research on psychosocial job factors and job stress in the Nether-
lands. (More than 50 journal articles have been published to date using scales
from the VBBA.) Previous research has shown evidence of the validity of the
VBBA scales (De Croon et al., 2004; Sluiter, De Croon, Meijman, &
Frings-Dresen, 2003; van Veldhoven, 1996; van Veldhoven & Broersen,
2003; van Veldhoven et al., 2002; Van Yperen & Snijders, 2000).

As mentioned, we selected seven work characteristics, allowing us to
operationalize the DCS model as well as to investigate alternative models
along the three directions outlined in the introduction. The models to be
tested inﬂuenced our selection of scales. In selecting the seven work char-
acteristics, we also tried to keep the study closely in line with the concepts
outlined in recent studies reported by Karasek et al. (1998) so as not to
deviate to a signiﬁcant degree from current measurement developments in
connection with the JCQ and the DCS model. This means that the list of work
characteristics was relatively limited (not nearly including all of the concepts
proposed by Parker et al., 2001) but broader than the standard DCS model,
including factors such as physical effort and job security. In the RESULTS
section, we elaborate on the connections between the models tested and on
the connections of these models with theoretical starting points such as the
DCS and JDR models. Apart from the seven work characteristics scales, we


12

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

included three scales measuring aspects of employee health and well-being.
Responses to items in the seven work characteristic categories were made in
terms of frequency, and a 4-point scale (ranging from never to always) was
used. Response categories for items relating to the three outcome aspects of
the study were dichotomous (yes or no). The scales used are described
subsequently.

Pace and Amount of Work

This was an 11-item scale that referred to quantitative workload in a
limited sense: How much work is there to be done in how much time? Pace
and amount of work need to be contrasted with more qualitative ways in
which a job may require effort (e.g., difﬁculty level or emotionally demand-
ing aspects). In terms of content, the items in this scale reﬂect the JCQ
quantitative workload questions (Karasek, 1985).

Physical Effort

This seven-item scale inquires about several aspects of physical work-
load that require effort, rather than more static, posture-related aspects of
physical workload. Karasek and Theorell (1990) included physical exertion
as an additional factor to be considered in job redesign projects. The current
scale can be considered an upgraded version of the way in which this concept
is measured in the JCQ (Karasek, 1985).

Skill Utilization

We used six items to measure this construct, tapping skill variety and
opportunities for skill use and creativity that are present in a particular job.
The content of these items resembles the way this concept is measured in the
JCQ (Karasek, 1985) and in the Job Diagnostic Survey (Hackman & Oldham,
1975).

Task Autonomy

The 11 items of this scale refer to a wide range of job control aspects at
the task level (in contrast to the group/organizational level). These items
focus on a range of task aspects that can or cannot be controlled by an


Complexity of Job Stress Models

13

individual employee. In its item content, this scale resembles that used by
Wall and colleagues (Wall, Jackson, & Mullarkey, 1995; Wall et al., 1996).

Quality of Social Relationships With Colleagues and Direct Supervisor

Two separate social relationship scales were included in the question-
naire, one focusing on colleagues and one focusing on direct supervisor. Both
are nine-item scales that contain a mix of positive and negative ways of
describing the quality of the relationship. Items range from (lacking) social
support to overt aggression and from solidarity in behavior to general work
atmosphere. These scales involve a broader view of the social support
dimension than that proposed by Johnson and Hall (1988) and Karasek and
Theorell (1990).

Job Security

This ﬁnal work characteristic was measured with a four-item scale
requiring respondents to rate the amount of doubt they have about the
stability of their job, its status, and the department they are working in. Job
security is included in the JCQ (Karasek, 1985), and Karasek and Theorell
(1990) considered it an important additional issue in job redesign. The JCQ
questions on this issue are integrated in the scale, albeit with somewhat
different wording.

Work-Related Fatigue

Employee health was operationalized here as work-related fatigue. Fa-
tigue was assessed with the need for recovery scale, an 11-item measure
derived from the workload-recovery model of Meijman (as described in
Meijman & Mulder, 1998). This scale has predicted absenteeism, coronary
heart disease, and accidents at work in several recent prospective studies
(e.g., Sluiter et al., 2003; Swaen, Van Amelsvoort, Bu¨ltmann, & Kant, 2003;
Van Amelsvoort, Kant, Bu¨ltmann, & Swaen, 2003; van Veldhoven & Bro-
ersen, 2003).

Task Satisfaction

The nine-item work pleasure scale can be interpreted as a proxy for job
satisfaction, although most questions are formulated in ways that inquire


14

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

about feelings of task resistance (on the negative side) or task engagement
(on the positive side). This scale is best considered as covering the facet of
task satisfaction rather than as covering the more global concept of job
satisfaction (Van Saane, Sluiter, Verbeek, & Frings-Dresen, 2003; Wanous,
Reichers, & Hudy, 1997).

Organizational Commitment

Finally, eight items measured affective commitment to the organization,
in much the same way as in the affective commitment subscale proposed by
Allen and Meyer (1990). Together, the task satisfaction and organizational
commitment scales were used to operationalize employee well-being in this
study.

Statistical Analysis

We examined the factorial structure underlying the work characteristics
studied here using conﬁrmatory factor analysis (Jo¨reskog & So¨rbom, 1993).
Five a priori models that might account for the relations among the scales
were speciﬁed and ﬁtted to the data (MacCallum, Roznowski, & Necowitz,
1992). The ﬁt of these models was compared, yielding insight regarding the
models that best approximated the mechanism generating the data. Although
this “conﬁrmatory” approach improves signiﬁcantly on traditional “explor-
atory” factor analysis, the danger of capitalization on chance remains present.
Thus, cross validation of results is desirable. To achieve this, we classiﬁed a
random sample of about half of the study population as an exploratory sample
in selecting theoretical models (n ⫽ 18,557; 49.8%). The remainder of the
study population was classiﬁed into four groups according to type of busi-
ness: industry (n ⫽ 2,919), ﬁnancial services (n ⫽ 5,497), public organiza-
tions (n ⫽ 3,291), and health care (n ⫽ 2,934). These four groups were used
as test or replication groups for the models selected on the basis of the
exploratory sample.

Model ﬁt was assessed with chi-square tests along with the adjusted
goodness-of-ﬁt index (AGFI), the root mean square error of approximation
(RMSEA), Hoelter’s (1983) critical N (CN), and Bentler’s (1990) compara-
tive ﬁt index (CFI). AGFI and CFI values of .90 and above are acceptable;
preferable RMSEA values are .05 or lower; and CNs should exceed 200 to
conclude that a particular model ﬁts the data acceptably well (Byrne, 2001).
We then evaluated the best ﬁtting model (in terms of dimensionality of
work characteristics) with respect to its relationships with the three outcome


Complexity of Job Stress Models

15

measures, again using the exploratory sample and the four test (replication)
samples. Further, comparing the results for these four speciﬁc groups with the
results for the overall group allowed us to gain insight into the degree to
which results replicate across different populations, providing evidence as to
the amount of situational speciﬁcity in the data.

Table 1 includes scale names, sample scale items, numbers of items, and
scale reliabilities (Cronbach alpha coefﬁcients) as measured in the explor-
atory sample. As can be seen, all of the measures showed good internal
consistency (Cortina, 1993), making our plan of analysis feasible.

RESULTS

Number of Work Characteristics

The ﬁrst model tested was a one-factor model assuming that a single
latent factor accounted for the relations among the seven work characteristics
studied here. All items thus loaded on the same dimension, and no corrections
were made for the fact that some of the scales represented work character-
istics that one would assume to be more strongly correlated with each other
than with other work characteristics. Model 2 (demands–resources) was
based on the assumption that a general theoretical distinction can be made
between job demands (i.e., physical demands and time demands, the latter
measured with the pace and amount of work scale) and job resources (skill
utilization, task autonomy, relations with colleagues and direct supervisor,

Table 1. Scale Names and Example Item Numbers of Items, and Internal Consistency

(Cronbach’s Alpha) in the Exploratory Sample

Scale and sample item

Pace and amount of work (e.g., “Do you work under time pressure?”)
Physical effort (e.g., “Does your work require physical strength?”)
Skill utilization (e.g., “Does your work require creativity?”)
Task autonomy (e.g., “Can you organize your work yourself?”)
Relationships with colleagues (e.g., “If necessary, can you ask your

Relationship with direct supervisor (e.g., “Do you get on well with

colleagues for help?”)

your boss?”)

Job security (e.g., “Do you need to be more secure that you will keep

your current job in the next year?”)

Task satisfaction (e.g., “Mostly, I am pleased to start my day’s

work.”)

this organization.”)

Organizational commitment (e.g., “I feel very at home working for

Work-related fatigue (e.g., “When I get home from work, I need to

be left in peace for a while.”)

No. of
items

11
7
6
11

9

9

4

9

8

11

␣

.88
.88
.84
.90

.82

.88

.94

.76

.75

.87


16

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

and job security; Bakker, Demerouti, De Boer, & Schaufeli, 2003; Demerouti
et al., 2001).

Model 3 (demands/decision latitude/other) was a variation of Model 2,
following Karasek and Theorell’s (1990) lead in distinguishing theoretically
between decision-latitude-related resources (i.e., skill utilization and task
autonomy) and other job resources (mainly support-related characteristics;
Johnson & Hall, 1988). Model 4 (Extended DCS Model 1) was a variation of
Model 3 in that further distinctions were made between two types of job
demands (i.e., time demands and physical demands) and three types of job
resources (i.e., decision latitude, measured with task autonomy and skill
utilization; support, represented by relations with colleagues and relations
with direct supervisor; and job security). Finally, Model 5 (Extended DCS
Model 2) moved one step further in terms of complexity, distinguishing
between job control (task autonomy) and skill discretion (skill utilization) on
the basis of previous research revealing that decision latitude is an empiri-
cally as well as conceptually ambiguous concept (Schreurs & Taris, 1998;
Wall et al., 1996).

Table 2 presents the results for the exploratory sample (random sample
across branches of industry), and Table 3 presents the results for the four
replication samples (stratiﬁed according to type of business). As inspection of
Tables 2 and 3 reveals, the single-factor and demands–resources models
(Models 1 and 2, respectively) ﬁt the data about equally well, judging from
the relatively small differences in chi-square values. The results for all of the
ﬁt indexes pointed in the same direction: Model 2 improved little or not at all
on Model 1. That is, a model involving a general distinction between
demands and resources dimensions ﬁt the data only minimally better than a
single-factor model.

In contrast, both Model 3 (demands/decision latitude/other) and Model 4
(Extended DCS Model 1) improved strongly on Models 1 and 2. In all of the
samples, there was a steep chi-square decline from Model 2 to Model 3 (the
chi-square value for Model 3 was roughly half of that for Model 1, ps ⬍

Table 2. Comparison of Models for the Exploratory Sample (N ⫽ 18,557): Various

Occupational Groups and Branches of Industry Pooled Together

␹2

Model

CN
df RMSEA AGFI CFI
128.59
.74
4,238.56 14
Model 1 (single-factor model)
130.80
.75
Model 2 (demands/resources)
3,958.51 13
252.04
.89
Model 3 (demands/decision latitude/other) 1,827.67 11
.93
310.10
7
Model 4 (Extended DCS Model 1)
1.00 5,202.20
Model 5 (Extended DCS Model 2)
4
Note. All models improved signiﬁcantly on preceding more parsimonious models (⌬␹2
signiﬁcant at p ⬍ .001). RMSEA ⫽ root-mean-square error of approximation; AGFI ⫽
adjusted goodness-of-ﬁt index; CFI ⫽ comparative ﬁt index; CN ⫽ critical N; DCS ⫽
demand– control–support model.

1,109.15
48.13

.13
.13
.09
.09
.02

.88
.87
.93
.93
.99


Complexity of Job Stress Models

Table 3. Comparison of Models for Four Branches of Industry
Sample

df RMSEA AGFI CFI

␹2

Sample 1 (n ⫽ 2,219, industry)
Model 1 (single-factor model)
Model 2 (demands/resources)
Model 3 (demands/decision

latitude/other)

Model 4 (Extended DCS Model 1)
Model 5 (Extended DCS Model 2)

Sample 2 (n ⫽ 5,497, ﬁnancial

services)

Model 1 (single-factor model)
Model 2 (demands/resources)
Model 3 (demands/decision

latitude/other)

Model 4 (Extended DCS Model 1)
Model 5 (Extended DCS Model 2)

Sample 3 (n ⫽ 3,291, public

organizations)

Model 1 (single-factor model)
Model 2 (demands/resources)
Model 3 (demands/decision

latitude/other)

Model 4 (Extended DCS Model 1)
Model 5 (Extended DCS Model 2)

Sample 4 (n ⫽ 2,934, health care)

Model 1 (single-factor model)
Model 2 (demands/resources)
Model 3 (demands/decision

890.27
800.00

311.85
191.30
10.40

1,640.51
1,601.75

783.36
448.61
16.63

511.32
493.50

275.56
246.01
19.32

521.02
409.03

14
13

11
7
4

14
13

11
7
4

14
13

11
7
4

14
13

.15
.14

.10
.10
.02

.15
.15

.11
.11
.02

.10
.11

.09
.10
.03

.11
.10

.84
.84

.93
.93
.99

.85
.83

.90
.91
.99

.92
.92

.94
.92
.99

.91
.92

.72
.75

.90
.94
1.00

.65
.66

.83
.91
1.00

.78
.79

.89
.90
.99

.77
.82

17

CN

96.52
102.00

232.37
282.82
3,727.83

98.64
96.01

174.48
227.35
4,389.94

188.52
185.59

296.21
248.09
2,272.06

165.06
199.55

latitude/other)

Model 4 (Extended DCS Model 1)
Model 5 (Extended DCS Model 2)

287.46
298.91
1,290.78
Note. All models improved signiﬁcantly on more parsimonious models (⌬␹2 signiﬁcant at
p ⬍ .001). RMSEA ⫽ root-mean-square error of approximation; AGFI ⫽ adjusted goodness-
of-ﬁt index; CFI ⫽ comparative ﬁt index; CN ⫽ critical N; DCS ⫽ demand– control–support
model.

253.17
181.90
30.19

.89
.92
.99

.09
.09
.05

.94
.93
.98

11
7
4

.001). The decrease in the chi-square value from Model 3 to Model 4 was
smaller but still quite considerable across the ﬁve groups (all ps ⬍ .001).
Thus, these results clearly show that the demands/decision latitude/other
model and Extended DCS Model 1 accounted considerably better for the
associations among the concepts examined in this study than did the more
parsimonious models.

Finally, Model 5 (Extended DCS Model 2, corresponding to Model 4 but
with further distinction between job control and skill discretion) ﬁt the data
even better than the more parsimonious models. Indeed, this was the only
general model for which acceptable values for all of the ﬁt indexes were
obtained across all samples (RMSEA ⬍ .05, AGFI and CFI ⬎ .90, CN ⬎
200). Thus, Model 5 seemed to account well for all of the data.


18

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

Table 4. Standardized Maximum Likelihood Estimates for the Effects of Model 5

(Extended DCS

Model 2): All Samples

Exploratory sample

(n ⫽ 18,557)

Sample 1

(n ⫽ 2,219, industry)

Variable

Satisfaction Commitment Fatigue Satisfaction Commitment Fatigue

Demands

Time
Physical

Skill utilization
Task autonomy
Social supporta
Job security

R2
Model ﬁt

.07
.04
.31
⫺.02*
.30

.00 (ns)

.25

⫺.02*
.05
.18
.02**
.37
⫺.05
.21

.00 (ns)

.36
.11

.04
.17
.03
.25

.08
.08
.29
⫺.04*
.32

.00 (ns)

.28

⫺.04*
.08
.16
.04*
.37

.03 (ns)

.24

.35
.08

.20

.26

.00 (ns)
.03 (ns)

.01 (ns)

␹2(7, N ⫽ 18,557) ⫽ 210.08,

RMSEA ⫽ .04, AGFI ⫽ .98, CFI
⫽ .99, CN ⫽ 1,632.95; loadings:
support colleagues, .65; support
supervisor, .81

␹2(7, N ⫽ 2,219) ⫽ 36.43, RMSEA
⫽ .04, AGFI ⫽ .98, CFI ⫽ 1.00,
CN ⫽ 1,481.00; loadings: support
colleagues, .66, support
supervisor, .80

Note. All effects were signiﬁcant at p ⬍ .001 except as indicated. DCS ⫽ demand– control–
support; RMSEA ⫽ root-mean-square error of approximation; AGFI ⫽ adjusted goodness-
of-ﬁt index; CFI ⫽ comparative ﬁt index; CN ⫽ critical N.
aLatent variable combining relations with colleagues and direct supervisor; see model ﬁt for
more information about loadings.
*p ⬍ .05.

**p ⬍ .01.

Speciﬁcity of Relationships

Another question that arises here is whether it makes sense from an
applied point of view to make such ﬁne distinctions among various types of
job resources and job demands; statistical signiﬁcance is not the same as
practical relevance, especially given the sample sizes involved in this study.
The question, then, is whether there are also substantive grounds to distin-
guish among the concepts incorporated in Model 5.

To this aim, we conducted a series of follow-up LISREL analyses in
which the six work characteristics of this extended DCS model (two types of
demands, skill utilization, task autonomy, social support, and job security)
were linked to three outcome variables: task satisfaction, organizational
commitment, and work-related fatigue. Table 4 presents the standardized
maximum likelihood estimates from these analyses.

The ﬁt of this model proved acceptable for all ﬁve samples (RMSEA ⬍
.05, AGFI and CFI ⬎ .90, CN ⬎ 200). Moreover, the pattern of results was
similar across the samples, as were the proportions of explained variance
(proportions ranged from .19 to .28 for task satisfaction [median value: .25],
from .15 to .24 for organizational commitment [median value: .21], and from
.23 to .26 for work-related fatigue [median value: .25]).

In discussing these results, it is helpful to distinguish among moderate/


Complexity of Job Stress Models

19

Sample 2

(n ⫽ 5,497, ﬁnancial services)

Sample 3

(n ⫽ 3,291, public organizations)

Satisfaction

Commitment

Fatigue

Satisfaction

Commitment

Fatigue

.07

.02 (ns)

.33
⫺.03*
.28

.02*

⫺.05 (ns)

.36
.09

.01 (ns)

.20
.00**
.29
.00 (ns)
.15

.02 (ns)
23

.04*
.17
.03*
.24
␹2(7, N ⫽ 5,497) ⫽ 51.83, RMSEA ⫽
.04, AGFI ⫽ .99, CFI ⫽ .99, CN ⫽
1,960.28; loadings: support colleagues,
.66 support supervisor, .81

.07

.00 (ns)

.34
⫺.07
.36

⫺.01 (ns)

.28

⫺.03 (ns)
⫺.01 (ns)

⫺.06**

⫺.10 (ns)

.19

.38

.19

.03 (ns)

.36
.03*
.04*

.20
.04*
.23

␹2(7, N ⫽ 3,291) ⫽ 47.17, RMSEA ⫽ .04,

AGFI ⫽ .98, CFI ⫽ .99, CN ⫽
1,289.55; loadings: support colleagues,
.64, support supervisor, .78

(Table 4 continues)

strong effects (standardized estimates above .20), weak effects (standardized
estimates between .10 and .20), and practically irrelevant effects (standard-
ized estimates below .10; these effects may be statistically signiﬁcant, but
their practical relevance is small). According to these criteria, job security
and task autonomy were virtually unrelated to any of the three outcome
variables included in this study (all effects, with one exception, were below
.10). Both time demands and physical demands were mainly related to
work-related fatigue (higher demands were associated with elevated levels of
work-related fatigue), but this association was considerably stronger for the
former than for the latter. Furthermore, skill utilization was moderately
strongly related to task satisfaction and weakly related to organizational
commitment (more skill utilization was associated with elevated levels of
task satisfaction and organizational commitment). Finally, social support was
moderately strongly associated with task satisfaction and organizational
commitment and weakly associated with work-related fatigue.

Job security may be empirically distinguished from the other concepts
included in this study, but it did not seem to have the same kind of general,
profound effects on (some of) the outcome variables, which may be taken as
evidence that the added value of including the job security dimension in an
extended version of the basic DCS model is relatively limited. Task auton-
omy was expected to be an important predictor on the basis of the DCS


20

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

Table 4. (Continued)

Sample 4 (n ⫽ 2,934, health care)

Variable

Satisfaction

Commitment

Fatigue

Demands

Time
Physical

Skill utilization
Task autonomy
Social supporta
Job security

R2
Model ﬁt

.11
.02 (ns)
.26

⫺.02 (ns)

.26
.04*
.19

⫺.00 (ns)

.04*
.14
.01 (ns)
.37

⫺.02 (ns)

.18

.37
.11
.01 (ns)
.01 (ns)
.16
.05**
.25

␹2(7, N ⫽ 2,934) ⫽ 39.59, RMSEA ⫽ .04,AGFI ⫽ .98, CFI
⫽ .99, CN ⫽ 1,369.62; loadings: support colleagues, .67,
support supervisor, .78

model, by way of the job control aspect in the decision latitude dimension,
but the data did not show a strong incremental predictive value of task
autonomy over the other variables in the models tested. Its collateral in the
“decision latitude” concept, skill utilization, proved to be a much stronger
predictor. In general, the present results support the notion that different work
characteristics are associated with different outcomes; speciﬁcity of relation-
ships was found, as was expected.

Situational Speciﬁcity?

Comparisons of the coefﬁcient patterns for the four branches of industry
revealed no strong evidence for situational speciﬁcity, for example, different
predictors in different branches of industry. When .20 was used as a bottom
value to evaluate the standardized maximum likelihood estimates, the same
pattern of important predictors was found in all four branches of industry:
Time demands predicted work-related fatigue, social support predicted or-
ganizational commitment, and skill utilization and social support predicted
task satisfaction. Three exceptions to this basic pattern were found. In
industry, social support also predicted work-related fatigue. In ﬁnancial
services, skill utilization also predicted organizational commitment. Finally,
in public organizations, social support also predicted work-related fatigue.


Complexity of Job Stress Models

21

All estimates for these three exceptions were exactly .20, considerably lower
than the estimates for the variables in the basic pattern. The basic pattern was,
however, very similar across branches of industry. These results therefore
suggest only weak support for situational speciﬁcity in terms of stressor–
outcome relationships.

DISCUSSION

The results of the present study suggest that Karasek and Theorell’s
(1990) DCS model still is a reasonable starting point for modeling the
relationship between work characteristics and employee health/well-being.
The model could be improved, however, and still remain parsimonious by
explicitly substituting the “skill utilization” concept for the “decision lati-
tude” or “control” concept in the model. It is rather ironic that not the control
aspect but its collateral in decision latitude, the skill discretion concept,
appears to be the more important factor, considering all of the attention given
to the dimensionality and operationalization of the job control construct (e.g.,
de Jonge, 1995; Schreurs & Taris, 1998; Wall et al., 1996). The resulting
model could tentatively be called the demand–skill–support model. The
ﬁndings on demands/skills observed in this study closely approximate one of
the basic dimensions of person– environment ﬁt theory (Edwards et al.,
1998): the ﬁt between demands and abilities. In operationalizing abilities in
person– environment ﬁt theory, however, the main focus is on attributes of
the person, whereas in this study—as in the DCS model—the focus was
situational, for example, on what opportunities the job provides for employ-
ees to use their abilities. If additional complexity is really necessary in this
demand–skill–support model, it could be achieved by (a) further discrimi-
nating between quantitative and qualitative job demands (as shown by Model
5) and (b) explicitly assuming speciﬁcity of relationships in the model, as
found in the analyses on differences between outcome variables.

Figure 1 shows the general model summarizing our ﬁndings from this
study. In terms of directions for future modeling, our conclusion is that a
general model, such as the one depicted here, still makes sense as a ﬁrst
approach. The model in Figure 1 discerns two basic axes in relationships
between work characteristics and health/well-being: Factors of quantitative
and qualitative job demands relate primarily to health/strain types of out-
comes, and factors of skill utilization and social support relate primarily to
attitudinal/well-being types of outcomes. The two axes are depicted in
parallel, thus indicating their parallel operation in time but leaving open to
further research the question of how they relate to or inﬂuence each other.


22

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

Figure 1. General model derived from this study.

According to this study, a situation-speciﬁc model such as the JDR
model (Demerouti et al., 2001; Bakker, Demerouti, Taris, & Schreurs, 2003)
is not strictly necessary, although the general theoretical predictions of this
particular model (excessive demands predict strain, and scarcity of resources
predicts negative well-being) concur rather well with the present ﬁndings.
Situation- or profession-speciﬁc models are possibly of value in examinations
of homogeneous samples, but they add relatively little detail in examinations
of heterogeneous data sets. When studying a new but speciﬁc sample, a
general model—such as the one described here—is probably still the best
starting point for developing a situation-speciﬁc view.

Thus, of the three possible directions for future modeling of the rela-
tionship between work characteristics and employee health/well-being, the
direction of reﬁning the general Karasek and Theorell (1990) DCS model
(adding a limited number of variables and assuming a limited degree of
speciﬁcity of relationships) seems to make the most sense. On the one hand,
this conﬁrms the positioning of the DCS model as an anchoring point in
occupational health psychology textbooks (Quick & Tetrick, 2003; Scha-
bracq et al., 2002).

On the other hand, this study proposes some small changes to the general
DCS model: (a) to include the factors of quantitative and qualitative job
demands separately and (b) to include skill utilization separately from, or
even rather than, control in such a model. These proposed changes are in line
with the ideas of Parker et al. (2001), Warr (1987, 1994), and de Jonge and
Dormann (2003), although this study raises the question of whether their
particular frameworks might be too complex; a simple four-factor model
would be sufﬁcient as a ﬁrst approach.


Complexity of Job Stress Models

23

Limitations

It is important to note the limitations of this study. A ﬁrst limitation is
that all of the measures used were of the self-report type, meaning that the
correlations among the concepts assessed may have been inﬂated as a result
of common-method variance (Conway, 2002). Another limitation is that, in
the cross-validation study, branches of industry were used instead of partic-
ular occupational or professional groups (Sparks & Cooper, 1999). As a
consequence, the cross-validation samples were probably quite heteroge-
neous and thus did not provide an ideal test of situational speciﬁcity. This
limitation has to be qualiﬁed, however: Assuming that there is some differ-
ence between the professions in each of these four branches of industry, the
present sample sizes warrant that these differences will be detected, even if
they are only small. The absence of such differences suggests that situational
speciﬁcity is not a major issue in modeling the effects of work characteristics
on worker health or well-being; the fact that the effects of the work charac-
teristics on job outcomes were about the same for all groups was not likely
to be due to the lack of statistical power or uncontrolled heterogeneity but
rather to the absence of such differences.

A further limitation is that only seven work characteristics were included
in this study, whereas many more variables are relevant in the literature
(Parker et al., 2001). The choice of these variables was based on recent
extensions of the JCQ and the DCS model for practical purposes (Karasek et
al., 1998; Karasek & Theorell, 1990) and on the necessity of these variables
for operationalizing the models we wanted to test. We intended to measure a
broad spectrum of employment situations, but it is nevertheless a legitimate
criticism to state that quite a few interesting factors were not included in this
study. This may mean that the number of variables needed for an efﬁcient
general model still must be increased. It may also mean that the value of
situation-speciﬁc models was not seriously tested in this study, because only
rather global concepts were included in the questionnaire. This criticism has
some ground, but we did ﬁnd that the same, limited set of global concepts
showed reasonable ﬁts for very different branches of industry. The R2 values
found in this study could be improved, and for speciﬁc subgroups of the
workforce, it is probably possible to do so by including more speciﬁc work
characteristics in the model. The present R2 values, however, were compa-
rable for all branches of industry, so the global concepts involved seem to be
of general importance. Also, to improve the general model presented here by
adding situation-speciﬁc factors, more speciﬁcity may be necessary than that
associated with the factors mentioned by, for example, Warr (1994), Parker
et al. (2001), and Sparks and Cooper (1999); these authors proposed factors
that are still rather generally applicable.


24

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

The number of predictors included in the ﬁnal model (Model 5) almost
corresponded to the number of factors included in the model. Only social
relations with colleagues and with direct supervisor were combined. There is,
however, sufﬁcient evidence that the effects of social support provided by
one’s direct supervisor and by one’s colleagues are different (Kahn &
Byosiere, 1992). For practical purposes, it is also necessary to specify
whether social support problems concern the direct supervisor or colleagues.
The ﬁndings of this study reﬂect only that social support problems often
coexist in practice in regard to both types of support, that is, from direct
supervisor and from colleagues, not that these types of support are concep-
tually the same.

The effects of task autonomy were found to be small. Correlations of job
control measures with health and well-being outcomes, however, are quite
well documented in the literature (Cox, Grifﬁths, & Rial-Gonza´lez, 2000).
Just why we failed to ﬁnd these expected correlations in this study is not
entirely clear; the ﬁndings might be study speciﬁc, country speciﬁc, sample
speciﬁc, or instrument speciﬁc. In terms of research context, it is unlikely that
the present study sample, given its size and heterogeneity, should in some
way have caused job control effects to be absent. There is, however, some
literature suggesting that the Dutch labor relations situation is quite different
from the general Anglo-Saxon situation (Boselie, Paauwe, & Jansen, 2001).
This might explain the absence of job control effects in this study to some
extent: Because a certain degree of task autonomy is quite common in the
Dutch workforce, even at lower employee levels, the variance in job control
may be more restricted than elsewhere. As for the instrument used, the items
of the task autonomy scale appear to involve relevant aspects of job control
(e.g., autonomy over work speed, task sequence, breaks, deadlines, task
content, planning, and approach to task) and are comparable to those con-
tained in other instruments reported in the literature (Wall et al., 1995).

A ﬁnal possible explanation is that the skill utilization scale already
captures some of the variance in job control, in that these concepts are related
(Karasek, 1979; Karasek & Theorell, 1990). However, if job control is a
substantive variable, at least some effects could have been expected for the
type of scale used in this study. Nevertheless, the suggestion made earlier that
a demand–skill–support model would be more appropriate than a demand–
control–support model should be interpreted with caution.

Implications

In spite of the limitations just discussed, our ﬁndings have several
implications. It appears that attempts to increase the complexity of job stress


Complexity of Job Stress Models

25

models are to a certain degree promising, especially when the number of
variables included in the analysis is increased slightly and when a limited
degree of speciﬁcity of relationships between work characteristics and health/
well-being outcomes is assumed. In regard to situational speciﬁcity, the
results of this particular study are less promising. All in all, a general model
of job stress is still a viable starting point for research and consultancy in
practice and for scientiﬁc research on heterogeneous data sets.

REFERENCES

Allen, N. J., & Meyer, J. P. (1990). The measurement and antecedents of affective, continuance
and normative commitment to the organization. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 63,
1–18.

Bakker, A. B., Demerouti, E., De Boer, E., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2003). Job demands and job
resources as predictors of absence duration and frequency. Journal of Vocational Behav-
ior, 62, 341–356.

Bakker, A. B., Demerouti, E., Taris, T. W., & Schreurs, P. J. G. (2003). A multigroup analysis
of the job demands-resources model in four home care organizations. International
Journal of Stress Management, 10, 16 –38.

Barling, J., & Grifﬁths, A. (2003). A history of occupational health psychology. In J. C. Quick
& L. E. Tetrick (Eds.), Handbook of occupational health psychology (pp. 19 –33).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Beehr, T. A., Glaser, K. M., Canali, K. G., & Wallwey, D. A. (2001). Back to basics:
Re-examination of demand-control theory of occupational stress. Work & Stress, 15,
115–130.

Bentler, P. M. (1990). Comparative ﬁt indexes in structural models. Psychological Bulletin,

107, 238 –246.

Boselie, P., Paauwe, J., & Jansen, P. (2001). Human resource management and performance:
Lessons from the Netherlands. International Journal of Human Resource Management,
12, 1107–1125.

Byrne, B. M. (2001). Structural equation modeling with AMOS. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Conway, J. M. (2002). Method variance and method bias in industrial and organizational
psychology. In S. G. Rogelberg (Ed.), Handbook of research methods in industrial and
organizational psychology (pp. 344 –365). Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Cooper, C. L. (1998). Theories of organizational stress. Oxford, England: Oxford University

Press.

Cortina, J. M. (1993). What is coefﬁcient alpha? An examination of theory and applications.

Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 98 –104.

Cox, T., Grifﬁths, A., & Rial-Gonza´lez, E. (2000). Research on work-related stress. Bilbao,

Spain: European Agency for Safety and Health at Work.

De Croon, E. M. (2003). Stressful work: Sickness absence and turnover in truck drivers.

Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Amsterdam.

De Croon, E. M., Sluiter, J. K., Blonk, R. W. B., Broersen, J. P. J., & Frings-Dresen, M. H. W.
(2004). Stressful work, psychological job strain, and turnover: A 2-year prospective cohort
study of truck drivers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 442– 454.

de Jonge, J. (1995). Job autonomy, well-being and health: A study among Dutch health care

workers. Maastricht, the Netherlands: Datawyse.

de Jonge, J., & Dormann, C. (2003). The DISC-model: Demand-induced strain compensation


26

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

mechanisms in job stress. In M. F. Dollard, A. H. Wineﬁeld, & H. R. Wineﬁeld (Eds.),
Occupational stress in the service professions (pp. 43–74). London: Taylor & Francis.
de Jonge, J., & Schaufeli, W. (1998). Job characteristics and employee well-being: A test of
Warr’s Vitamin Model in health care workers using structural equation modelling. Journal
of Organizational Behavior, 19, 387– 407.

De Lange, A. H., Taris, T. W., Kompier, M. A. J., Houtman, I. L. D., & Bongers, P. M. (2003).
The very best of the millennium: Longitudinal research on the job demands-control model.
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 8, 282–305.

Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Nachreiner, F., & Schaufeli, W. B. (2001). The job demands-

resources model of burnout. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 499 –512.

Edwards, J. R., Caplan, R. D., & Van Harrison, R. (1998). Person-environment ﬁt theory:
Conceptual foundations, empirical evidence, and directions for future research. In C. L.
Cooper (Ed.), Theories of organizational stress (pp. 28 – 67). Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.

Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1975). Development of the Job Diagnostic Survey. Journal

of Applied Psychology, 60, 159 –170.

Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1980). Work redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Herzberg, F. (1968). One more time: How do you motivate your workers? Harvard Business

Review, 46, 53– 62.

Hoelter, J. W. (1983). The analysis of covariance structures: Goodness-of-ﬁt indices. Socio-

logical Methods & Research, 11, 325–344.

Houkes, I., & Janssen, P. P. M. (1999). A test of Leiter’s process model of burnout. Journal of

Health and Human Services Administration, 21, 533–559.

Houkes, I., Janssen, P. P. M., de Jonge, J., & Nijhuis, F. J. N. (2001). Speciﬁc relationships
between work characteristics and intrinsic work motivation, burnout and turnover inten-
tion: A multi-sample analysis. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology,
19, 1–23.

Janssen, P. P. M., Schaufeli, W. B., & Houkes, I. (1999). Work-related and individual

determinants of the three burnout dimensions. Work & Stress, 13, 74 – 86.

Jeurissen, T., & Nyklicek, I. (2001). Testing the vitamin model of job stress in Dutch health

care workers. Work & Stress, 15, 254 –264.

Johnson, J. V., & Hall, E. M. (1988). Job strain, workplace social support and cardiovascular
disease: A cross-sectional study of a random sample of the Swedish working population.
American Journal of Public Health, 78, 1336 –1342.

Jo¨reskog, K. G., & So¨rbom, D. (1993). LISREL-8 research manual. Chicago: Scientiﬁc

Software.

Kahn, R. L., & Byosiere, P. (1992). Stress in organizations. In M. D. Dunette & L. M. Hough
(Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 3, pp. 571– 650). Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Karasek, R. A. (1979). Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain: Implications for

job redesign. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 285–308.

Karasek, R. A. (1985). Job Content Questionnaire. Los Angeles: Department of Industrial and

Systems Engineering, University of Southern California.

Karasek, R., Brisson, C., Kawakami, N., Houtman, I., Bongers, P., & Amick, B. (1998). The
Job Content Questionnaire (JCQ): An instrument for internationally comparative assess-
ments of psychosocial work characteristics. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology,
3, 322–355.

Karasek, R. A., & Theorell, T. (1990). Healthy work: Stress, productivity, and the reconstruc-

tion of working life. New York: Basic Books.

Kasl, S. V. (1998). Measuring job stressors and studying the health impact of the work
environment: An epidemiologic commentary. Journal of Occupational Health Psychol-
ogy, 3, 390 – 401.


Complexity of Job Stress Models

27

Koslowski, M. (1998). Modelling the stress-strain relationship in work settings. London:

Routledge.

Lee, R. T., & Ashforth, B. E. (1996). A further examination of managerial burnout: Toward an

integrated model. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14, 3–20.

MacCallum, R. C., Roznowski, M., & Necowitz, L. B. (1992). Model modiﬁcations in
covariance structure analysis: The problem of capitalization on chance. Psychological
Bulletin, 111, 490 –504.

Meijman, T. F., & Mulder, G. (1998). Psychological aspects of workload. In P. J. D. Drenth &
H. Thierry (Eds.), Handbook of work and organizational psychology (pp. 5–33). Hove,
England: Psychology Press.

Parker, S., & Wall, T. (1998). Job and work design: Organizing work to promote well-being

and effectiveness. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Parker, S. K., Wall, T. D., & Cordery, J. L. (2001). Future work design research and practice:
Towards an elaborated model of work design. Journal of Occupational and Organiza-
tional Psychology, 74, 413– 440.

Quick, J. C., & Tetrick, L. E. (2003). Handbook of occupational health psychology. Washing-

ton, DC: American Psychological Association.

Schabracq, M., Winnubst, J., & Cooper, C. L. (2002). Handbook of work and health psychol-

ogy. Chichester, England: Wiley.

Schreurs, P. J. G., & Taris, T. W. (1998). Construct validity of the demand-control model:

Double cross-validation approach. Work & Stress, 12, 66 – 84.

Sluiter, J. K., De Croon, E. M., Meijman, T. F., & Frings-Dresen, M. H. W. (2003). Need for
recovery from work related fatigue and its role in the development and prediction of
subjective health complaints. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 60, i62–i70.

Sparks, K., & Cooper, C. L. (1999). Occupational differences in the work-strain relationship:
Towards the use of a situation-speciﬁc model. Journal of Occupational and Organiza-
tional Psychology, 72, 219 –229.

Swaen, G. M. H., Van Amelsvoort, L. G. P. M., Bu¨ltmann, U., & Kant, I. J. (2003). Fatigue as
a risk factor for being injured in an occupational accident: Results from the Maastricht
Cohort Study. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 60, i88 –i92.

Taris, T. W., Schreurs, P. J. G., & Van Iersel-Van Silfhout, I. J. (2001). Job stress, job strain,
and psychological withdrawal among Dutch university staff: Towards a dual-process
model for the effects of occupational stress. Work & Stress, 15, 283–296.

Trist, E. L., & Bamforth, K. W. (1951). Some social and psychological consequences of the

long-wall method of coal-getting. Human Relations, 4, 3–38.

Van Amelsvoort, L. G. P. M., Kant, I. J., Bu¨ltmann, U., & Swaen, G. M. H. (2003). Need for
recovery after work and the subsequent risk of cardiovascular disease in a working
population. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 60, i83–i87.

Van Der Doef, M., & Maes, S. (1999). The job demand-control (-support) model and
psychological well-being: A review of 20 years of empirical research. Work & Stress, 13,
87–114.

Van Saane, N., Sluiter, J. K., Verbeek, J. H. A. M., & Frings-Dresen, M. H. W. (2003).
Reliability and validity of instruments measuring job satisfaction—A systematic review.
Occupational Medicine, 53, 191–200.

van Veldhoven, M. (1996). Psychosociale arbeidsbelasting en werkstress [Psychosocial job

demands and job stress]. Lisse, the Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.

van Veldhoven, M., & Broersen, J. P. J. (2003). Measurement quality and validity of the “need

for recovery scale.” Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 60, i3–i9.

van Veldhoven, M., de Jonge, J., Broersen, S., Kompier, M., & Meijman, T. F. (2002). Speciﬁc
relationships between psychosocial job conditions and job-related stress: A three-level
analytic test. Work & Stress, 16, 207–228.

van Veldhoven, M., & Meijman, T. F. (1994). Het meten van psychosociale arbeidsbelasting


28

van Veldhoven, Taris, de Jonge, and Broersen

met een vragenlijst: de vragenlijst beleving en beoordeling van de arbeid (VBBA) [The
measurement of psychosocial job demands with a questionnaire: The questionnaire on the
experience and evaluation of work (QEEW)]. Amsterdam: Nederlands Instituut voor
Arbeidsomstandigheden.

Van Yperen, N., & Snijders, T. A. M. (2000). A multilevel analysis of the demands-control
model: Is stress at work determined by factors at the group or at the individual level?
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 5, 182–190.

Viswesvaran, C., Sanchez, J. I., & Fisher, J. (1999). The role of social support in the process

of work stress: A meta-analysis. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 54, 314 –334.

Wall, T. D., Jackson, P. R., & Mullarkey, S. (1995). Further evidence on some new measures
of job control, cognitive demand and production responsibility. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 69, 153–166.

Wall, T. D., Jackson, P. R., Mullarkey, S., & Parker, S. K. (1996). The demands-control model
of job strain: A more speciﬁc test. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychol-
ogy, 69, 153–166.

Wanous, J. P., Reichers, A. E., & Hudy, M. J. (1997). Overall job satisfaction: How good are

single-item measures? Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 247–252.

Warr, P. (1987). Work, unemployment and mental health. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Warr, P. (1994). A conceptual framework for the study of work and mental health. Work &

Stress, 8, 84 –97.

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

