 
 
Chasing the Hottest IT: Effects of Information Technology Fashion on Organizations
Author(s): Ping Wang
Source: MIS Quarterly, Vol. 34, No. 1 (March 2010), pp. 63-85
Published by: Management Information Systems Research Center, University of Minnesota
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20721415
Accessed: 02-08-2017 18:03 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Management Information Systems Research Center, University of Minnesota is
collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to MIS Quarterly

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Quarterly aa^^u

 Chasing the Hottest IT: Effects of Information
 Technology Fashion on Organizations1

 By: Ping Wang

 College of Information Studies
 University of Maryland at College Park
 4105 Hornbake Building, South Wing
 College Park, MD 20742
 U.S.A.
 pwang@umd.edu

 Abstract

 What happens to organizations that chase the hottest informa
 tion technologies? This study examines some of the important
 organizational impacts of the fashion phenomenon in IT. An
 IT fashion is a transitory collective belief that an information
 technology is new, efficient, and at the forefront ofpractice.
 Using data collected from published discourse and annual IT
 budgets of 109 large companies for a decade, I have found
 that firms whose names were associated with ITfashions in
 the press did not have higher performance, but they had
 better reputation and higher executive compensation in the
 near term. Companies investing in IT in fashion also had
 higher reputation and executive pay, but they had lower per
 formance in the short term and then improvedperformance in
 the long term. These results support afashion explanation for
 the middle phase diffusion of IT innovations, illustrating that

 Varun Grover was the accepting senior editor for this paper. Elizabeth
 Davidson served as the associate editor.

 A research-in-progress version of this study was presented at the 27th
 International Conference on Information Systems in 2006. Another earlier
 version of the paper was presented at the Academy of Management Annual
 Meeting in 2007, where it won the Best Paper Award from the Academy's
 Organizational Communication and Information Systems (OCIS) Division.

 following fashion can legitimize organizations and their
 leaders regardless of performance improvement. The
 findings also extend institutional theory from its usual focus
 on taken-for-grantedpractices to fashion as a novel source of
 social approval. This study suggests that practitioners
 balance between performance pressure and social approval
 when they confront whatever is hottest in IT.

 Keywords: Information technology fashion, management
 fashion, innovation, diffusion, discourse, corporate reputation,
 executive compensation, legitimacy, performance

 Introduction W????????I???????????????M

 New information technologies emerge constantly. When
 managers confront a promising new IT, a question they often
 ask is whether the technology will become the next big thing
 or if it is just a passing fad. The former means an important
 innovation that will come to be adopted widely and institu
 tionalized to transform IT and business practices, whereas the
 latter refers to a trivial tool that will be rejected or abandoned.
 A fad often experiences a short fashion period when the focal
 IT is considered hot: it attracts fierce enthusiasm and atten
 tion and triggers exaggerated expectations about its benefits.
 Interestingly, most big things (i.e., the IT widely adopted and
 institutionalized) frequently go through similar fashion peri
 ods. For example, data warehouse, ERP (enterprise resource
 planning), and CRM (customer relationship management)
 underwent wide swings in popularity, progressed through
 hype cycles filled with inflated expectations, and spread
 across organizations via passionate bandwagons of adoption.
 As the enthusiasm about these innovations faded away, many
 adopting organizations assimilated them into everyday work
 practice (see Kumar and van Hillegersberg 2000). Regardless

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1, pp. 63-85/March 2010 63

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 of the differentiated destinies of IT, fashion seems to become
 a commonplace phenomenon in IT nowadays (Baskerville and
 Myers 2009; Swanson and Ramiller 2004).

 explanation for the middle phase diffusion of IT innovations,
 illustrating that following fashion can legitimize organizations
 and their leaders regardless of performance improvement.
 The findings also extend institutional theory from its usual
 focus on taken-for-granted practices to fashion as a novel
 source of social approval. This study suggests that practi
 tioners balance between performance pressure and social
 approval when they confront fashionable IT.

 Despite wide recognition of and often lamentations on the
 faddishness of IT practice (and our own academic com
 munity's research agenda), little is known about fashions in
 IT. What is an IT fashion in the first place? Acknowledging
 the diverse definitions of IT fashion (Fichman 2004), in this
 study an IT fashion is defined as a transitory collective belief
 that an information technology is new, efficient, and at the
 forefront of practice. When such a belief is prevalent for an
 IT, the technology can be described as "in fashion." Coming
 into fashion, though, does not imply that the technology is
 without practical merit. Technologies with lasting utility,
 some short-lived benefits, or little value are all subject to the
 swings of fashion. Several recent studies have just begun to
 examine the fashion phenomenon in IT. For example,
 studying the diffusion of business process reengineering
 (BPR) across European firms, Newell et al. (1998) found that
 consultants and software vendors created a fashion that helped
 disseminate BPR as a "packaged solution" among firms
 adopting it for political rather than economic reasons. The
 analysis by Wang and Ramiller (2009) showed that the
 formation of the ERP fashion concurred with a collective
 learning process participated in by a wide array of diverse
 organizations.

 In the sections that follow, this study is first situated in the
 broader research stream of diffusion of innovations. The
 theories that motivated the study are then reviewed. Fol
 lowing the description of the methods are the main findings
 and their discussion. The paper concludes with the broader
 implications of this study to the theory and practice of
 managing IT in organizations.

 Theories ??^ H

 An organizational innovation is a structure, practice, or
 technology new to the organization adopting it. Diffusion is
 the process by which an innovation spreads over time among
 organizations (Rogers 2003). Central to the research on
 diffusion of innovations is a question: Why do organizations
 adopt innovations? Among the numerous attempts to answer
 this question, there are two main schools of thought. On the
 one hand, the economic-rationalistic perspective is focused
 on organizational performance, which refers to the extent to
 which an organization realizes its objectives, often measured
 in financial or economic terms.2 Scholars from the economic
 rationalistic perspective argue that organizations recognize
 performance problems and then search and adopt innovations
 to solve the problems efficiently, thus improving performance
 (Cyert and March 1992). On the other hand, the institutional
 perspective stresses organizational legitimacy, which refers to
 a generalized perception or assumption that the actions of an
 organization are desirable or appropriate within the organiza
 tion's socially constructed environment of norms, values, and
 beliefs (Suchman 1995). Institutional researchers contend
 that organizations adopt innovations that are taken for granted
 as legitimate practices in order to gain organizational legi
 timacy, regardless of the actual impact of the innovation on
 the performance of particular organizations (Meyer and
 Rowan 1977).

 These pioneering studies were primarily focused on the
 emergence and evolution of the fashion phenomenon in IT.
 They fell short of demonstrating the significance of the
 phenomenon in the first place. If IT fashion is essentially
 trivial, then why should anyone care about its development
 and evolution? Accordingly, this study aims to examine the
 organizational consequences of IT fashion, raising the
 research question: What happens to key outcomes of organi
 zations engaging with IT fashion. Specifically, the study
 drew on a sample of 109 Fortune 500 companies. Using data
 collected from published discourse and annual corporate IT
 budgets, the extent to which firms in the sample engaged
 themselves with IT innovations in fashion over a decade was
 examined. The study found that companies whose names
 were associated with IT fashions in the press did not have
 higher performance, but they had better reputation and higher
 executive compensation in the near term. Similarly, com
 panies investing in IT in fashion were also admired more and
 their chief executives received higher pay. However, these
 firms had lower performance in the short term, but improved
 their performance in the long term. These findings demon
 strate that IT fashion brings about serious consequences to
 organizations on their performance, reputation, and executive
 compensation. Further, these results support a fashion

 2 Among the diverse definitions of organizational performance in the literature
 (Melville et al. 2004), the focus here was on performance at the
 organizational level using financial measures that capture both efficiency and
 effectiveness.

 64 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 While the debate continues on whether performance or
 legitimacy drives the diffusion of innovations, research has
 shown that, in its early diffusion, adopters undertake an
 innovation to improve performance, and in its later diffusion,
 most organizations adopt it to pursue legitimacy (Tolbert and
 Zucker 1983). In other words, when an innovation is nascent,
 early adoption is driven by rational choice made by each
 organization, based upon its local calculation of the inno
 vation's projected benefits in enhancing organizational
 performance. Once the innovation has been widely adopted
 and institutionalized as a legitimate practice, however, late
 adopters implement it simply to conform to institutional
 norms. Although this performance-and-then-legitimacy
 driven diffusion theory has received support in empirical
 studies (e.g., Fligstein 1985; Tolbert and Zucker 1983), the
 theory is ambiguous as to what happens in the middle: When
 an innovation moves from its early diffusion toward institu
 tionalization, does the pursuit of performance or quest for
 legitimacy drive organizations to adopt the innovation?

 In fact, the middle phase is often crucial to technological
 innovations. During this phase, a new technology has to cross
 the chasm from the early adopters to the majority of adopters
 (Moore 2002). It is also the period when various stakeholders
 build an industrial infrastructure to institutionalize the
 innovation (Van de Ven 2005). The fact that only some inno
 vations succeed in crossing the chasm and others fail begs a
 theoretical explanation for the important middle phase of
 diffusion. One might propose that, in the middle phase, the
 most efficient innovations for enhancing organizational
 performance come to be widely adopted and accepted as
 legitimate practices. Despite its potential to synthesize the
 performance- and legitimacy-focused perspectives, the propo
 sition faces at least two challenges in its validation. First,
 because each organization is unique in some aspects, the
 innovation most efficient for one organization may not be so
 for another. Second, even in circumstances where efficiency
 evaluation criteria are applicable across organizations, the
 most efficient innovation is often not the most widely
 adopted, nor is it institutionalized as a legitimate practice.
 Many cases show that innovations with suboptimal efficiency
 (e.g., David 1985) or even no obvious benefits come to be
 widely accepted (Abrahamson 1991). Beyond the perfor
 mance- and legitimacy-driven adoption rationales, an inno
 vation's middle phase of diffusion often witnesses a notable
 surge in popularity, reminiscent of fashion waves in aesthetics
 and entertainment. The recently developed management
 fashion theory may offer a promising explanation for the
 middle phase.

 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Management Fashion

 According to management fashion theory, idea entrepreneurs
 (such as consultants, gurus, journalists, and academics) com
 pete in a market for providing management knowledge. They
 identify and highlight widespread problems with organiza
 tional performance, or so-called performance gaps: the
 difference between the performance level managers aspire to
 and the level they actually achieve. They sense managers'
 demands for new management techniques and produce
 discourse to articulate ideas that promote the use of certain
 techniques to help narrow the performance gaps. When
 discourse converges on a technique (e.g., TQM?total quality
 management), a dramatic surge of media coverage and the
 ensuing managerial attention and interest will create a
 management fashion: a relatively transitory collective belief
 that an administrative technique is new, efficient, and at the
 forefront of management practice (Abrahamson 1996). This
 belief, although often based on early adopters' anecdotal
 success, generates increasing pressure on every organization
 to adopt the innovation, because organizational stakeholders
 expect managers to employ modern and efficient techniques
 to manage their organizations (Meyer and Rowan 1977). The
 more organizations adopt the innovation, the stronger the
 collective belief. Then even more organizations will adopt.
 In this way, management fashion and adoption build upon
 each other in a self-reinforcing cycle. Consequently, "certain
 innovations may garner managerial attention and organiza
 tional adoption out of all proportion to the ultimate benefits
 flowing from their actual use" (Fichman 2004, pp. 327-328).
 Apparently, management fashion theory has absorbed ele
 ments from both the performance- and legitimacy-based
 theories of diffusion: Performance gaps motivate the search
 for innovations, and adoptions of innovations in high fashion
 convey legitimacy. In this way, management fashion theory
 complements other theories for diffusion and provides a novel
 explanation of an innovation's mid-career.

 information Technology Fashion

 The above description of management fashion should not
 sound unfamiliar when it comes to the diffusion of IT inno
 vations. On the one hand, numerous idea entrepreneurs (such
 as vendors, market research analysts, consultants, pundits,
 gurus, and academics) compete in the market for IT knowl
 edge by producing voluminous discourse to promote various
 IT or IT-enabled innovations through a host of outlets such as
 books, articles, workshops, and conferences. On the other
 hand, executives and IT managers are characteristically on the
 lookout for the next big thing to help their organizations per
 form and compete. Every now and then idea entrepreneurs'

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 65

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 discourse converges on an innovation that becomes a "big
 thing." Be it ERP or Web 2.0, each of these major inno
 vations enjoys an instant fame and attracts tremendous
 managerial attention and interest, which in turn generates a
 transitory collective belief that an information technology is
 new, efficient, and at the forefront of practice?the IT inno
 vation comes into fashion! Organizations seeking new,
 efficient, and cutting-edge IT thus adopt the innovation in
 fashion, a course of action often pejoratively depicted as
 "jumping on the bandwagon." However, the hype associated
 with every IT fashion will soon reach the point where the
 expectation of the benefits the innovation will bring is inflated
 beyond the capabilities of the innovation. Unfulfilled promise
 generates backlash, which quickly drives the innovation out
 of fashion and sends it to the "trough of disillusionment."
 This "hype cycle," originally sketched by Gartner, plausibly
 depicts the fashion phenomenon in IT (Linden and Fenn
 2003).

 Although both administrative and IT practices are subject to
 the swings of fashion, the theoretical distinction between
 administrative and IT innovations cautions against a hasty
 wholesale acceptance of management fashion theory in the
 field of IT as a mere test-bed for the theory. Previous inno
 vation research suspected that administrative and technical
 innovations (of which IT is a special type) imply different
 decision-making processes and different adoption drivers and
 processes (Damanpour 1991). The uniqueness of IT innova
 tions (as opposed to administrative techniques such as
 employee empowerment and TQM) motivates IT fashion
 research as a distinctive stream of IT diffusion studies. Most
 conspicuously, IT innovations usually have tangible artifacts
 (such as hardware and software components) that are pro
 vided by vendors and used by the adopters. Both a vendor's
 production assets and an adopter's work processes are speci
 fically tailored for a type of IT innovation (such as enterprise
 software) and are often difficult to apply to another type (such
 as consumer electronics). Therefore, unlike management
 consultants who can capitalize on their skill-sets in multiple
 types of administrative innovations, IT practitioners face high
 switching costs, which might make IT practice less prone to
 the fickleness of fashion. Also, in contrast to administrative
 innovations that are often abandoned when they go out of
 fashion, several fashionable IT innovations are institu
 tionalized (Fichman 2004). These innovations go out of
 fashion not because adopters find them useless and abandon
 them. Rather, they move from the forefront of IT practice to
 the background as they have been assimilated into the
 adopting organizations and thus there is no need to hype them
 anymore. A case in point is ERP. As this highly popular
 1990s innovation achieved widespread adoption in and across
 many industries worldwide and eventually became institu

 66 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

 tionalized (Kumar and van Hillegersberg 2000), the hype
 about ERP has faded away.

 The distinction between IT and administrative innovations is
 theoretical, however. In practice, IT innovations often have
 administrative components and administrative innovations
 often have IT components, especially with the increasing
 penetration of IT in administrative practices. While it would
 be ideal to measure the "IT-ness" or "administrative-ness" of
 an innovation, in practice it is relatively straightforward to
 identify innovations that have intensive IT components or
 intensive administrative components. For simplicity, IT
 intensive innovations are referred to as IT innovations in this
 paper. The uniqueness of IT innovations illustrated above
 requires IT fashion research to not only articulate and advance
 management fashion theory broadly, but also develop a
 fashion theory specific to IT innovations.

 Thus far, IT fashion research has focused on the emergence
 and evolution of IT fashions (e.g., Baskerville and Myers
 2009; Lee and Collar 2003; Newell et al. 1998; Wang and
 Ramiller 2009), assuming that IT fashions matter to adopting
 organizations. However, that assumption has not been veri
 fied. To justify IT fashion as a worthy phenomenon to study,
 research must investigate the organizational consequences of
 IT fashions. What influence does an organization's engage
 ment with IT fashions have on important outcomes such as
 performance and legitimacy? If the ebb and flow of IT
 fashions are found to indeed shape key organizational
 outcomes, then the study of the emergence and evolution of
 IT fashion is warranted. If, however, fashion is found to have
 no effect on organizations either on or off the bandwagon,
 then IT fashion research might become an esoteric dead-end
 (Ramiller et al. 2008). To investigate the impacts of organiz
 ational engagement with IT fashions, such engagement needs
 to be defined.

 Engagement with IT Fashions

 An organization's engagement with an IT fashion is the
 establishment of a material or informational relationship
 between the organization and the IT innovation in fashion.
 While an organization can establish such a relationship at
 various points of an innovation's diffusion, for the purpose of
 this paper, the focus is on organizational engagement with the
 IT innovation during itsfashion period?when the innovation
 is in fashion. Engaging with an IT fashion can take on a
 material or informational form. Material engagement refers
 to the adoption, implementation, and utilization of the IT.
 These material activities have been the traditional focus of IT
 innovation research mainly from the economic-rationalistic

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 perspective. Especially where performance is concerned, it is
 argued that what organizations do matters most (Pfeffer and
 Sutton 2000). On the other hand, from the institutional per
 spective, organizations gain legitimacy by informing their
 stakeholders that they are associated with socially approved
 IT. By way of signaling, organizations informationally
 engage with IT fashions. The informational engagement is
 sometimes in synch with the material engagement, just as in
 the case when an organization announces that it adopts CRM
 and it actually adopts it. Sometimes, however, an organiza
 tion's informational engagement does not necessarily corre
 spond to its material engagement; that is, the rhetoric does not
 always match the reality (Zbaracki 1998). For example, in
 this study's dataset, some firms that were reported in the news
 to have adopted CRM were actually considering adoption,
 with no budget yet committed to CRM. A number of manage
 ment fashions in the 1980s conveyed the alignment of
 corporate executives and shareholder interests such as through
 long-term incentive plans (LTIPs). Westphal and Zajac
 (1998) found that many firms announced the adoption of
 LTIPs but never implemented the plans and that, nevertheless,
 the stock market reacted favorably in terms of excess returns
 to these symbolic adopters anyway. In other words, what
 organizations say they do also seems to matter, especially
 where legitimacy is concerned. Hence the effects of engage
 ment with IT fashion on organizational legitimacy and
 performance deserve more detailed discussion next.

 Fashion Effect on Legitimacy

 Organizations considered legitimate not only enjoy social
 approval, but also gain access to resources, increasing their
 chances of survival and growth. In contrast, organizations
 lacking legitimacy are likely to disappear (Aldrich and Fiol
 1994). Meyer and Rowan (1977) noted that organizations
 seek legitimacy by incorporating practices that match widely
 accepted cultural models embodying common beliefs.
 Building upon and extending from this argument, manage
 ment fashion theorists claim that an important common belief
 in an organization's environment is the belief that certain
 innovations are efficient and at the forefront of practice, even
 though these innovations have not yet been widely adopted.
 Organizations sensitive to such belief will engage with current
 fashions and gain legitimacy.

 Studies of organizational legitimacy traditionally focused on
 coercive, dichotomous measures, such as approvals of regula
 tory agencies (Deephouse 1996) and accreditation (Westphal
 et al. 1997), that are based on negative deviation from goals
 or standards. More recently, Staw and Epstein (2000) argued
 that once an organization has met the standards and expecta

 tions specified by its external stakeholders, it can still improve
 its legitimacy by pursuing valued ends such as corporate
 reputation (Fombrun 1996). Because this normative view of
 legitimacy has far more potential to apply to a broad cross
 section of organizations than the coercive view, which is most
 applicable to highly regulated industries, this study follows
 Staw and Epstein's approach to examine corporate reputation
 as a means to gaining organizational legitimacy.

 Staw and Epstein found that firms engaging with TQM in its
 fashion period (the first half of the 1990s) significantly
 augmented their reputation in the eyes of external stake
 holders. Interestingly, beyond the effect of firms' actual
 adoption and implementation of TQM, they found that co
 occurrences of companies' names and TQM in the news made
 independent contribution to the increased legitimacy. Similar
 to what Westphal and Zajac (1998) uncovered in the case of
 LTIPs, the finding suggests that some organizations could
 improve their legitimacy by informationally associating
 themselves with TQM in discourse even without adopting or
 implementing TQM. While these studies were among the
 first to directly assess the effect of fashion on organizational
 legitimacy, they only tested the effect of fashions for
 administrative techniques. In investigating the effects of IT
 fashions on organizational legitimacy, the first two hypoth
 eses are raised:

 HI: Organizations gain in reputation when they are infor

 mationally associated with IT in fashion.

 H2: Organizations gain in reputation when they adopt and

 implement IT in fashion.

 Besides the impact of fashion on an organization's legitimacy
 in its external environment, Staw and Epstein suggested that
 a similar effect might also exist inside each organization. In
 contrast to external legitimacy as indicated by organizational
 reputation, internal legitimacy is the collective perception
 held by an organization's internal stakeholders that their
 organization's leaders manage the organization appropriately
 according to internal rules, norms, and values. While each
 organization's internal environment always has its unique
 ness, according to institutional theory, most organizations
 seek to align their internal environment with the external
 environment to gain external legitimacy (Scott 2003). Rules,
 norms, and values inside an organization are thus largely
 congruent with those outside it. Hence, an organization's
 engagement with innovations in fashion may not only
 increase its external legitimacy, but also raise the internal
 legitimacy of the organizational leaders who make the key
 decision to engage with innovations in fashion. Indeed, Staw
 and Epstein found that firms with both informational and

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 67

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 material engagement with management fashions had signi
 ficant, positive effects on executive compensation, even
 absent any effect on firm performance. For IT fashions, one
 might make a similar argument that leaders engaging their
 organizations with trendy IT might obtain higher pay
 approved by their organizations' internal stakeholders.
 Accordingly, another two hypotheses are raised.

 H3: Organizational leaders are compensated more when
 their organizations are informationally associated with
 IT in fashion.

 H4: Organizational leaders are compensated more when
 their organizations adopt and implement IT in fashion.

 Fashion Effect on Performance

 Informationally associating an organization with innovations
 that are in fashion and collectively believed to improve
 performance may not actually improve the organization's
 performance. According to Pfeffer and Sutton (2000),
 because performance is an outcome of what people in the
 organization do, not of what they say or know, information or
 knowledge about how to improve performance needs to be
 turned into material actions and it is these actions that actually
 improve performance. Therefore, an organization's informa
 tional link to IT in fashion should have no direct effect on
 performance.

 However, when an organization's engagement with innova
 tions in fashion becomes material?when the firm invests in,
 adopts, and implements the innovation?will there be any
 effect on performance? Research from the economic
 rationalistic perspective has traditionally focused on the
 relationship between IT spending and performance. Initially,
 in the early 1980s, researchers found scant evidence of
 performance improvement despite dramatic increase in
 computing power and spending and hence coined the term
 productivity paradox. Since then Brynjolfsson and colleagues
 have demonstrated that substantial firm- and task-level
 evidence for the positive link between IT investment and
 performance often lagged for several years (e.g., Aral et al.
 2006; Brynjolfsson and Hitt 1996). It has been argued that
 "the changes in business processes needed to realize the
 benefits of IT may have taken some time to implement"
 (Brynjolfsson and Hitt 1996, p. 556). Notwithstanding the
 positive and temporal link between IT investment and
 performance, studies on IT productivity do not usually differ
 entiate the technologies by the stage of their development and
 diffusion. IT productivity research does not tell whether the
 positive link between general IT spending and performance

 68 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

 also holds for the relationship between investment in IT
 fashions and performance.

 On the other hand, innovation research from the institutional
 perspective is sensitive to the various stages in the develop
 ment and diffusion of an innovation because the innovation's
 own legitimacy, the core concern in institutional research,
 changes over time in different development and diffusion
 stages. However, institutional research still falls short of
 theorizing or empirically testing the effects of legitimacy
 based adoption on performance. In fact, the relationship
 between legitimacy-based adoption and performance stands
 at the center of the debate among institutional theorists. It has
 been argued that organizations' quest for legitimacy often
 conflicts with their pursuit of economic performance and thus
 it is best the two activities be decoupled (Meyer and Rowan
 1977). Further, Meyer and Rowan (1977) argued that the
 quest for legitimacy simply entails that firms appear to con
 form to taken-for-granted norms without having to implement
 the norms in action (e.g., informational association with the
 innovations in fashion), as if the norms were mere myths and
 ceremonies. Other institutional theorists, however, have con
 tended that conformance to institutional norms must generate
 actions (e.g., adoption and implementation of the innovations
 in fashion) (Tolbert and Zucker 1996). Further, the implica
 tions of such legitimacy-motivated actions are rather incon
 clusive. On the one hand, any particular organization's
 legitimacy seeking activities such as its adoption and imple
 mentation of innovations in fashion would draw resources
 away from performance-enhancing activities and thus
 influence performance negatively. On the other hand, a posi
 tive effect of fashion on performance seems plausible: Gain
 in legitimacy may help organizations secure valued resources,
 which enable better economic performance (Scott 1995).

 This theoretical ambiguity seems to manifest itself in the
 reality of IT management. Seeing everyone else is doing it,
 some organizations adopt the most hyped IT only to find out
 that it is useless in improving performance. Others adopt the
 same innovation around the same time, implement and assim
 ilate it, and gain significant benefits. Further, an essential
 component of an IT fashion is the collective belief that an
 innovation will efficiently solve an important organizational
 problem. This collective belief, beyond anecdotal success
 stories, has never been substantiated at any level of IT
 practice. Thus, a pair of competing hypotheses are raised.

 H5a: Adopting and implementing IT in fashion leads to

 lower organizational performance.

 H5b: Adopting and implementing IT in fashion leads to

 higher organizational performance.

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Figure 1. Research Framework with Main Constructs and Hypotheses

 Figure 1 illustrates the research framework showing all con
 structs and hypotheses.

 Methods ^^??^K???????I?K???????????U

 To test these hypotheses, several methodological features
 have been borrowed from the Staw and Epstein (2000) study
 of popular administrative techniques. These common features
 make it possible to compare the results of this study with
 theirs, possibly extending management fashion theory for IT
 research and practice. In this section, the methods that were
 drawn from their study are noted, as well as where and why
 different methods were used.

 Sample of Organizations

 Initially this study drew a sample of 109 large U.S.-based
 companies that meet the following criteria. First, they
 appeared on the Fortune 500 list between 1994 and 2003 at
 least five times. Fortune magazine compiles and publishes
 the ranking of American corporations (by gross revenue) that
 make their financial data publicly available. Thousands of
 companies have appeared on the list at least once. Firms
 more frequently on the list are more likely to meet the
 following two criteria. Second, the company names survived
 mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures between 1994 and 2003.

 This criterion made it relatively straightforward to search the
 company names in discourse over time. Third, data on these
 companies (as described below) can be obtained. Together
 these criteria ensure a suitable sample size that balances
 between the data collection effort and sufficient statistical
 power for the subsequent regression analysis. Firms in the
 sample, with average total assets of approximately US$36
 billion and net annual sales of US$16 billion, belonged to 14
 industries. Table 1 shows that the sample is diverse and
 largely representative of the Fortune 500 companies in terms
 of size, performance, and industry composition.

 IT Fashions

 A list of 83 innovations with intensive IT components was
 compiled by reviewing 23 information systems textbooks
 published between 1983 and 2002. Specifically, the inno
 vations on the list are IT-intensive concepts that appeared in
 the indices of more than two of the IS textbooks. This
 criterion allowed elimination of idiosyncratic concepts
 included by only one or two textbooks and focused attention
 on innovations that enjoyed at least some visibility at various
 points of time in the two decades (1983-2002). The list was
 then given to five senior IT practitioners and five senior
 professors in IS, all having at least 20 years of experience in
 IT practice or research. Each of them was asked to select
 from the list the innovations that he/she once believed to be
 new, efficient, and at the forefront of IT practice, regardless

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 69

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Table 1. Descriptive Statistics of Sample Firms and Fortune 500 Firms

 Average if Sample Firms

 in this Study

 Fortune 500 Average

 (1994-2003)

 Average total assets (in billions)
 Average net sales (in billions)
 Average return on assets (ROA)
 Average return on equity (ROE)
 Average return on sales (ROS)
 Industries

 Manufacturing
 Finance and Insurance
 Retail
 Utilities
 Information
 Other

 of the innovation's actual destiny (such as institutionalization
 or collective abandonment). Their independent selections
 generated a list of 28 innovations, each of which was selected
 by at least 8 out of the 10 senior practitioners and professors.
 Their collective beliefs generated these candidates for IT
 fashions. Next, articles that included each innovation (by its
 full name or variant labels) in either the title or the abstract
 each year (between 1971 and 2002) in the ABI/Inform Global
 database (a frequently used source for discourse analysis
 containing over 2,700 periodicals) were counted.3 In this
 way, a discourse curve with yearly article counts for each
 innovation was constructed. Most management and IT
 fashion researchers describe a distinctive lifecycle for fashion
 discourse: A period of dormancy is followed by a sudden but
 short-lived surge, resulting in an unusually peaked curve
 (Abrahamson and Fairchild 1999). According to this descrip
 tion, while the discourse curves for most topics are wave-like,
 it is the unusual peakedness that indicates the presence of
 fashion. The kurtosis, a widely accepted measure for the
 peakedness of the probability distribution of a random
 variable, of each discourse curve was then calculated.
 Eighteen curves turned out leptokurtic (with positive kurtosis
 values and more acute peaks than that of a normal curve),
 while the other ten curves' kurtosis values were not signi
 ficantly different from that of a bell-shaped normal curve.
 Essentially, the zero point of the kurtosis was used as a
 threshold: A positive kurtosis suggests the presence of

 3 Although these innovations were selected from textbooks published between
 1983 and 2002, some innovations had appeared before 1983. To visualize
 the entire discourse curves of these innovations, we searched each innovation
 in the ABI from 1971, the database's inaugural year.

 70 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

 $35.22
 $16.23
 2.37%
 6.06%
 14.70%

 26.00%
 20.00%
 11.00%
 9.00%
 4.00%
 30.00%

 $34.25
 $14.96
 2.45%
 5.97%
 14.84%

 32.00%
 18.00%
 13.00%
 8.00%
 5.00%
 23.00%

 fashion, while a zero or negative kurtosis suggests absence.
 While this approach may appear a little mechanical, the com
 parison between IT fashions and non-fashion IT innovations
 discussed later suggests that the threshold has some validity.
 Among the 18 innovations with leptokurtic curves, 8 are more
 recent, coming in fashion between 1993 and 2002. For their
 higher relevance to recent and current practice, these eight IT
 innovations, listed in Table 2 with a brief definition for each,
 were chosen as the focus of this study.

 As Table 2 shows, the degree of "IT-ness vs. administrative
 ness" varies across the innovations, with data warehouse and
 groupware on the technical end, and business process re
 engineering (BPR) and knowledge management (KM) on the
 administrative end. Nonetheless, both BPR and KM are IT
 intensive: First, the conceptualization and implementation of
 each innovation has IT as a strong, indispensable component
 from the beginning of and throughout its diffusion. Second,
 the administrative component of each innovation is enabled
 by IT. Third, major IT projects have been conducted under
 the banner of BPR or KM. For example, in their original
 formulation of the BPR innovation, Hammer and Champy
 (1993) observed that one major theme emerging from success
 ful reengineering projects is the creative use of IT. They
 further argued that the agent that enabled companies to "break
 their old rules and create new process models was modern
 information technology" (p. 50). Partially because of the
 daunting task of developing new information systems to
 support new business processes, many organizations turned to
 packaged IT (such ERP and CRM) with specific embedded
 processes as their means to do BPR (Davenport 2008).
 Therefore, even if BPR and KM have significant adminis
 trative connotations, their strong IT component differentiates

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Table 2. Information Technology Innovations and Their Fashion Periods

 Definition from Dictionary.com

 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001  2002

 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Application ser
 vice provider
 (ASP)
 Business process
 reengineering
 (BPR)

 A service (usually a business) that provides remote
 access to an application program across a network
 protocol, typically HTTP.

 Any radical change in the way in which an organiza
 tion performs its business activities. BPR involves a
 fundamental rethink of the business processes
 followed by a redesign of business activities to
 enhance all or most of its critical measures (costs,
 quality of service, staff dynamics, etc.).

 /

 Customer rela
 tionship manage
 ment (CRM)

 Enterprise-wide software applications that allow com
 panies to manage every aspect of their relationship
 with a customer. The aim of these systems is to assist
 in building lasting customer relationships (to turn
 customer satisfaction into customer loyalty).

 Data warehouse
 (DW)

 Any system for storing, retrieving, and managing large
 amounts of data. Data warehouse software often
 includes sophisticated compression and hashing
 techniques for fast searches, as well as advanced
 filtering. A data warehouse is often a relational
 database containing a recent snapshot of corporate
 data and optimized for searching.

 E-commerce

 Commerce that is transacted electronically, as over
 the Internet.

 Enterprise
 resource planning
 (ERP)

 A process by which a company (often a manufacturer)
 manages and integrates the important parts of its
 business. An ERP management information system
 integrates areas such as planning, purchasing, inven
 tory, sales, marketing, finance, human resources, etc.

 Groupware

 Knowledge
 management
 (KM)

 Software that integrates work on a single project by
 several concurrent users at separated workstations.

 The technologies involved in creating, disseminating,
 and utilizing knowledge data.

 /The innovation was in fashion that year.

 them from the relatively pure administrative techniques, such
 as TQM, self-managed teams, and employee empowerment
 that Staw and Epstein (2000) studied.

 Figure 2 depicts the discourse curves of the eight IT inno
 vations examined in this study. These innovations came in
 fashion and peaked in popularity at different times and thus
 their fashion periods are different, albeit overlapping.
 Because the fashion period for an innovation is when the
 collective belief about its efficiency and currency is prevalent,
 this study operationalized the fashion period notion with the
 last third of the upswing phase of the discourse curve. For
 example, the upswing of the ERP discourse curve lasted for
 about nine years from 1991 through 1999. Therefore, ERP's

 fashion period is 1997-1999. Sensitivity analysis on the
 operationalization of the fashion period showed that the
 conclusions based on the findings reported here held when
 fashion period was defined as any segment between the
 middle point of the upswing phase and the peak of the
 discourse curve. Other segments of the curve do not seem to
 represent the theoretical meaning of the fashion period. For
 example, in the first half of the upswing phase, the collective
 belief about the focal innovation is not yet prevalent. And
 after the peak, the collective belief that the focal innovation
 is new and efficient faces increasing challenges and disagree
 ment in the discourse. Table 2 also indicates the fashion
 periods of the eight innovations.

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 71

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 180

 | 160
 E

 * 140

 120

 .1 100

 80

 2 60

 40

 < 20

 Groupware^ #

 /

 ERP/\ t

 E-Commerce

 \CRM

 I? t

 2000

 1800

 1600

 1400

 1200

 1000

 800

 600

 400

 200

 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003

 0

 ? - Business Process Reengineering (BPR)

 Knowledge Management (KM)

 -Groupware

 - Application Service Provider (ASP)

 Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
 Data Warehouse
 Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
 E-Commerce

 Because ABI itself has grown dramatically over the years, the total number of articles on each
 innovation each year was adjusted to factor out the variations in the total number of articles
 indexed by ABI. The number of articles on each innovation in a certain year was multiplied by
 the ratio between the total number of articles indexed in 1986 and the total number of articles
 indexed that year.

 Figure 2. Discourse Curves of Selected IT Innovations

 Engagement with IT Fashions

 Two variables measure a firm's engagement with IT fashions:
 association with IT fashions (for informational engagement)
 and investment in IT fashions (for material engagement). The
 former measures the informational link between a company
 and IT fashions in discourse. Specifically, in AB I/Inform and
 the 50 largest U.S. newspapers indexed by Dow Jones'
 Factiva, for each year, articles were counted that mentioned
 both the name of a company in the sample and any of the
 eight IT innovations if the innovation was in its fashion period
 that year.4 For example, data warehouse and groupware were
 in fashion in 1995. The company Motorola was mentioned in

 4Although an IT and an organization appear in the same article often because
 the organization adopts the IT, unlike Ranganathan and Brown (2006), the
 data was not limited to adoption announcements in this study mainly because
 the objective was to use the same measure as Staw and Epstein (2000) so that
 the results would be comparable.

 72 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

 39 articles where either data warehouse or groupware was
 also mentioned. Unlike the Staw and Epstein (2000) study,
 where the innovations studied were the same each year
 throughout the examination window, this study examines
 innovations only when they were in fashion, and so the
 number of innovations in fashion varies each year. For
 example, only two innovations were in fashion in 1995 and
 four were in fashion in 2000. This time-varying factor and
 the different scopes of the innovations made the total volume
 of IT fashion discourse fluctuate significantly from year to
 year. Therefore, the yearly raw counts of articles mentioning
 companies and innovations must be normalized to factor out
 such fluctuation. Accordingly, the yearly article counts
 obtained from the previous step were divided by the total
 number of articles that mentioned any IT innovations in
 fashion that year. For the example just mentioned, because
 there were 1,884 articles in 1995 in which data warehouse or
 groupware appeared at least once, Motorola's proportion of
 citations is then 2.07 percent (39 divided by 1,884). The

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 result was farther divided by firm size, measured as the
 average of normalized sales and assets, since firm size is
 highly correlated with the firm's proportion of citations in the
 fashion discourse (r = .81). The resulting measure, associa
 tion with IT fashions, is then free from the multicollinearity
 problem when this variable and firm size are both included in
 regression equations. Interestingly, firm size is also highly
 correlated with annual total citations received by each firm in
 the sample (r = .85). The high correlation means that each
 sample firm's coverage in the press was largely proportionate
 to its size, irrespective of its varying degree of impression
 management effort. Hence the association measure, already
 adjusted for firm size, was not severely subject to corporate
 impression management in the media.5

 In addition to informational engagement, to measure these
 firms' material engagement with IT fashions, data was
 collected on each firm's budgeted spending/investment in
 each of the IT innovations in its fashion period from the
 annual IT spending surveys conducted by IDC (a technology
 media and research company). Every year IDC interviews the
 CIOs (chief information officers) or vice president for IT at
 firms of various sizes worldwide to survey their IT usage and
 investment plans. IDC claims that this survey is the largest of
 its kind, with an average of approximately 1,000 complete
 responses and an average response rate of 68 percent annually
 in the past decade. As part of the survey, IDC provides
 definitions of mutually exclusive categories of IT and
 respondents are asked to provide their annual budgets in each
 category. The categories changed over time, but all of the
 eight IT innovations examined in this study were among the
 categories in the IDC survey at least during the innovations'
 fashion periods. For example, IDC initiated the ASP
 (application service provider) category in 1997 and eliminated
 it in 2003. According to the definition of fashion periods
 shown in Table 2, ASP was briefly in fashion in the year 2000
 and thus only the ASP investment in 2000 was relevant to this
 study. A firm's spending on all IT innovations in fashion
 each year was then summed up as the firm's annual
 investment in IT fashions. For example, in 1995 Firm X
 budgeted $Y for acquiring, implementing, and maintaining
 data warehousing, and allocated $Z for groupware.6 Since
 data warehousing and groupware were the two innovations in
 fashion that year, Firm X's investment in IT fashions in 1995
 was $Y+$Z.

 The association and investment variables capture a firm's
 informational and material (respectively) engagements with
 IT fashions. As previously argued, although informational
 association sometimes corresponds to the material investment,
 the rhetoric and the reality do not always connect. Causes for
 such disconnect may range from simple reporting errors to
 strategic impression management. More generally, even if a
 firm was reported to have adopted an IT and it actually
 adopted the IT, the level of reporting and the level of invest
 ment did not perfectly correlate. This observation suggests
 that, ceteris paribus, firms receiving the same number of
 mentions with an IT may not have invested the same amount
 of money in the IT, possibly caused by inadvertent or
 strategic impression management. Accordingly, we use these
 two related but separate variables and assess their differen
 tiated influences on the dependent variables.

 Dependent Variables

 Corporate reputation and executive compensation are
 indicators for external legitimacy and internal legitimacy
 (respectively). The reputation scores for the sample com
 panies were retrieved from Fortune's "America's Most
 Admired Companies" lists from 1994 to 2003. Every year,
 Fortune sends surveys to approximately 10,000 executives,
 outside directors, and financial analysts asking them to rank
 companies ' reputation by industry. The average response rate
 has been between 40 and 50 percent. Executive compensation
 is measured by the CEO's salary and bonus, retrieved from
 COMPUSTAT's Execucomp database. This measure is
 appropriate for two reasons: First, the same measure makes
 it possible to directly compare the results from this study with
 those from the Staw and Epstein (2000) study. Second, IT
 has evolved beyond the role of mere infrastructure in support
 of business strategy to become the business strategy itself,
 hence a firm's top executive is expected to have the top
 responsibility of IT investment and innovation (Earl and
 Feeny 2000). For the purpose of comparison with the Staw
 and Epstein study, firm performance is measured by the
 summation of normalized return on assets (ROA), return on
 equity (ROE), and return on sales (ROS).

 Control Variables

 5Staw and Epstein used two association measures: one adjusted for firm size
 and the other adjusted for the firm's total media exposure. Since the two
 factors are highly correlated in this study, only one association measure
 (adjusted for both) is necessary.

 6The agreement with IDC allows sharing the data only in aggregate form.

 Firm size may have direct effects on dependent variables
 (especially corporate reputation and executive compensation),
 so firm size was included in all regression equations as a
 control variable. In addition, industry performance was used
 as a control variable in models predicting firm performance,
 which itself is a control variable for corporate reputation. For

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 73

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 executive compensation, as Staw and Epstein suspected that
 an organization's internal stakeholders might compensate
 their leader according to how outsiders judge the organization
 in terms of its reputation, corporate reputation was included
 in all regression models predicting CEO pay. Other control
 variables included previously well-researched predictors such
 as board size, CEO tenure, proportion of inside directors,
 whether the CEO was also chair of the board, and CEO pay
 in previous years. Data of these control variables came from
 such sources as Fortune 500 (for industry performance),
 COMPUSTAT Execucomp database (for CEO tenure and
 pay), and the Standard and Poor's Register of Corporations,
 Directors, and Executives (for other control variables).
 Further, to control for other possible effects varying according
 to time and the industries and geographic region in which the
 organizations operate, dummy variables for the years, the
 sample firms' primary industries, and the regions of their
 headquarters were included in all regression equations. All
 models were estimated with the multiple regression procedure
 in Stata.7 Table 3 summarizes all variables and their opera
 tional definitions except the dummy variables.

 Results

 Table 4 shows the correlations among the main variables in
 this study. The dummies were omitted from the table for
 brevity. The significant correlation between firm performance
 and reputation was expected and caused no multicollinearity
 problem as the dependent variables were entered into separate
 equations. The strong correlation between association and
 investment suggests that firms investing more in IT inno
 vations in fashion are more likely to be mentioned together
 with the innovation in discourse. The relevant checks (eigen
 analysis, tolerance values, variance inflation factors) did not
 find any evidence of multicollinearity due to this correlation
 or correlations among all other variables in every regression
 model to be discussed below. Additionally, to detect the
 potential presence of autocorrelation among error terms in the
 following regression analysis, the Breusch-Godfrey test was
 used; this test is suitable for models including lagged
 dependent variables (Breusch 1978; Godfrey 1978). Neither
 the chi-squared form nor the F form of the Breusch-Godfrey
 test showed signs of autocorrelation in the regression models.

 7The "cluster" option was used to correct the estimated standard errors,
 accounting for the lack of independence across observations for each
 company.

 74 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

 Organizational Legitimacy

 Nine regression models were run to examine the effect of IT
 fashions on corporate reputation, the indicator of external
 legitimacy (see Table 5). The dependent variable was lagged
 one year behind all independent and control variables in
 Models 1, 2, and 3. Since it is also possible to argue that the
 fashion effect on reputation might last longer than a year, in
 Models 4,5, and 6, corporate reputation was lagged two years
 behind the independent variables, and in Models 7, 8, and 9,
 reputation was lagged three years behind the independent
 variables. All models included the control variables (dum
 mies not shown in the table). Models 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, and 8
 examined only one of the two independent variables (asso
 ciation or investment); Models 3, 6, and 9 included both
 independent variables (association and investment). The
 results confirmed that a firm's prior performance and prior
 reputation were significant predictors of corporate reputation.
 Models 1,2, and 3 show that both association with and invest
 ment in IT fashions in Year t-1 were significantly and
 positively associated with corporate reputation in Year t and
 that each variable explained a significant amount of variance
 beyond that of the other independent and control variables.
 In contrast, Models 4 through 9 indicate that neither asso
 ciation with nor investment in IT fashions had significant
 effect on corporate reputation two or three years later, sug
 gesting that the effect of fashions on corporate reputation
 disappeared after a year.

 A similar set of regression was run on executive compen
 sation, the indicator of internal legitimacy. Table 6 shows
 that firm size was a consistent predictor of the salary and
 bonus a firm gave to its top executive. Besides the effects of
 control variables, Models 1,2, and 3 show that both associa
 tion with and investment in IT fashions in Year t-1 were
 significantly positively correlated with the CEO pay in Year t.
 Again, each independent variable explained a significant and
 unique portion of the variance in the executive compensation.
 As the fashion effect on corporate reputation disappeared after
 one year, the fashion effect on CEO pay also vanished
 (Models 4 through 9 in Table 6).

 Organizational Performance

 Table 7 shows the effect of IT fashion on organizational
 performance, measured by a normalized average of returns on
 sales, equity, and assets. As expected, industry average per
 formance and firm performance a year before consistently
 explained a firm's current performance. Models 1, 4, and 7
 shows that association with IT fashions in discourse had
 negative effects on performance one and three years later, but

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Table 3. Operational Definitions of Variables

 Operational Definition

 Dependent Variables
 Firm performance
 Reputation
 CEO pay (in millions of US $)

 Independent Variables

 Association with IT fashions

 Investment in IT fashions (in
 millions of US $)

 Control Variables

 Firm size
 Industry performance
 Proportion inside directors
 Board size
 CEO tenure
 CEO as board chair

 Sum of normalized returns on assets, equity, and sales
 Reputation scores retrieved from Fortune's "America's Most Admired Companies"
 CEO's salary and bonus retrieved from COMPUSTAT

 Number of articles that mention both the focal firm's name and any IT innovation
 in fashion that year, divided by the total number of articles that mention any IT
 innovation in fashion that year, and divided by firm size (measured as the average
 of normalized sales and assets)
 The focal firm's annual budget for IT innovations in fashion that year

 Average of normalized sales and assets
 Average of normalized sales and assets in the focal firm's primary industry
 Percentage of directors of board who also serve as executives of the focal firm
 Number of people on the focal firm's board of directors
 Number of years the current CEO has worked for the focal firm
 Whether the chairperson of the board also serves as the CEO of the local firm

 Table 4. Correlations Among Major Variables
 Mean  S.D.

 10

 Dependent Variables (t)

 Firm performance1
 Reputation
 CEO pay (in millions of US $)

 Independent Variables (t-1)

 Association with IT fashions

 Investment in IT fashions (in
 millions of US $)

 Control Variables (t-1)

 Firm size1

 Industry performance1
 Proportion inside directors
 Board size
 CEO tenure
 CEO as board chair
 = 931

 2.7E-17

 5.50
 3.22

 0.66
 0.80
 1.18

 0.40*
 0.10

 0.06

 4.5E-16

 0.84

 0.79
 1.22

 -0.13
 -0.26*

 0.28*
 0.14

 0.17
 0.25

 0.45*

 3.4E-17
 3.8E-17

 0.42
 12.33
 7.44
 0.88

 0.86
 0.91
 0.85
 2.98
 5.89
 0.38

 -0.04
 0.47*
 0.03
 -0.09
 -0.13
 -0.05

 0.18
 0.37*
 0.03
 0.14
 -0.12
 0.05

 0.57**
 0.16
 -0.05
 0.06
 -0.22
 -0.01

 -0.03
 0.13
 -0.08
 -0.09
 -0.14
 -0.12

 0.12
 -0.05
 -0.12
 -0.05
 -0.11
 -0.08

 -0.04
 -0.06
 0.10
 -0.15
 -0.12

 -0.06
 0.06
 -0.04
 -0.06

 -0.13
 -0.14
 0.03

 0.06
 -0.13  0.27*

 t = 1994, 1995, ... 2003
 *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; two-tailed tests.
 Variable has been normalized around mean of 0.

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

 75

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Table 5. Effects of Information Technology Fashions on Corporate Reputation in Year t

 1

 6

 8

 Control Variables

 Firm performance (t-1)

 Firm size (t-1)

 Prior corporate reputation (t-1)

 Prior corporate reputation (t-2)

 Prior corporate reputation (t-3)

 Independent Variables

 Association with IT fashions (t-1 )

 Investment in IT fashions (t-1)

 Association with IT fashions (t-2)

 Investment in IT fashions (t-2)

 Association with IT fashions (t-3)

 Investment in IT fashions (t-3)

 0.123**
 (0.041)
 0.166*
 (0.086)
 0.557***
 (0.080)

 0.290***
 (0.089)
 0.086*
 (0.047)
 0.503**
 (0.208)

 0.258**
 (0.104)
 0.074
 (0.046)
 0.440**
 (0.184)

 0.117**
 (0.044)
 0.142
 (0.090)

 0.288***
 (0.093)
 0.079
 (0.052)

 0.270**
 (0.095)
 0.089
 0.057)

 0.115**
 (0.049)
 0.132
 (0.092)

 0.256**
 (0.084)
 0.174
 (0.109)

 0.589**
 (0.220)

 0.499**
 (0.202)

 0.520*
 (0.224)

 0.552**
 (0.196)

 0.529**
 (0.203)

 0.442***
 (0.130)

 0.516**
 (0.169)
 0.664**
 (0.224)

 0.509**
 (0.208)

 0.437
 (0.298)

 0.419
 (0.288)
 0.478
 (0.299)

 0.496
 (0.302)

 0.430
 (0.322)

 0.336
 (0.288)
 0.231
 602

 0.679
 745

 0.594
 745

 0.733
 745

 0.309
 684

 0.252
 684

 0.332
 684

 0.244
 602

 t = 1994, 1995, ...2003
 *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; one-tailed tests.
 Standard errors are in parentheses.

 76  MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Table 6. Effects of Information Technology Fashions on CEO Pay (Salary and Bonus in Millions of US $)
 in Year t

 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 0.183
 (0.114)
 0.532**
 (0.185)
 -0.055
 (0.109)
 -0.022
 (0.028)
 -0.017*
 (0.008)
 0.677
 (0.444)
 0.029
 (0.022)

 0.166
 (0.101)
 0.489***
 (0.129)
 -0.059
 (0.201)
 -0.017
 (0.034)
 -0.011***
 (0.000)
 0.659
 (0.436)
 0.030
 (0.019)

 0.190
 (0.116)
 0.536**
 (0.194)
 -0.056
 (0.117)
 -0.021
 (0.031)
 -0.007
 (0.007)
 0.628
 (0.392)
 0.028
 (0.019)

 0.522**
 (0.119)

 0.518**
 (0.122)

 0.525**
 (0.124)

 0.323**
 (0.114)

 0.272**
 (0.092)
 0.045**
 (0.016)

 0.035**
 (0.014)

 Control Variables

 Firm performance (t-1 )

 Firm size (t-1 )

 Proportion inside directors (t-1)

 Board size (t-1)

 CEO tenure (t-1)

 CEO as board chair (t-1)

 Corporate reputation (t-1 )

 Corporate reputation (t-2)

 Corporate reputation (t-3)

 Prior CEO pay (t-1)

 Prior CEO pay (t-2)

 Prior CEO pay (t-3)

 Independent Variables

 Association with IT fashions (t-1 )

 Investment in IT fashions (t-1)

 Association with IT fashions (t-2)

 Investment in IT fashions (t-1)

 Association with IT fashions (t-3)

 Investment in IT fashions (t-3)

 0.176
 (0.132)
 0.497**
 (0.171)
 -0.059
 (0.081)
 -0.015
 (0.021)
 -0.025
 (0.029)
 0.631
 (0.390)

 0.166
 (0.112)
 0.518**
 (0.202)
 -0.058
 (0.097)
 -0.017
 (0.024)
 -0.017**
 (0.005)
 0.669*
 (0.386)

 0.152
 (0.102)
 0.494**
 (0.204)
 -0.051
 (0.092)
 -0.020
 (0.024)
 -0.019
 (0.013)
 0.545*
 (0.327)

 0.153
 (0.113)
 0.465**
 (0.188)
 -0.047
 (0.090)
 -0.016
 (0.029)
 -0.008
 (0.022)
 0.524
 (0.330)

 0.155
 (0.133)
 0.488**
 (0.184)
 -0.035
 (0.088)
 -0.018
 (0.022)
 -0.013
 (0.010)
 0.563
 (0.356)

 0.002
 (0.015)

 0.025
 (0.018)

 0.023
 (0.017)

 0.474**
 (0.143)

 0.435***
 (0.139)

 0.468**
 (0.153)

 0.013
 (0.011)

 0.016
 (0.010)

 0.578**
 (0.203)

 0.533**
 (0.199)

 0.117
 (0.100)

 0.106
 (0.087)
 0.014
 (0.019)

 0.025
 (0.021)

 -0.215
 (0.171)

 -0.002
 (0.006)
 0.205
 794

 0.422
 931

 0.440
 931

 0.489
 931

 0.324
 878

 0.339
 878

 0.405
 878

 0.225
 794

 t= 1994, 1995, ... 2003
 *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; one-tailed tests.
 Standard errors are in parentheses.

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

 77

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Table 7. Effects of Information Technology Fashions on Firm Performance in Year t

 Control Variables

 Industry performance (t-1)

 Firm size (t-1)

 Prior firm performance (t-1)

 Independent Variables

 Association with IT fashions (t-1)

 Investment in IT fashions (t-1)

 Association with IT fashions (t-2)

 Investment in IT fashions (t-2)

 Association with IT fashions (t-3)

 Investment in IT fashions (t-3)

 0.324**
 (0.125)
 -0.022
 (0.019)
 0.245**
 (0.085)

 0.288*
 (0.124)
 0.024
 (0.035)
 0.244**
 (0.089)

 0.311*
 (0.139)
 -0.037
 (0.035)
 0.227**
 (0.079)

 0.253
 (0.131)
 -0.018
 (0.014)
 0.283**
 (0.093)

 0.266*
 (0.115)
 -0.024
 (0.020)
 0.243*
 (0.112)

 6

 0.265*
 (0.134)
 -0.020
 (0.019)
 0.199*
 (0.086)

 8

 0.243*
 (0.096)
 0.047
 (0.043)
 0.206*
 (0.103)

 0.286**
 (0.105)
 0.011
 (0.008)
 0.216*
 (0.089)

 20.349
 (24.395)

 16.435
 (23.526)
 -4.353*
 (2.014)

 -5.341*
 (2.546)

 -5.340
 (3.497)

 -4.356
 (3.234)
 1.245
 (0.849)

 -0.340
 (0.235)

 -2.453
 (2.596)

 0.256
 931

 0.301
 931

 0.325
 931

 0.174
 878

 0.242
 878

 0.259
 878

 0.189
 794

 t = 1994, 1995, ... 2003
 *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 ; ***p < 0.001 ; two-tailed tests.
 Standard errors are in parentheses.

 Table 8. Summary of Regression Results

 Organizational Outcome

 in Year t

 Firm

 Performance

 Corporate
 Reputation

 Association with IT fashions (t-1)
 Association with IT fashions (t-2)
 Association with IT fashions (t-3)
 Investment in IT fashions (t-1)
 Investment in IT fashions (t-2)
 Investment in IT fashions (t-3)

 t= 1994, 1995, ... 2003
 n.s.: not significant
 +: significant, positive association
 -: significant, negative association

 n.s.
 n.s.
 n.s.

 n.s.
 +

 +
 n.s.
 n.s.
 +
 n.s.
 n.s.

 6.495**
 (2.055)
 0.325
 794

 CEO
 Pay
 +
 n.s.
 n.s.
 +
 n.s.
 n.s.

 the effect was not statistically significant. In contrast, firm
 performance in Year t was negatively correlated with firms'
 actual investment in IT fashions in Year t-1 (Models 2 and 3),
 largely uncorrelated with the investment in Year t-2 (Models
 5 and 6), but was positively correlated with the investment in
 Year t-3 (Models 8 and 9).

 Table 8 summarizes the main findings from the study. First,
 firms associating themselves more frequently with and

 investing more in IT innovations in fashion tended to have
 increased reputation and CEO compensation the next year.
 These positive effects support hypotheses 1-4. Second, how
 ever, the positive effects of IT fashions on corporate reputa
 tion and CEO compensation disappeared after a year. Third,
 firms strengthening their informational association with IT
 innovations in fashion did not increase or decrease perfor
 mance. Finally, firms investing more in IT innovations in
 fashion tended to have lower performance in a year and higher

 78 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 performance in three years. Therefore, hypotheses 5a and 5b,
 which suggest opposite relationships between IT fashions and
 performance, are supported, but in different time frames.

 Discussion HHHHH

 tinuous spectrum rather than a dichotomy. One may argue
 that a self-reported IT budget is another form of discourse
 because (1) the budgeted money may never be spent and
 (2) even if an organization follows its budgets to purchase
 new IT, implementation may be delayed or canceled (Fichman
 and Kemerer 1999). Nonetheless, it is reasonable to assume
 that having a line item for ERP in the IT budget suggests a
 material step that an organization takes from just talking about
 ERP toward implementation of ERP. On the other hand, the
 lack of effect of corporate reputation on CEO pay in Table 6
 suggests that internal stakeholders in the sample firms did not
 compensate their leaders according to corporate reputation.
 Fashion effect on executive compensation was thus direct and
 beyond the effect on corporate reputation.

 Are organizations that follow IT fashions admired more? Yes.
 Companies are considered more reputable when they are
 informationally linked to and invest in IT innovations in
 fashion, even if these innovations lead to sagging performance
 (at least temporarily). Specifically, Model 3 in Table 5
 implies that when a firm increases its association with IT
 fashions by 1 percent, its reputation score will increase by
 0.52 percent in the following year. The model also implies
 that for every $1 million a firm invests in IT fashions, its
 reputation score will increase .66, a substantial jump given
 that the reputation's standard deviation is only .80.

 Do organizational leaders whose companies follow IT
 fashions receive higher pay? Yes. Model 3 in Table 6 implies
 that when a firm increases its association with IT fashions by
 1 percent, its CEO's compensation will increase 0.27 percent
 the next year. The model also implies that, in more material
 terms, for every $1 million a firm invests in IT fashions, the
 CEO will reap an approximately $45,000 gain in salary or
 bonus within a year, regardless of firm performance. These
 findings suggest that internal legitimacy?an organization's
 internal stakeholders' confidence in its leader?stems in part
 from the leader's advocacy of IT in fashion.

 While fashion association and investment had similar, positive

 influences on corporate reputation and executive compensa
 tion, these effects are distinctive from each other. On the one
 hand, as the hierarchical regression analysis (Models 1,2, and
 3 in Tables 5 and 6) shows, informational association with IT
 fashions significantly affected corporate reputation and CEO
 pay beyond the effect of investment in IT fashions. Similar to
 what Staw and Epstein (2000) and Westphal and Zajac (1998)
 found previously, the importance of discourse was demon
 strated here again by the evidence that mere informational
 association with IT fashions influenced organizations ' internal
 and external legitimacy. In the meantime, investment in IT
 fashions significantly affected corporate reputation and CEO
 pay beyond the effect of informational association with IT
 fashions. This finding means that, besides discourse, practice
 as manifested by organizations' material investment also had
 an impact on legitimacy. Hence in considering the effect of
 fashions on organizational legitimacy, it is useful to examine
 both what organizations say and what they do. It helps to
 conceptualize the discourse/practice distinction as a con

 Do organizations that follow IT fashions also perform better?
 It depends. Indeed, the answer depends on when performance
 is examined and whether organizations follow IT fashions
 informationally or materially. By following IT fashions infor
 mationally such as associating themselves with IT fashions in
 discourse, firms in the sample did not seem to perform better
 or worse one or more years down the line. One may suspect
 that informational association is simply reporting the inno
 vations' effect on performance after the fact. To address this
 possibility, an additional regression analysis was conducted
 using association with IT fashions as a lagging, rather than a
 leading, indicator of performance. The result showed no
 significant effect either. This is consistent with Staw and
 Epstein's finding that informational association with popular
 management innovations such as TQM, self-managed teams,
 and employee empowerment had little effect on firm
 performance. Both studies cast doubt on the success stories
 being told about innovations in fashion. These stories
 characteristically link popular innovations to high performing
 organizations and attribute these organizations' success to the
 adoption and use of the innovations that the storytellers
 promote. To the contrary, the empirical result here implies
 that the protagonists in these success stories did not improve
 performance before or after their appearance in the stories.
 This finding conflicts not only with what the success stories
 meant to promote, but also with the collective belief, held by
 those who tell or hear these stories, that the innovations are
 efficient in enhancing organizational performance. Although
 explaining the conflict is beyond the scope of this study, at
 least two accounts are worth discussion. First, what is said
 and written and what people hear and read about organizations
 and innovations might be completely unrelated to the actions
 organizations take. This account, however, carries the
 implausible implication that innovation discourse is entirely
 the product of vendors' marketing campaigns and/or corporate
 impression manipulation. Nor could the account explain the
 significantly positive correlation between informational

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 79

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 association and material investment (see Table 4). Second, as
 also suspected by Staw and Epstein, performance effects of
 the innovations in this study might have been found with
 proximal measures of performance such as product quality and
 customer satisfaction that are usually not reflected in distal,
 traditional accounting measures such as returns on sales,
 equity, and assets. While this account seems to explain the
 nonsignificant effect of fashion association on performance,
 it fails to explain the significant effect of fashion investment
 on performance, which is discussed next.

 by replacing IT fashion investment with total IT investment
 (based on total IT budget reported in IDC surveys) in the
 regression models. There was no evidence for significant
 effects of general IT spending on corporate reputation or CEO
 pay with one-, two-, or three-year lags. Nonetheless, evidence
 was found that general IT spending had a significant negative
 effect on performance one year later and then a significant
 positive effect on performance two years later. The result
 from this comparison suggests that the effects on legitimacy
 were unique to IT fashions.

 By following IT fashions materially such as investing in IT
 innovations in fashion, firms in the sample suffered declining
 performance in the following year and then their performance
 improved in the third year. This significant, reversing effect
 on performance presents a sharp contrast to Staw and
 Epstein's finding: implementation of TQM in Fortune 500
 companies during TQM's fashion period did not generate
 better or worse performance, even four or five years after the
 implementation. One might infer that the IT innovations are
 generally more efficient in enhancing performance than are
 administrative innovations. While caution is advised against
 such hasty inference because the comparison was imbalanced
 and the number of cases compared is small, a worthy research
 question is whether an IT in fashion tends to have a stronger
 impact on organizational performance than do popular
 administrative techniques. Nonetheless, the reversing pattern
 of the investment effect on performance is consistent with the
 IT productivity and implementation literature. As mentioned
 earlier, IT productivity researchers argue it takes time to
 implement the organizational structures and business pro
 cesses that complement the new IT before realizing the
 benefits of the technologies (Brynjolfsson and Hitt 1996).
 Similarly, research on ERP implementation found that many
 firms that implemented ERP systems suffered an initial
 performance dip because the new systems required new busi
 ness processes and thus were highly disruptive to the existing
 processes the firms relied on to perform (Ross and Vitale
 2000). The finding here implies that performance dip applied
 to not just ERP, but also seven other innovations that were in
 fashion at various points of time. After the firms invested in
 these IT in fashion, it took them on average three years to
 absorb the negative impacts, recover from the disruptions, and
 improve performance.

 How unique and robust are these findings to different speci
 fications of key design features of this study? One important
 feature is that this study examines special types of innova
 tions: those coming in and then out of fashion, as opposed to
 general IT spending examined by IT productivity studies for
 instance. To compare the effects of investments in IT fashions
 and general IT spending, an additional analysis was conducted

 Another key design feature of this study is the use of kurtosis
 threshold to identify IT fashions. Based on the characteristic
 patterns reported in previous research on administrative and
 IT fashions, innovations whose discourse curves are lepto
 kurtic (with positive kurtosis values) were selected. To see
 how well this selection method serves the purpose of this
 study, data on eight other innovations whose discourse curves
 followed relatively normal distribution (i.e., the kurtosis
 values are below zero) were also collected. The operational
 definition for the fashion period helps define the popular
 period for each of these non-fashion innovations. That is, the
 popular period for each non-fashion innovation is the last third
 of the upswing phase of its discourse curve. The same regres
 sion analysis was then performed to examine the effects of
 these non-fashion innovations on the same dependent vari
 ables. The results show that firms' engagement with these
 non-fashion innovations was not associated with any signi
 ficant effects on corporate reputation or CEO pay, regardless
 of the time lag between the independent and dependent
 variables and irrespective of the engagement form (informa
 tional association or material investments). However, the
 effects on firm performance were similar to those of IT
 fashions and general IT with worse performance in the near
 term and better performance in the long-term. The com
 parison of the results from analyses of IT fashions and non
 fashions suggests, again, that the effects on legitimacy were
 unique to IT fashions. Thus measuring the unusual peaked
 ness with kurtosis seems a reasonable method to detect the
 presence of fashion.

 Common to the original and additional analyses thus far is that
 various IT innovations were examined in aggregate terms.
 Data were collected on individual IT innovations but were
 summed up each year to derive aggregate measures such as
 yearly association with and investment in IT fashions. To see
 whether the fashion effect found in the aggregate terms
 existed for each individual innovation that was in fashion, the
 same analysis was performed on each of the eight innovations.
 The eight replications generated results similar to those pro
 duced in the aggregate analysis. These separate analyses of
 individual fashions has revealed that the investment in some

 80 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 fashions (ASP, data warehouse, groupware, and e-commerce)
 led to better performance in three years and the investment in
 others (BPR, CRM, ERP, and knowledge management) led to
 better performance in four years. Despite this nuance, the
 study's findings are robust in both aggregate and disaggregate
 terms. In addition, the consistent findings across the eight
 individual innovations suggest that the more administrative
 innovations such as BPR and KM with strong IT components
 behave much like IT innovations and unlike relatively pure
 administrative innovations such as TQM.8

 The findings, however, should be interpreted within the
 limitations of the empirical data and analysis. With respect to
 internal validity, as with any study relating organizational
 actions to outcomes, careful model specification reduces but
 does not eliminate endogeneity and unobserved heterogeneity
 concerns. Regarding endogeneity, one might worry that
 organizations' current performance or reputation may influ
 ence their engagement with IT fashions. Using an extended
 Durbin-Wu-Hausman test (Davidson and MacKinnon 1993),
 no significant endogeneity problems were detected in any of
 the regression models. Regarding unobserved heterogeneity,
 an infinite number of variables might plague the results. For
 example, the industries and geographic regions in which the
 sample firms operate might place differentiated weights on the
 pressures for legitimacy and performance. Some industry and
 region dummies turned out to be significant, implying that
 certain industries and the Northeast region of the United
 States were associated with significantly higher performance,
 reputation, and CEO pay. However, the effects of fashions on
 the outcome variables remain robust to the addition of the
 industry and region terms, suggesting that the industry or
 region theses appear to explain additional variance rather than
 accounting for the hypothesized relationships. With respect
 to external validity or generalizability, it should be noted that
 economic prosperity and the boom phase of the dot-com
 bubble dominated the examination window (1994-2003).
 Whether the effects of IT fashions found here extend beyond
 this period is a question that future research may address.
 Also, the sample represents very large U.S.-based business
 organizations. Therefore, it would be interesting to test the
 hypotheses in smaller organizations and in other countries,
 where the pressures for legitimacy and performance may vary
 significantly from those found in the sample, with explicit
 controls for endogeneity and unobserved heterogeneity in
 future research.

 g
 The results of the additional analysis on individual fashion and non-fashion
 innovations are available from the author upon request.

 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Conclusion

 When organizations chase the hottest IT, they bear the impact
 of fashion. Specifically, when firms associate themselves in
 the press with IT in fashion or invest in these technologies, in
 the short term they tend to be more admired and their chief
 executives tend to be compensated more. However, mere
 association with IT fashions does not lead to better economic
 performance at any time. In contrast, investment in IT in
 fashion leads to lower performance in the short term and then
 higher performance in the longer term. This 10-year study of
 109 large U.S. firms' engagement with 8 IT innovations
 demonstrates that the fashion phenomenon in IT matters to
 key organizational outcomes, thus justifying the research
 program to understand the emergence and evolution of
 fashions in IT practice.

 Implications for Research

 The findings here support a fashion explanation for the middle
 phase diffusion of IT innovations. Institutional theory holds
 that pressures for legitimacy lead organizations to follow
 institutionalized rules, expectations, and norms, which often
 direct attention away from task performance (Zucker 1987).
 Consistent with this theoretical view, the results of this study
 show that engagement with IT innovations collectively
 believed to be new, efficient, and cutting-edge could legiti
 mize companies and their leaders without positive perfor
 mance effects (at least in the short term). However, the long
 term, positive effect of investment in IT fashions on perfor
 mance seems to support those institutional theorists who
 argued against the decoupling of institutional norms and
 actions and contended that gain in legitimacy may help
 organizations secure valued resources, enabling better econo
 mic performance (Scott 1995). In fact, the long-term effect of
 IT fashions on performance is similar to that of non-fashions
 and IT investment in general, as revealed from the additional
 analysis discussed above. Therefore, the economic-rationa
 listic explanation may also apply here, in addition to the
 fashion explanation. To be more precise, the fashion explana
 tion applies to IT innovations that go through the fashion
 cycles, whereas the economic-rationalistic explanation applies
 to IT innovations regardless of whether they become fashions
 or not. When firms engage with IT fashions, they are con
 cerned with both short-term payoff in internal and external
 legitimacy and long-term performance. By differentiating
 between IT fashions and non-fashions and demonstrating their
 different impacts on organizational legitimacy, this study
 opens a line of inquiry to understand the trade-off between
 social approval and economic gain. For example, how much

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 81

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 short-term legitimacy gain could provide enough impetus for
 organizations to deviate from the pursuit of performance and
 adopt risky innovations without judicious implementation and
 thorough assimilation?

 in different fields. Does the progress clock run faster for IT
 than for administrative techniques? As more and more
 administrative techniques involve new IT, is the progress
 clock for these techniques getting increasingly in synch with
 that for IT?

 Tests of institutional theory in the context of innovation
 diffusion, however, traditionally focused on the later phase
 where innovations have already been widely accepted and
 taken for granted. This study, instead, provides evidence that
 the legitimacy-driven diffusion begins well before the later
 phase (Swanson and Ramiller 1997) and that fashion is the
 mechanism underlying the mid-phase of such institutional
 process. Instead of deriving from taken-for-granted practices,
 legitimacy stems from fashion, regardless of what the destiny
 of the innovation eventually turns out to be. Unlike institu
 tionalized practices that may serve as a relatively enduring
 basis for legitimacy, fashion is a temporary source of legiti
 macy because the collective belief of what is new, by its own
 nature, is transitory and fast changing. The fashion source of
 legitimacy, discovered in this study, not only expands the
 applicability of institutional theory to a much broader phase of
 innovation diffusion, but also helps resolve a paradox that
 Staw and Epstein (2000) observed: Some scholars use
 institutional theory to explain the persistence of procedures
 widely accepted and taken-for-granted while others use
 institutional theory to explain why organizations jump from
 one practice to the next. This study contributes to the under
 standing that both institutionalized practices and transitory
 fashions induce legitimacy.

 Fashion-induced legitimacy is apparently ephemeral. Staw
 and Epstein asked "how long the pursuit of popular manage
 ment techniques can legitimize a company or its leader in the
 absence of any performance effects" (p. 551). No more than
 a year in the context of IT, as this study reveals. The effects
 of IT fashions on corporate reputation and executive compen
 sation disappeared after one year and this result implies that,
 ceteris paribus, engagement with IT out of fashion, even just
 one year late, would not bring higher reputation or CEO pay.
 In contrast, Staw and Epstein found that the effects of
 management fashions on reputation and CEO pay lasted four
 or five years. While this comparison is based on a limited
 number of cases (three management innovations for about five
 years in Staw and Epstin's study versus eight IT innovations
 for a decade here), it is reasonable to conjecture that the shelf
 life of fashion-based legitimacy depends on the clock-speed
 of progress in each facet of organizational life. Essentially,
 the constant substitution of fashions is driven in part by the
 norms of progress, the generalized expectation that
 organizations employ newer and better means to achieve their
 goals (Abrahamson 1996). Pressures for progress may vary

 Questions like these touch on the interesting issue of the
 uniqueness and commonness of practices in different facets of
 organizations and the sensitive issue of the uniqueness and
 commonness of research programs in different disciplines of
 management such as Information Systems and Organizational
 Behavior. Unfortunately, we as scholars cannot yet fully
 engage in discussing these interesting and sensitive issues
 because most of us work within our own disciplines and it is
 difficult to compare studies across fields in part due to the
 different methods used in different disciplines. Fortunately,
 this difficulty can be overcome with relative ease, as long as
 researchers are willing to try methods learned from other
 fields. This study borrowed several design features that Staw
 and Epstein used in their study of popular administrative
 techniques and applied them to the study of IT fashions.
 These common features include, for instance, the general
 theoretical perspective (institutional theory), the structure of
 the research question and hypotheses, key variables and their
 measures, and the regression analysis. These common design
 features made it possible to directly compare the findings from
 the Staw and Epstein study and the current study, revealing
 striking differences in the consequences of innovations in IT
 and administrative practices. The most conspicuous pro
 perties unique to IT fashions are their short-lived effects on
 legitimacy and the first-negative-and-then-positive impacts on
 performance. Different findings point to different implica
 tions. For example, while the lack of performance effect of
 TQM Staw and Epstein found may suggest the conventional
 wisdom that fashion is trivial and thus can be ignored by
 performance-driven managers, IT innovations coming in
 fashion may potentially improve performance and thus should
 not be rashly dismissed.

 Besides the common design features shared by the Staw and
 Epstein study and this study, many key parameters of the two
 studies differ in most dimensions (problem, theory, context,
 method, and finding) of the research space (Berthon et al.
 2002). For example, methodologically, this study contributes
 a set of systematic methods scalable for studying far more
 fashionable innovations for much longer periods than those
 examined by Staw and Epstein (2000). Theoretically, with its
 explicit positioning of management fashion theory and signi
 ficant results, this study helps the theory shed the conventional
 myth that fashion is always trivial without performance
 implications. The different effects on performance found in

 82 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 this study and Staw and Epstein's study echo another distinc
 tion between management fashion and IT fashion examined in
 previous research. Studies of the organizational culture
 (Barley et al. 1988) and quality circles (Abrahamson and
 Fairchild 2001) found that academic discourse lagged behind
 and followed practitioner discourse on these management
 fashions. In contrast, academic and practitioner discourses on
 four IT fashions (office automation, computer-aided software
 engineering, BPR, and e-commerce) largely paralleled each
 other (Baskerville and Myers 2009). These extensions and
 differences not only encourage IS researchers to study IT
 fashion in a distinctive research stream, but also signify the
 fruits that the interaction between IS research and Organi
 zation Studies may bear (Orlikowski and Barley 2001).

 Implications for Practice

 Practically speaking, findings from this study seem to agree
 with what the jump-on-the bandwagon caricature connotes:
 Firms associated with the hottest IT in the press may not
 actually have higher performance and investing in hyped
 technologies may hurt firm performance, at least in the short
 run. Nonetheless, IT fashions do bring better reputation to
 organizations and higher pay to their leaders in the near term
 and improved performance in the longer term. Therefore,
 practitioners should not be urged to concentrate on the bottom
 line only and ignore fashionable IT, nor should they be given
 a green light to chase whatever is hottest in IT. Rather, this
 study invites a more realistic look at the people who lead their
 organizations to make the jump. Of course they are concerned
 with organizational performance, but they are also embedded
 in institutional networks (Teo et al. 2003) and they strive for
 social approval by internal and external stakeholders. This
 study suggests that organizational leaders include both legiti
 macy and performance in their calculation of the return on IT
 investment and prioritize their objectives accordingly. When
 gains in social approval outweigh shortfalls in economic
 performance, engaging in the hottest IT may be a sensible
 course of action, as long as organizational leaders understand
 the dynamic interaction between IT fashions and organiza
 tional outcomes that this study seeks to reveal. At a higher
 level, unlike popular administrative techniques that are often
 rejected or abandoned for lack of utility, fashionable IT
 innovations seem to have benefited organizations in the long
 run. This observation suggests that, compared to their man
 agement counterparts, either IT knowledge entrepreneurs are
 more skillful in picking the more efficient innovations to
 promote or IT practitioners are more capable of extracting
 value after adopting innovations in fashion by expanding and

 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 extending their use. For either or both reasons, a continued
 research program on IT fashion will contribute to the under
 standing and improvement of these important skills and
 capabilities.

 Acknowledgments

 This research was supported in part by the National Science
 Foundation's Human and Social Dynamics program (Grant IIS
 0729459) and Science of Science and Innovation Policy program
 (Grant SBE-0915645), and by the General Research Board of the
 Graduate School at the University of Maryland, College Park.
 Margarita Echeverri, Soojung Kim, and Chia-jung Tsui provided
 valuable research assistance. The author thanks JJ Hsieh, Steven
 Johnson, Hope Koch, Bob Zmud, and the anonymous reviewers of
 ICIS 2006 and the 2007 Academy of Management Annual Meeting
 for their useful comments on previous versions of the paper. The
 author is also grateful to the senior editor, associate editor, and four
 anonymous reviewers at MS Quarterly for their helpful feedback
 and suggestions.

 References

 Abrahamson, E. 1991. "Managerial Fads and Fashions: The Diffu
 sion and Rejection of Innovations," Academy of Management
 Review (16:3), pp. 586-612.

 Abrahamson, E. 1996. "Management Fashion," Academy of Man

 agement Review (21:1), pp. 254-285.

 Abrahamson, E., and Fairchild, G. 1999. "Management Fashion:
 Lifecycles, Triggers, and Collective Learning Processes," Admin
 istrative Science Quarterly (44:4), pp. 708-740.

 Aldrich,H.E.,andFiol,C.M. 1994. "Fools Rush In? The Institu
 tional Context of Industry Creation," Academy of Management
 Review (\9:4), pp. 645-670.

 Aral, S., Brynjolfsson, E., and van Alstyne, M. 2006. "Information
 Technology and Information Worker Productivity: Task Level
 Evidence," in Proceedings of the 27th International Conference
 on Information Systems, D. Straub, S. Klein, W. Haseman, and
 C. Washbum (eds.), Milwaukee, WI, pp. 285-306.

 Barley, S. R., Meyer, G. W., and Gash, D. C. 1988. "Cultures of
 Culture: Academics, Practitioners and the Pragmatics of Norma
 tive Control," Administrative Science Quarterly (33:1), pp. 24-60.
 Baskerville, R. L., and Myers, M. D. 2009. "Fashion Waves in
 Information Systems Research and Practice," MS Quarterly
 (33:4), pp. 647-662.

 Berthon, P., Pitt, L., Ewing, M., and Carr, C. L. 2002. "Potential
 Research Space in MIS: A Framework for Envisioning and
 Evaluating Research Replication, Extension, and Generation,"
 Information Systems Research (13:4), pp. 416-427.

 Breusch, T. S. 1978. "Testing for Autocorrelation in Dynamic
 Linear Models," Australian Economic Papers (17:31), pp.
 334-355.

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 83

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Brynjolfsson, E., and Hitt, L. 1996. "Paradox Lost: Firm-Level
 Evidence on the Returns to Information Systems Spending,"
 Management Science (42:4), pp. 541-558.

 Cyert, R. M., and March, J. G. 1992. A Behavioral Theory of the

 Firm (2nd ed.), Cambridge, England: Blackwell Business.

 Damanpour, F. 1991. "Organizational Innovation: A Meta
 Analysis of Effects of Determinants and Moderators," Academy
 of Management Journal (34:3), pp. 555-590.

 Davenport, T. H. 2008. "Foreword," in Business Process Trans
 formation, V. Grover and M. L. Markus (eds.), Armonk, NY:
 M. S. Sharpe, pp. xi-xiv.

 David, P. A. 1985. "Clio and the Economics of QWERTY," The

 American Economic Review (75:2), pp. 332-337.

 Davidson, R., and MacKinnon, J. G. 1993. Estimation and

 Inference in Econometrics, New York: Oxford Press.

 Deephouse, D. L. 1996. "Does Isomorphism Legitimate?," Aca

 demy of Management Journal (39:4), pp. 1024-1039.

 Earl, M., and Feeny, D. 2000. "How to Be a CEO for the
 Information Age," Sloan Management Review (41:2), pp. 11 -23.
 Fichman, R. G. 2004. "Going Beyond the Dominant Paradigm for
 Information Technology Innovation Research: Emerging Con
 cepts and Methods," Journal of the Association for Information
 Systems (5:8), pp. 314-355.

 Fichman, R. G., and Kemerer, C. F. 1999. "The Illusory Diffusion
 of Innovation: An Examination of Assimilation Gaps," Infor
 mation Systems Research (10:3), pp. 255-275.

 Fligstein, N. 1985. "The Spread of the Multidivisional Form among

 Large Firms, 1919-1979," American Sociological Review (50:3),
 pp. 377-391.

 Fombrun, C. J. 1996. Reputation: Realizing Value from the

 Corporate Image, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

 Godfrey, L. G. 1978. "Testing for Higher Order Serial Correlation
 in Regression Equations When the Regressors Include Lagged
 Dependent Variables," Econometrica (46:6), pp. 1303-1310.
 Hammer, M., and Champy, J. 1993. Reengineering the Cor
 poration: A Manifesto for Business Revolution. New York:
 HarperBusiness.

 Kumar, K., and van Hillegersberg, J. 2000. "ERP Experiences and

 Evolution," Communications of the ACM (43:4), pp. 22-26.

 Lee, J., and Collar, E. 2003. "Information Technology Fashions:
 Lifecycle Phase Analysis," in Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii
 International Conference on System Sciences, Los Alamitos, CA:
 IEEE Computer Society Press.

 Linden, A., and Fenn, J. 2003. "Understanding Gartner's Hype

 Cycles," R-20-1971, Gartner, Inc., Stanford, CT, May 30.

 Melville, N., Kraemer, K., and Gurbaxani, V. 2004. "Information
 Technology and Organizational Performance," MIS Quarterly
 (28:2), pp. 283-322.

 Meyer, J. W., and Rowan, B. 1977. "Institutionalized Organiza
 tions: Formal Structure as Myth and Ceremony," American
 Journal of Sociology (83:2), pp. 340-363.

 Moore, G. A. 2002. Crossing the Chasm, New York:

 HarperCollins.

 Newell, S., Swan, J., and Robertson, M. 1998. "A Cross-National
 Comparison of the Adoption of Business Process Reengineering:

 Fashion Setting Networks?," Journal of Strategic Information
 Systems (7:4), pp. 299-317.

 Orlikowski, W. J., and Barley, S. R. 2001. "Technology and Insti
 tutions: What Can Research on Information Technology and
 Research on Organizations Learn from Each Other?," MS
 Quarterly (25:2), pp. 145-165.

 Pfeffer, J., and Sutton, R. I. 2000. The Knowing-Doing Gap,

 Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

 Ramiller, N. C, Swanson, E. B., and Wang, P. 2008. "Research
 Directions in Information Systems: Toward an Institutional
 Ecology," Journal of the Association for Information Systems
 (9:1), pp. 1-22.

 Ranganathan, C, and Brown, C. V. 2006. "ERP Investments and
 the Market Value of Firms: Toward an Understanding of
 Influential ERP Project Variables," Information Systems Research
 (17:2), pp. 145-161.

 Rogers, E. M. 2003. Diffusion of Innovations (5th ed.), New York:

 Free Press.

 Ross, J. W., and Vitale, M. R. 2000. "The ERP Revolution:
 Surviving Vs. Thriving,"Information Systems Frontiers (2:2), pp.
 233-241.

 Scott, W. R. 1995. Institutions and Organizations, Thousand Oaks,

 CA: Sage Publications.

 Scott, W. R. 2003. Organizations: Rational, Natural, and Open

 Systems, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

 Staw, . M., and Epstein, L. D. 2000. "What Bandwagons Bring:
 Effects of Popular Management Techniques on Corporate Per
 formance, Reputation, and CEO Pay," Administrative Science
 Quarterly (45:3), pp. 523-556.

 Suchman, M. 1995. "Managing Legitimacy: Strategic and Insti
 tutional Approaches," Academy of Management Review (20:3),
 pp. 571-610.

 Swanson, E. B., and Ramiller, N. C. 1997. "The Organizing Vision
 in Information Systems Innovation," Organization Science (8:5),
 pp. 458-474.

 Swanson, E. B., and Ramiller, N. C. 2004. "Innovating Mindfully

 with Information Technology," MS Quarterly (28:4), pp.
 553-583.

 Teo, H. H, Wei, . K., and Benbasat, I. 2003. "Predicting Inten
 tion to Adopt Interorganizational Linkages: An Institutional
 Perspective," MS Quarterly (27:1), pp. 19-49.

 Tolbert, P. S., and Zucker, L. G. 1983. "Institutional Sources of
 Change in the Formal Structure of Organizations: The Diffusion
 of Civil Service Reform, 1880-1935," Administrative Science
 Quarterly (28:1), pp. 22-39.

 Tolbert, P.S., and Zucker, L.G. 1996. "The Institutionalization of
 Institutional Theory," in Handbook oj Organization Studies, S. R.
 Clegg, C. Hardy, and W. Nord (eds.), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
 Publications, pp. 175-190.

 Van de Ven, A. . 2005. "Running in Packs to Develop
 Knowledge-Intensive Technologies," MS Quarterly (29:2), pp.
 365-378.

 Wang, P., and Ramiller, N. C. 2009. "Community Learning in
 Information Technology Innovation," MS Quarterly (33:4), pp.
 709-734.

 84 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Wang/Effects of IT Fashion on Organizations

 Westphal, J. D., Gulati, R., and Shortell, S. M. 1997. "Customi

 zation or Conformity? An Institutional and Network Perspec
 tive on the Content and Consequences of TQM Adoption,"
 Administrative Science Quarterly (42:2), pp. 366-394.

 Westphal, J. D., and Zajac, E. J. 1998. "The Symbolic Management
 of Stockholders: Corporate Governance Reforms and Share
 holder Reactions," Administrative Science Quarterly (43:1), pp.
 127-153.

 Zbaracki, M. J. 1987. "The Rhetoric and Reality of Total Quality
 Management," Administrative Science Quarterly (43:3), pp.
 602-636.

 Zucker, L. G. 1987. "Institutional Theories of Organization,"
 Annual Review of Sociology (13), pp. 443-464.

 About the Author

 Ping Wang is an assistant professor at the College of Information
 Studies, the University of Maryland, College Park. His research
 addresses how and why organizations innovate with information
 technologies. Specifically, his research seeks to understand the
 popularity of IT innovations and the effects of popular innovations
 on organizations. At Maryland, he leads two interdisciplinary
 research teams, both sponsored by the National Science Foundation,
 to apply natural language processing to innovation research and to
 develop large-scale data sets and visual analytic tools for monitoring
 and understanding innovation trends in IT, biotechnology, and
 nanotechnology. Dr. Wang received his Ph.D. from UCLA
 Anderson School of Management. Additional information is
 available at http://terpconnect.umd.edu/~pwang/Research/.

 MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010 85

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 18:03:10 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

