Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
Vol. 83, No. 1, September, pp. 1–32, 2000
doi:10.1006/obhd.2000.2894, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Procedural Fairness, Managers’ Self-Esteem,
and Managerial Behaviors Following a Layoff

Batia M. Wiesenfeld

Stern School of Business, New York University

Joel Brockner

Columbia University

and

Valerie Thibault

San Francisco, California

The present research examined the predictors and conse-
quences associated with managers’ reactions to job layoffs.
Whereas previous research suggests that procedural unfairness
lowers self-esteem, we hypothesized that, in a downsizing con-
text, the relationship between procedural unfairness and lower
self-esteem would be more pronounced among managers than
nonmanagers. The results of Study 1 supported the hypothesis
and showed that the findings were attributable to managers’
greater organizational commitment. Study 2 showed that manag-
ers who perceived procedures to be less fair were less likely to
report practicing the behaviors needed from effective managers
in times of change. Moreover, the relationship between proce-
dural unfairness and managers’ behaviors was mediated by their
self-esteem. Subordinates of managers who engaged in less effec-
tive managerial behaviors, in turn, had more negative percep-
tions of their immediate work environments.
q 2000 Academic Press

An adage that applies to most employees today is: The only reliable feature
of organizations is change. Firms undergo frequent changes in an effort to
become more nimble, efficient, and competitive. One of the most prevalent
forms of organizational change is downsizing, which often includes involuntary

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Batia Wiesenfeld, Management Department,

Stern School of Business, New York University, 44 West 4th Street, New York, NY 10012.

1

0749-5978/00 $35.00
Copyright q 2000 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.


2

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

layoffs. Crucial to the success of a downsizing initiative (and, indeed, to the
success of any organizational change) is the speed and effectiveness with which
remaining organization members (a.k.a. survivors) adapt.

A growing body of theory and research has sought to explain the reactions
of layoff survivors (e.g., Brockner & Wiesenfeld, 1993). However, most studies
of survivors’ reactions have examined lower-level employees, such as factory
workers and salespeople, who occupy job categories that were historically the
hardest hit by layoffs. Relatively neglected in past research are the reactions
of higher-level employees and managers in particular (O’Neill & Lenn, 1995).
It is important to study managers in a layoff context for at least two reasons.
First, as organizations have become less hierarchical, layoffs have been increas-
ingly targeted at the managerial level. Second, during times of change such
as downsizings, managers play key roles as decision makers and as sources of
influence (Bedeian & Armenakis, 1998; Heckscher, 1995). As decision makers,
managers may influence the choice of strategy that the organization pursues
and the ways that resources are utilized. As opinion leaders and role models,
managers’ reactions may influence the reactions of their subordinates and thus
may reverberate throughout their work units. In short, during organizational
transitions such as layoffs managers are expected to act in ways that help the
organization maximize the benefits of the change. Therefore, how managers
experience and react to aspects of downsizing could have important organiza-
tional implications.

The present studies focus on managers’ reactions to the way that layoffs are
handled. One of our central goals is to evaluate how managers’ reactions relate
to their effectiveness during times of change. To predict how well managers
perform in a change context, it is important to consider how the change process
affects them on a personal level, as so-called recipients of change (Jick, 1990).
For many people, work involvements are highly important not only as a source
of livelihood but also as a source of meaning and identity. This is likely to
be especially true for managers—a group of employees who tend to be more
committed to their organization than their nonmanagerial counterparts (Mow-
day, Porter, & Steers, 1982). Organizational change may be especially meaning-
ful to managers on a personal level, resulting in more intense reactions than
those exhibited by nonmanagers. For example, managers who survive downsiz-
ing often express burnout, depression, anxiety, and personal loss (Kets de
Vries & Balazs, 1997; O’Neill & Lenn, 1995).

Unfortunately, scant attention has been paid to the impact of managers’
personal experience of change on their managerial efficacy during times of
change. A central hypothesis of the present research is that the more managers
experience lower self-esteem in a layoff context, the less likely they are to enact
the behaviors needed for them to be effective as managers of change. For
example, managers who feel self-threatened by organizational change may be
overly rigid and risk averse (Staw, Sandelands, & Dutton 1981). As a result,
they may be less likely to make effective strategic decisions or to institute
innovative ideas and practices. Further elaboration of the negative effects of
self-threat on managers’ reactions will be provided in the introduction to Study


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

3

2. For now, suffice it to say that when layoffs (or any organizational change,
for that matter) adversely influence managers’ self-esteem, they may be less
likely to enact the behaviors needed from them during times of change which,
in turn, may be related to negative reactions among their subordinates.

If this reasoning is correct, then it is important to identify factors that affect
managers’ self-esteem in a downsizing context. Previous theory and research
in a nonlayoff context have suggested that one important determinant of indi-
viduals’ self-esteem is the perceived fairness or unfairness of decision proce-
dures (Folger, 1986; 1993; Koper, Van Knippenberg, Bouhuijs, Vermunt &
Wilke, 1993, Study 2; Tyler, Degoey & Smith, 1996; Vermunt, Wit, van den
Bos & Lind, 1993). Thus, it is plausible that in a layoff context, the fairness
of the procedures used to plan and implement the layoff may be a key predictor
of employees’ self-esteem. Furthermore, managers may be particularly vulnera-
ble to low self-esteem as a result of layoff procedures that are perceived to be
unfair because they are likely to be more committed to the organization, relative
to their nonmanagerial counterparts, and therefore more concerned with the
appropriateness of organizational practices.

The present research consists of two studies focusing on the relationship
between procedural unfairness and managers’ reactions to layoffs. Study 1
examines whether managers are more likely than nonmanagers to experience
lower self-esteem in the face of layoffs that are perceived to be more procedurally
unfair. Study 1 also evaluates whether the expected tendency of managers to
exhibit lower self-esteem in association with greater procedural unfairness is
attributable to their higher levels of organizational commitment. Study 2 ex-
plores whether the lower self-esteem that managers experience in relation to
more procedurally unfair layoffs makes them less likely to enact the behaviors
needed from effective managers in times of change. Furthermore, Study 2
assesses the possibility that the behaviors exhibited by layoff managers associ-
ated with their experience of lower self-esteem will have, in turn, a negative
influence on their subordinates’ reactions. Thus, in Study 2 we also examine
the relationship between managers’ reports of their change-related behaviors
and their subordinates’ perceptions of the immediate work environment.

STUDY 1

Previous empirical research in nonlayoff contexts has established a relation-
ship between perceived procedural unfairness and lower self-esteem (Koper et
al., 1993, Study 2; Tyler et al., 1996; Vermunt et al., 1993). While a number
of explanations may account for the relationship between perceptions of proce-
dural unfairness and individuals’ self-esteem, two are likely to be particularly
relevant to the experience of employees who survive layoffs in general and
surviving managers in particular. Managers who survive layoffs: (a) remain
affiliated with (and possibly socially identified with) the organization, and (b)
may feel partially responsible for the procedures that are implemented. Thus,
two explanations of the link between procedural unfairness and lower self-
esteem (particularly among managers as layoff survivors) are social identity


4

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

theory and attribution theory; we view these psychological mechanisms as
complementary and possibly simultaneously occurring processes.

First, according to social identity theory, people define themselves to a consid-
erable extent based upon their relationships with social entities, i.e., other
people, groups, and organizations (Turner, 1982). As a result, the attributes
or behaviors of these social entities have implications for people’s self-esteem.
If the attributes or behaviors of the social entity are favorable or admirable,
then by association people will experience relatively high self-esteem (i.e., a
positive social identity). Alternatively, if the social entity’s attributes or behav-
iors are less favorable or admirable, then people will experience lower self-
esteem (i.e., a more negative social identity). For example, if an organization’s
procedures are fair, its members may experience a positive social identity (e.g.,
pride) as a result of being associated with the institution. If, however, the
organization’s procedures are unfair, then its members may feel less favorably
about themselves. That is, unfair procedures reflect negatively upon those
associated with the institution. Moreover, according to social identity theory,
organization members need not feel personally responsible for the institution’s
attributes or behaviors (such as the fairness of its procedures). Merely being
associated with the organization is sufficient for the favorability of its attributes
or behaviors to influence members’ self-evaluations.

The second argument linking greater procedural unfairness to lowered self-
esteem—particularly among managers who survive a downsizing—is based
on attribution theory. Research has shown that the more that people feel
personally responsible (or make internal attributions) for negative events, the
more likely is their self-esteem to suffer (Brockner & Wiesenfeld, 1996). Unfair
procedures accompanying a downsizing are likely to be viewed as negative
events. If so, then people who see themselves as personally responsible for
the planning or implementation of unfair procedures (i.e., managers) may
experience reduced self-esteem (Folger & Pugh, 1998; Folger & Skarlicki, 1998).
Prior theory and research provide bases for hypothesizing a relationship
between perceived unfairness and lower self-esteem in general. However, social
identity and attribution theories suggest that this relationship may be espe-
cially pronounced among managers (rather than nonmanagers). The social
identity theory explanation of the link between procedural unfairness and
lowered self-esteem is predicated on people feeling connected to the social
entity. The more connected people feel toward the entity, the more likely are
the attributes or behaviors of the entity to influence people’s self-esteem, for
better or worse. Research suggests that managers tend to exhibit greater orga-
nizational commitment than their nonmanagerial counterparts (Hill, 1992).
Thus, they may be more likely to experience lower self-esteem in relation to
procedural unfairness. Consistent with this reasoning, Tyler et al. (1996) found
that individuals were less likely to experience pride (i.e., a self-related positive
emotion; Fischer & Tangney, 1995) when groups to which they were more
committed behaved in procedurally unfair ways.

Attribution theory provides a somewhat different account of how managerial


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

5

status may moderate the relationship between perceptions of procedural fair-
ness and self-esteem. In particular, managerial positions confer a higher level
of decision-making power than lower-level positions, which may lead managers
to feel more personally responsible for organizational actions. As indicated
above, managers often play a role in devising and implementing layoff proce-
dures and thus may feel at least some personal responsibility for the enacted
procedures. To the extent that they feel personally responsible for procedures,
managers should exhibit lower self-esteem when procedures are perceived to
be unfair, relative to nonmanagers who presumably feel little or no responsibil-
ity for the procedures.

Attribution theory leads to differential predictions concerning the effects of
organizational commitment for managers and nonmanagers. For managers,
who presumably feel some personal responsibility for the enactment of proce-
dures, the relationship between procedural unfairness and lower self-esteem
should be more pronounced among those with greater organizational commit-
ment. Managers who are more organizationally committed are likely to attach
greater importance to workplace events, relative to managers who are less
organizationally committed. Managers high in organizational commitment who
perceive procedures to be unfair thus may be experiencing personal responsibil-
ity for events which are negative and important, the net effect of which is lower
self-esteem.

Nonmanagers, in contrast, feel little or no personal responsibility for how
procedures are enacted. Whereas the more organizationally committed non-
managers should attach greater importance to workplace events than less
committed nonmanagers, their low level of personal responsibility for proce-
dures should make them less apt to view the procedures as relevant to their
self-esteem.

Although few empirical studies have evaluated whether differences in prior
organizational commitment account for variations in the reactions of managers
versus nonmanagers, previous research has shown that individuals who are
more committed to an organization generally have more adverse reactions to
procedural unfairness than those who are less committed. For example, in a
downsizing context, Brockner, Tyler, and Cooper-Schneider (1992) found that
survivors who reported greater commitment to the organization prior to a layoff
exhibited more negative reactions (e.g., on measures of turnover intention and
work effort) in response to perceived procedural unfairness than survivors who
reported less prior commitment. Conlon (1993) studied the reactions of faculty,
staff, and students who had received a ticket for parking violations at a univer-
sity. He found that organization members who were presumably more commit-
ted to the university (i.e., faculty and staff) exhibited a stronger relationship
between their experience of procedural justice and their evaluations of a univer-
sity-affiliated entity (the appeal board) than did members who were presumably
less committed to the university (i.e., students). Both of these studies suggest
that individuals who are more committed to an organization will react more
negatively to procedural unfairness.


6

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

Following from the theoretical reasoning and empirical findings above, we

expect that:

Hypothesis 1. Managerial status will moderate the relationship between
procedural fairness and self-esteem, such that the relationship will be more
pronounced among managers than nonmanagers.

Furthermore, previous empirical findings regarding organizational commit-

ment and reactions to procedural unfairness suggest that:

Hypothesis 2. Employees’ organizational commitment will moderate the
relationship between procedural fairness and self-esteem, such that the rela-
tionship will be more pronounced among those with higher levels of organiza-
tional commitment.

Social identity theory and attribution theory lead to different predictions,
depicted below as Hypotheses 3a and 3b, respectively. The reasoning stemming
from social identity theory suggests that it is not managerial status per se which
is interacting with procedural unfairness to influence self-esteem. Rather, it
is because of managers’ greater commitment to the organization that the
relationship between procedural unfairness and self-esteem will be particularly
strong for managers. Thus, social identity theory suggests the following
hypothesis:

Hypothesis 3a. The interaction effect of managerial status and procedural
fairness on participants’ self-esteem is attributable to (mediated by) the interac-
tion between organizational commitment and procedural fairness.

Hypothesis 3a lends itself to the following predictions:

(1) Managerial status and organizational commitment should be corre-

lated, with managers tending to be more committed.

(2) The interaction specified in Hypothesis 1 between managerial status
and procedural fairness should be reduced, once we control for the interaction
specified in Hypothesis 2 between organizational commitment and proce-
dural fairness.

(3) The interaction between organizational commitment and procedural
fairness should remain significant, even when we control for the interaction
between managerial status and procedural fairness.

Whereas social identity theory suggests that all employees have the potential
to feel personally impacted when procedures are unfair because all employees
are part of the organization, attribution processes are more likely to apply to
managers, whose roles provide them with more responsibility for the procedures
utilized. Among those who potentially feel responsible (i.e., managers), greater
levels of organizational commitment may have the effect of exacerbating the
impact of procedural unfairness on self-esteem because commitment provides
information about the degree to which managers find the organizational domain
to be relevant to (impactful on) their self-evaluations. Thus, attribution theory
posits a triple interaction of the following form between procedural fairness,
managerial status, and organizational commitment:


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

7

Hypothesis 3b. Among managers, the relationship between procedural fair-
ness and self-esteem will be moderated by organizational commitment. Manag-
ers higher in organizational commitment are more apt to exhibit a relationship
between procedural unfairness and lower self-esteem, relative to less commit-
ted managers. Among non-managers, level of organizational commitment will
be less apt to moderate the relationship between procedural unfairness and
lower self-esteem.

While social identity theory and attribution theory suggest different predic-
tions regarding the relationships between procedural fairness, managerial sta-
tus, and organizational commitment, the present study was not designed to
be a critical test of competing theories. The social identity explanation hypothe-
sizes that there should be two-way interactions between procedural unfairness
with each of managerial status and organizational commitment. In contrast,
attribution theory posits an even higher-order triple interaction between proce-
dural unfairness, managerial status, and organizational commitment. Higher-
order interactions are notoriously difficult to observe, particularly in correla-
tional studies such as Study 1. Moreover, a mediator of the social identity
hypothesis was assessed in Study 1, whereas the same could not be said about
the attribution hypothesis. In short, to position Study 1 as a critical test of
competing theories would have constituted what Cooper and Richardson (1986)
have called an “unfair comparison.”

Participants

Method

We examined a sample of part-time business school students who had sur-
vived a layoff in their organization within the previous year. At the time of
the study, all participants were permanent employees of an organization in
which layoffs took place, either as managers (N 5 48) or as nonmanagers
(N 5 81). Several organizations were represented in the sample, all of them
located in a city in the south-central region of the United States. Surveys were
completed during a class session. All students received and completed a survey.
For students who indicated that they had not survived a layoff (N 5 79),
the layoff questions were replaced with other items; the responses of these
participants were omitted from the analyses.

Independent Variables

Determinants of procedural fairness include structural attributes of the deci-
sion process (e.g., Leventhal, Karuza, & Fry, 1980) as well as the interpersonal
behavior of the individuals who plan and implement decisions (see Bies’ (1987)
discussion of interactional justice). The procedural fairness measure employed
in Study 1 consisted of three items, which drew from the structural and inter-
personal domains. The interpersonal items were, “How clearly were the reasons
for the layoffs explained to you by top management?” and “How clearly were
the reasons for the layoff explained to you by your supervisor?” The structural


8

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

item was, “How fair were the criteria used to decide which employees were
laid off and which were retained?” Responses to the items on a 1 (“strongly
disagree”) to 7 (“strongly agree”) scale were averaged into an index (coefficient
alpha 5 .77). An additional question in the survey asked participants to indicate
whether they were managers (coded as “1”) or nonmanagers (coded as “2”).

Organizational commitment was assessed with 22 items. Eighteen items
were drawn from a scale used in previous research on survivors’ reactions to
layoffs (Brockner, Wiesenfeld, Reed, Grover, & Martin, 1993). Sample items
are, “I feel I am part of this organization”; and “If I had my employment decision
to make over, knowing what I know now, I would choose to work for the
organization.” Four additional items were drawn from O’Reilly and Chatman’s
(1986) organizational commitment scale. Responses ranged from “strongly dis-
agree” (1) to “strongly agree” (7); coefficient alpha 5 .96.

Dependent Variable

Self-esteem was assessed with six items taken from the Heatherton and
Polivy (1991) State Self-Esteem scale (coefficient alpha 5 .70). Sample items
were “I feel displeased with myself” (reverse scored) and “I feel that others
respect and admire me.” The response scale was “Write 1 if you don’t feel this
way at all”; “Write 2 if you feel this way a little bit”; “Write 3 if you feel this
way moderately”; and “Write 4 if you feel this way very much.”

Control Variables

Although all participants in this study were working in an organization in
which layoffs had occurred, not all of them were employed full-time. To assess
individuals’ degree of employment, they were asked, “How many hours per
week do you work?” Responses to this open-ended question served as a con-
trol variable.

Two additional control variables were included. Tenure in job was assessed
with an open-ended item asking respondents to indicate the number of years
in their current job title. Education was assessed by having respondents indi-
cate the highest degree earned (“1” for high school graduate, “2” for associate
degree, “3” for undergraduate degree, “4” for masters level, and “5” for PhD).

Results

Summary statistics are shown in Table 1. In general, similar patterns were
found for managers and nonmanagers. Consistent with previous theory and
research (e.g., Hill, 1992), managers reported significantly greater organiza-
tional commitment than did nonmanagers. Managers also worked significantly
more hours per week than did nonmanagers, possibly because of the broader
nature of their job responsibilities.

Tests of Hypotheses

To evaluate Hypothesis 1, we conducted a hierarchical multiple regression
analysis on the dependent variable of self-esteem. The main effects of perceived


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

9

Intercorrelations, Means, Standard Deviations, and t Tests for Managers and

Nonmanagers (Study 1)

TABLE 1

Correlations

Managers Nonmanagers

1

2

3

4

5

Std.
6 Mean Dev. Mean Dev.

Std.

t

(1) Procedural fairness —
(2) Organizational

.40*** 2.12

.09 2.17

.05

4.40 1.67

4.05 1.52

1.20

commitment
(3) Self-esteem
(4) Hours worked
(5) Education
(6) Tenure in job

.35*
.26
.18
.16
2.25

—
2.01
.18
2.10
2.38**

.03
.14

4.58 1.18
3.37 0.48

.01 2.07 2.20
—
.16 2.06
.21 —
.01
2.85 1.03
.19 2.03 2.20 — 3.68 3.39

2.16*
4.10 1.20
0.81
3.30 0.44
4.98***
.02 2.20 48.46 8.56 41.70 4.45
2.77 1.02
0.39
4.02 3.61 20.54

.23 —

.02

Note. Higher scores reflect higher or more positive evaluations of each of the constructs. Intercor-
relations for managers are reported below the diagonal and intercorrelations for non-managers
are reported above the diagonal.

* p , .05.
** p , .01.
*** p , .001.

procedural unfairness, managerial status, and the control variables were en-
tered in the first step. The interaction between managerial status and proce-
dural unfairness (the effect of greatest conceptual significance) was entered
on the second step. In all analyses, independent and control variables were
zero-centered following the methodology recommended by Aiken & West (1991).
The only effect to attain significance on the first step was attributable to a
control variable (see Table 2, Model 1, Step 1): individuals who worked more
hours had higher self-esteem. Of greater importance, the interaction between
managerial status and procedural unfairness was significant (See Table 2;
Model 1, Step 2), and including the interaction term in the model added signifi-
cantly to the amount of variance explained (change in R2 5 .04; Fchange 5 5.30;
p , .02).

To illustrate the nature of the interaction, we plotted it following the proce-
dures recommended by Aiken and West (1991). Consistent with Hypothesis 1,
there was a more pronounced relationship between procedural fairness and
self-esteem among managers than among nonmanagers. That is, among man-
agers (but not among nonmanagers) lower procedural fairness was associated
with lower self-esteem (see Fig. 1).

A hierarchical regression analysis also was conducted to test Hypothesis 2.
In the first step we entered the main effects of organizational commitment,
procedural fairness, and the control variables; in the second step we added the
interaction between organizational commitment and procedural unfairness
(see Table 2, Model 2). Of greatest importance, the interaction effect was signifi-
cant ( p , .01) and including the interaction term added significantly to the
amount of variance explained (change in R2 5 .08; Fchange 5 10.27; p , .01).
For illustrative purposes, we plotted the interaction (Aiken & West, 1991).
Consistent with Hypothesis 2, among respondents who were more committed


10

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

Regression Results for Self-Esteem as a Function of Procedural Fairness,

Managerial Status, and Organizational Commitment (Study 1)

TABLE 2

Variable

Procedural fairness (PF)
Managerial status (MS)
Organizational commitment (OC)
Hours worked
Highest degree
Tenure in job
Overall F
p
R2

PF 3 MS
PF 3 OC
Overall F
p
Change in R2

b

.01
.02

.02
2.02
.02

2.12

Model 1

F

Step 1

.11
.03

5.27
.19
3.08
1.81
.12
.08

Step 2

5.30

2.45
.03
.04

( p , .02)

p

n.s.
n.s.

.03
n.s.
.08

b

.02

2.03
.02
2.02
.02

.02

.07

p

n.s.

n.s.
.01
n.s.
n.s.

.01

Model 2

F

.41

.68
6.57
.32
2.64
1.95
.09
.08

10.27
3.48
.004
.08

( p , .01)

Note: Standardized regression coefficients are reported.

to the organization, there was a more pronounced tendency for unfairness to
be associated with lower self-esteem (see Fig. 2).

The empirical tests of Hypothesis 3a consisted of a number of components.
First, we conducted a t test to determine if managerial status and organizational
commitment were related. As shown in Table 1, managers expressed greater
organizational commitment than nonmanagers did.

Thus far, we have shown that procedural unfairness interacts with each
of managerial status and organizational commitment (in separate regression
equations). However, following from social identity theory, Hypothesis 3a sug-
gests that it is not managerial status per se, but rather the level of organiza-
tional commitment associated with managerial status that is interacting with
procedural unfairness to predict participants’ self-esteem. Thus, Hypothesis
3a posited that the interaction between managerial status and procedural
fairness set forth in Hypothesis 1 was attributable to (mediated by) the interac-
tion between organizational commitment and procedural fairness set forth in
Hypothesis 2.

To evaluate this possibility we conducted an additional multiple regression
analysis. First, we entered all main effects and control variables (Table 3, Model
1). Then, to evaluate whether it was simply the main effect of organizational
commitment that served as the mediator of the interaction between managerial
status and procedural fairness, we added the interaction between procedural


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

11

FIG. 1. Self-esteem as a function of procedural fairness and managerial status. Note that all
main effects were zero-centered to graph the interaction, following the methodology recommended
by Aiken & West (1991). This procedure has the effect of subtracting a constant from the effects
and is thus responsible for the lower self-esteem scores reported in the graph relative to the
corresponding tables. The same procedure also applies to Fig. 2.

fairness and managerial status. As can be seen in Table 3, Model 2, the interac-
tion between managerial status and procedural fairness remained significant
( p , .05). Such findings suggest that the interaction between managerial status
and procedural fairness was not mediated by the main effect of organizational
commitment. According to Baron and Kenny (1986), if the main effect of organi-
zational commitment had been the mediator, then the interaction between
managerial status and procedural fairness should have been considerably less
pronounced when commitment was included in the regression (see Table 3,
Model 2) relative to when commitment was not included (see Table 2, Model 1).
To test whether it was organizational commitment rather than managerial
status per se which interacted with procedural unfairness, we added the inter-
action of organizational commitment and procedural fairness (presented in
Table 3, Model 3). Of greatest importance, we sought to examine the interaction
between procedural fairness with each of managerial status and organizational
commitment when the two interactions were entered into the same regression
equation. In fact, the interaction between procedural fairness and organiza-
tional commitment remained significant ( p , .01) whereas the interaction
between procedural fairness and managerial status did not ( p . .10).

To state the results in Table 3, Model 3 differently, the interaction between
procedural fairness and organizational commitment meaningfully reduced the


12

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

FIG. 2. Self-esteem as a function of procedural fairness and organizational commitment.

variance explained by the procedural fairness 3 managerial status interaction.
In fact, the R2 accounted for by the interaction between procedural fairness and
managerial status declined by 55% when the interaction between procedural
fairness and organizational commitment was added (R2 for PF 3 MS 5 .042
when PF 3 OC is not included, and .019 when PF 3 OC is included). In sum,
these results support Hypothesis 3 and are consistent with the social identity
theory explanation of the interaction between procedural fairness and manage-
rial status.

Hypothesis 3b predicted a triple interaction effect based on attribution theory.
To examine this hypothesis, we conducted a hierarchical multiple regression
analysis. We added all three two-way interactions between procedural fairness,
managerial status, and organizational commitment to the main effects and
control variables previously entered, as well as the triple interaction between
procedural fairness, managerial status, and organizational commitment. Re-
sults indicate that the triple interaction was not significant (see Table 3, Model
4), thus failing to support Hypothesis 3b.

Discussion

The results of Study 1 supported the prediction that managers’ self-esteem
would be more strongly related to procedural unfairness than was that of
nonmanagers. This finding contributes to our understanding of the reactions
of managers, who are an important but relatively understudied group of layoff
survivors. The present findings also are consistent with previous findings show-
ing that individuals who are more committed to an organization exhibit more
pronounced negative reactions to perceived procedural unfairness (e.g., Brock-
ner et al., 1992; Conlon, 1993). Moreover, the results of this study extend those


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

13

TABLE 3

Regression Results Testing for Mediation and Moderation of the Interaction
between Procedural Fairness and Managerial Status on Self-Esteem (Study 1)

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Variable

Procedural fairness
Managerial status
Organizational
commitment
Hours worked
Highest degree
Tenure in job
PF 3 MS
PF 3 OC
MS 3 OC
PF 3 MS 3 OC
Overall F
p
R2

b

.02
.01

F

p

.40 n.s.
.00 n.s.

b

.01
.01

2.03

.64 n.s. 2.03

.02 5.26

.02

.01 4.55

2.02

.31 n.s. 2.04
.02

.02 2.62 n.s.

2.12 5.14

F

p

b

F

p

b

F

p

.21 n.s.
.02
.00 n.s. 2.01

.54 n.s.
.02
.01 n.s. 2.01

.42 n.s.
.01 n.s.

.05

.04

.01 4.03

.01 4.19

.02 2.54 n.s.

.73 n.s. 2.03

.77 n.s. 2.03
3.67 .06

.52 n.s. 2.04 1.08 n.s. 2.04 1.00 n.s.
.05
.73 n.s.
.02 2.30 n.s.
.03 2.09 2.54 n.s. 2.09 2.62 n.s.
.01
.18 n.s.
.01 n.s.
2.33
.02
.18

.06 7.04
.03
2.01

2.94
.01
.18

.06 7.43

2.17
.04
.12

.01

1.61
.15
.08

Note: Standadized regression coefficients are reported.

previous findings beyond organizational attitudes (e.g., turnover intention) to
the domain of individuals’ self-esteem.

Hypothesis 3a suggested that it is managers’ greater organizational commit-
ment (rather than their managerial status per se) which explains their more
pronounced relationship between perceived procedural unfairness and self-
esteem. Consistent with this possibility, the results of Study 1 revealed that
once the interaction of perceived fairness and organizational commitment is
taken into account, the interaction between perceived fairness and managerial
status is no longer significant, thus providing support for the social identity
explanation.

The triple interaction (Hypothesis 3b) was not supported, thus failing to
provide evidence for the attribution theory explanation of our results. This is
not to say that attribution processes have no bearing on people’s reactions to
procedural unfairness. For one thing, as stated above the present research was
not intended to be a critical test of competing theories. Furthermore, attribution
theory has proven useful in understanding procedural justice effects in general
and particularly as an explanation of reactions to negative outcomes (e.g.,
Brockner & Wiesenfeld, 1996; Koper et al., 1993, Study 1; Van den Bos, Bruins,
Wilke, & Drokert, 1999).

While the results of Study 1 are generally supportive of the hypotheses,
alternative explanations are possible. For example, all of the independent and
dependent variables were assessed with self-report at the same point in time,
raising the possibility that the results are an artifact of common methods.
Although the common methods explanation cannot be eliminated entirely, it
is important to note that the major findings were interaction effects. Since


14

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

common methods should have affected all respondents equally, it is not readily
apparent how the common methods alternative explanation would account for
the fact that the relationship between procedural unfairness and self-esteem
was more pronounced among managers than nonmanagers (and more pro-
nounced among those who were more rather than less organizationally
committed).

Another limitation of the study involves the measures of procedural un-
fairness and self-esteem. The measure of procedural unfairness tapped only
some of the structural and interpersonal dimensions of the construct. We also
used a measure of global self-esteem rather than domain-specific self-esteem.
Domain-specific self-esteem reflects respondents’ self-evaluations relevant to
the work domain while global self-esteem reflects overall self-evaluations
(across situation) and therefore may be less salient and influential to individu-
als in the work-focused context of our study. It is possible that the nonsignificant
main effect of procedural unfairness for the whole sample (see Table 2, Step
1) and the fact that the interaction explained only a small amount of the
variance in self-esteem were due to the incompleteness of these measures.
Further exploration of the relationship between perceived fairness and self-
esteem utilizing more comprehensive and domain-specific measures is there-
fore necessary. Indeed, Study 2 was designed in part to address these concerns.
For example, given previous findings showing that performance in a given
domain is more strongly related to domain-specific self-esteem rather than
global self-esteem (Pelham, 1993), the self-esteem measure in Study 2 assessed
participants’ opinions of themselves as organization members, rather than
their views of themselves in general.

STUDY 2

Study 2 was designed to extend (and partially replicate) the results of Study
1. Specifically, not only did we reexamine the relationship between procedural
unfairness and managers’ self-esteem, but also we hypothesized that the lower
self-esteem which managers experience in relation to greater procedural un-
fairness may be associated with less than optimal managerial behaviors. Addi-
tionally, Study 2 explores whether these less than optimal managerial behav-
iors predict subordinates’ perceptions of
the work
environment.

the favorability of

Study 2 takes as its starting point one of the key findings of Study 1—that
greater procedural unfairness is associated with lower self-esteem among man-
agers. Thus,

Hypothesis 1. The more managers perceive that a layoff was handled un-

fairly, the lower their self-esteem.

Managers’ Self-Esteem and Managerial Behaviors during Times of Change

Study 2 also explores the implications of the relationship between procedural
unfairness and self-esteem for managers’ behaviors. After a downsizing, man-
agers’ behaviors are likely to influence their subordinates’ work attitudes and


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

15

behaviors (Heckscher, 1995). During and immediately after a major change
such as downsizing, subordinates look to their managers for symbolic or sub-
stantive actions that set the tone for the future and thus determine how quickly
and easily the functioning of the work unit will be restored (Hambrick &
Cannella, 1989). Managers who behave effectively in times of change are those
who lead, guide, and support their subordinates, thereby minimizing the transi-
tion period and maximizing work group productivity and effectiveness (Bridges,
1988; Heckscher, 1995; Jick, 1990).

If managers experience lower self-esteem in association with greater proce-
dural unfairness, and if managers play an important role in shaping their
subordinates’ reactions, then managers’ experience of unfairness may have
significant organizational implications. Study 2 investigates the ramifications
of the lower self-esteem associated with greater procedural unfairness for man-
agers’ behaviors (and the workgroups that they lead). In particular, the self-
threat managers experience in relation to procedural unfairness may elicit self-
protective responses that reduce the likelihood that they will exhibit effective
behaviors during times of change (Folger & Pugh, 1998). Furthermore, manag-
ers who behave less effectively during times of change may negatively influence
their subordinates’ perceptions of the work environment. Thus, a central hy-
pothesis of Study 2 is that the lower self-esteem that managers experience in
association with greater procedural unfairness will make them less likely to
perform the behaviors needed from them during times of change.

The hypothesized relationship between managers’ self-esteem and their man-
agerial behaviors is based on an analysis of how people generally respond to
threats to the self. The most typical response to a threat to the self is self-
protection, which may manifest itself in a variety of ways. For example, self-
threatened individuals are likely to become more defensive, self-conscious, and
inwardly focused (Argyris, 1985; Batson, Early, & Salvarani, 1997; Baumeister,
1984; Folger & Pugh, 1998; Hodgins, Liebeskind, & Schwartz, 1996). As a
result, they may invest substantial effort in justifying their behaviors and
saving face, thereby rendering them less able to perform their assigned tasks
(Baumeister, 1984; Hodgins et al., 1996). Self-threat also may make people
unwilling to explore new ideas, hesitant to experiment with unfamiliar behav-
iors, and motivated to avoid risks (Staw, Sandelands, & Dutton, 1981). In
addition, self-protection often encourages a focus on short-term concerns rather
than long-term issues (Argyris, 1985). Self-threatened individuals are more
likely to derogate and deceive others (Fein & Spencer, 1997; Hodgins et al.,
1996) and therefore may be perceived as unsupportive. Self-protection also
may involve a tendency to seize control in an effort to limit future threats or
to withdraw from the threatening situation (Aronson, Blanton, & Cooper, 1995;
Bandura, 1986; Cameron, Freeman, & Mishra, 1993; Folger & Pugh, 1998;
Folger & Skarlicki, 1998; Steele & Aronson, 1995). In sum, lower self-esteem
(associated with greater perceived unfairness or other factors) is likely to elicit
a wide variety of self-protective responses.

In a sense, the self-protective responses alluded to above may be personally
adaptive for managers who feel self-threatened (Folger & Pugh, 1998). When


16

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

individuals feel threatened, it is often useful for them to focus energy on elimi-
nating the threat. However, such self-protective strategies on the part of manag-
ers may make them less effective during times of change. For example, espe-
cially after a significant change such as layoffs, subordinates require
reassurance, support, and resources from their managers (Burke, 1990). Man-
agers who are very self-focused may be less able to provide such support and
in fact may tend to distance themselves from their subordinates (Cameron et
al., 1993; Folger & Pugh, 1998). Folger and Skarlicki (1998) report suggestive
evidence that managers withdraw in response to self-threat in a downsizing
context. In their studies, managers who were more likely to feel self-threatened
(because they were more personally implicated in the downsizing) reported
experiencing greater discomfort and were more likely to distance themselves
from the layoff victims (e.g., by spending less time notifying them of their
dismissal).

Managers’ experience of self-threat may compromise their ability to perform
their role effectively in other respects. For example, subordinates look to their
manager to develop a clear vision for the work unit and specific goals that they
can work toward following change (Jick, 1990). Initiating such activities is
likely to be very difficult for managers who themselves may be having trouble
focusing on long-term issues. Subordinates also may benefit from being empow-
ered by their managers, i.e., allowed to participate in decision making or given
responsibility and autonomy. However, subordinates’ desire to be empowered
may be at odds with managers’ need to maintain control in the face of a threat.
The most talented subordinates may wish to implement innovative solutions,
but this desire may conflict with self-threatened managers’ aversion to risk,
uncertainty, and innovation (Bedeian & Armenakis, 1998). Further examples
of the discrepancies between the self-protective tendencies of managers who
feel threatened and the actions needed for them to be effective during times
of change are presented in Table 4. In sum, the reactions of managers to lower
self-esteem are hypothesized to conflict with the actions needed to lead work
units effectively after layoffs. Thus, the self-protective responses of managers

TABLE 4

Comparison between Self-Threatened Managers’ Tendencies and Actions Required

of Managers during Times of Change

Self-threatened managers tend to

During times of change managers need to

Focus on immediate threat
Focus on personal needs
Show decreased motivation
Be cautious
Be rigid
Be defensive
Withdraw
Maintain tight control

Focus on vision and long-term plans
Anticipate and satisfy resource needs of work unit
Increase their motivation
Be risk-seeking
Be innovative
Be participatory/Have open communication
Be psychologically available to their subordinates
Empower subordinates


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

17

which may be personally adaptive (at least in the short term) are suboptimal
from the organization’s perspective.

The notion that the perception of greater procedural unfairness is associated
with lower self-esteem, which in turn makes managers less likely to perform
the behaviors needed from them during times of change, gives rise to the
following hypotheses:

Hypothesis 2. Managers’ self-esteem should be positively associated with
their tendency to perform the behaviors needed from them during times of
change.

Hypothesis 3. Perceptions of unfairness should be negatively associated
with managers’ tendency to perform the behaviors needed from them during
times of change.

Hypothesis 4. The relationship between managers’ fairness perceptions and
their enactment of behaviors needed from them during times of change will
be mediated by their self-esteem.

Relationship between Managerial Behaviors and Subordinates’ Perceptions

of Their Immediate Work Environment

While Hypotheses 1–4 in Study 2 focused on the relationship between percep-
tions of fairness, self-esteem, and self-reported managerial behaviors, it is
important to note that managers’ behaviors have wider implications (especially
following a significant change such as layoffs). In particular, managerial behav-
iors may be related to the reactions of their subordinates. One factor that may
be associated with how well subordinates function is their perceptions of the
immediate work environment. Managerial behaviors are likely to be associated
with subordinate perceptions of the work environment even when the organiza-
tion is not going through a change. However, the period immediately following
a major organizational change such as downsizing is generally viewed as highly
uncertain and ambiguous (Bridges, 1988; Jick, 1990). Organization members
are likely to be unsure of what is expected from them, how they are to be
rewarded, and what they can expect from their coworkers. Subordinates’ per-
ceived uncertainty may lead them to attempt to make sense of their situation,
seeking out both symbolic and substantive sources of information (Brockner &
Wiesenfeld, 1996; Weick, 1995). The uncertainty that subordinates experience
during a significant organizational change such as downsizing may make them
particularly attentive to managerial behaviors, thereby strengthening the rela-
tionship between subordinates’ perceptions of their managers’ behaviors and
their immediate work environment.

When managers behave in a self-protective manner, their subordinates may
be adversely affected by what they perceive to be a lack of managerial support.
Because perceived managerial support is one important factor associated with
subordinates’ overall perception of the work environment, it is likely that
managers’ failure to demonstrate the behaviors needed from them during times


18

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

of change may lead subordinates to have negative perceptions of the work
environment. Hence:

Hypothesis 5. The subordinates of managers who report engaging in fewer
of the behaviors needed during times of change will have more negative percep-
tions of their managers’ behaviors.

Hypothesis 6. Subordinates who have more negative perceptions of their
managers’ behaviors will have more negative perceptions of their immediate
work environment.

Hypothesis 7. The subordinates of managers who report engaging in fewer
of the behaviors needed from them during times of change will have more
negative perceptions of their immediate work environment, and

Hypothesis 8. Subordinates’ perceptions of their managers’ behaviors will
mediate the relationship between managers’ reported behaviors and subordi-
nates’ perceptions of their immediate work environment.

Figure 3 summarizes Hypotheses 1 through 8.

Method

The study occurred approximately two months following an organization-
wide downsizing and restructuring effort in a large public utility on the West
Coast of the United States. This was the first major downsizing in the organiza-
tion and it was implemented in response to deregulation in the industry. Manag-
ers in each of five divisions of the organization attended short meetings in
which the general purpose of the study was explained (i.e., to investigate
the effects of layoffs and related changes on organization members). At the
conclusion of the meetings, each manager was given a packet containing one
manager survey for him or her to complete and four subordinate surveys that
they were told to distribute randomly to their subordinates. The surveys were
anonymous. However, an identification code matched the subordinate and man-
ager surveys to each other. At least two subordinates in a work unit (as well
as the workgroup manager) had to respond to the survey in order for the
responses to be included in the statistical analyses.

Participants

Managers. Surveys were distributed to a total of 100 managers in the five
divisions; 62 completed surveys were returned to us. In four cases responses
had to be discarded because fewer than two of the managers’ subordinates

FIG. 3. Summary of relationships between key variables in Study 2.


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

19

returned their surveys (total N 5 58). The sample was primarily male (78%)
and educated (71% completed college or both college and at least some graduate
school). The majority of respondents were mid-level managers (60%), with
senior managers and first-level line managers each making up 17% of the
respondents (the remaining 6% of the sample did not report their managerial
level). Managers’ mean tenure in their current position was approximately
4.5 years.

Subordinates. The 58 participating managers distributed a total of 232
subordinate surveys, 179 of which were returned to us. Union workers made
up about half of subordinate respondents (51%). A substantial portion of the
subordinates surveyed were themselves managers (39%), such as lower-level
managers supervised by mid-level or senior management. In no case did any
respondent receive both a manager and a subordinate survey, however. The
remaining 10% of subordinate respondents were neither union workers nor
management. The subordinates who responded were 69% male and 28% female,
with 3% not reporting gender. With respect to education, 43% of subordinate
respondents reported completing some college or technical school, 31% were
college graduates, 17% attended or completed graduate school, and 9% were
high school graduates. Mean tenure in their current position was approximately
seven years.

Variables Measured at the Manager Level

Procedural fairness. Managers’ perceptions of procedural fairness were
measured with a six-item scale drawn from previous research (Brockner, Wie-
senfeld, & Martin, 1995; coefficient alpha 5 .85). All items asked about “the
changes” at the organization, in which “changes” were defined in the survey
as the “layoffs and restructuring involved in the downsizing initiative.” The
scale included an item tapping overall perception of procedural fairness (“In
general, how fair were the procedures used to manage the changes at [the
organization]?”; endpoints were “not at all fair” (1) and “very fair” (7)). Three
items tapped the structural dimensions of procedural justice (e.g., “To what
extent was corporate management consistent in how they carried out the
changes?”; endpoints were “not at all consistent” (1) and “very consistent” (7)).
Two items tapped interactional justice (e.g., “To what extent were people treated
with dignity and respect when the changes occurred?”; endpoints were “not at
all” (1) and “to a great extent” (7)).

Managers’ self-esteem. Research suggests that self-esteem may vary across
domains (e.g., work, school, family involvements); moreover, the best predictor
of behavior in a particular domain is domain-specific self-esteem rather than
general self-esteem (Pelham, 1993). Thus, we developed a domain-relevant
measure of managers’ self-esteem in this study. We used six items with the
greatest face-validity for managerial positions from the 10-item organization-
based self-esteem scale (Pierce, Gardner, Cummings, & Dunham, 1989). These
items were “I matter at [the organization]”; “I am taken seriously at [the


20

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

organization]”; “I am an important part of [the organization]”; “I am trusted
at [the organization]”; “I make a difference at [the organization]”; “I am efficient
at [the organization].” Four additional items were developed for the purpose
of this study. Those items were, “When doing my work at (the organization),
I feel good about myself,” “I am generally able to control the important things
that happen to me at work,” “I have opportunities to make a significant contri-
bution to and influence the workgroup’s outcome,” and “I feel that I am an
integral part of a larger effort.” Endpoints for all items were “strongly disagree”
(1) and “strongly agree” (7). Coefficient alpha for the combined 10-item scale
was .92.

Managerial behaviors. To measure managers’ perceptions of their manage-
rial behaviors, we selected 10 items from the Managerial Practices scale (Burke,
1990). The items chosen reflected behaviors expected of managers in the context
of change. The items included, “To what extent do you develop long-range plans
for your work unit?”; “To what extent do you take a personal interest in your
direct reports?”; and “To what extent do you provide a vision of the future and
a mission that captures the commitment of people?” Endpoints for all items
were “not at all” (1) and “to a great extent” (7). Coefficient alpha for the scale
was .87.

Variables Measured at the Subordinate Level

Subordinates’ perceptions of managerial behaviors. The measure of subordi-
nates’ perceptions of their managers’ behaviors consisted of the same 10-item
scale completed by managers, but rephrased to be appropriate to subordinates.
Thus, for example, the first sample item provided above was rephrased as
follows: “To what extent does your direct supervisor develop long-range plans
for your work unit?” Endpoints were “not at all” (1) and “to a great extent” (7).
Coefficient alpha for the scale was .96.

Immediate work environment. The measure of subordinates’ perceptions of
their immediate work environment consisted of 17 items adapted from the scale
developed by Burke (1990). Items included, “To what extent is performance of
work unit members overly constrained by a fear of failure?”; “When a work
unit member needs help, to what extent are others in the work unit quick to
respond?”; “To what extent are work unit goals clear?”; “To what extent do
people take pride in being a member of the work unit?”; and “To what extent
are members of the work unit inspired to perform at a higher level?” Endpoints
for all items were “not at all” (1) and “to a great extent” (7). Coefficient alpha
for the scale was .91.

Control Variables

In addition to the self processes that are the focus of this study, both manage-
rial behaviors and subordinates’ evaluations of the work environment may
have been influenced by factors external to the self. External factors may


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

21

present an alternative explanation of the hypothesized relationship between
managerial behaviors and subordinates’ perceptions of the work environment.
Specifically, it is possible that both managerial behaviors and subordinates’
perceptions of the work environment are caused by a third factor—the objective
work context. If so, then the correlation between managerial behaviors and
subordinates’ perceptions may be spurious.

To test for this possibility, a control variable was created to measure the
severity of the downsizing in each department, based on the percentage of
employees laid off. This variable relates to an objective factor that could have
numerous implications. For managers, the percentage of their subordinates
laid off refers to the loss of power they may have experienced in the organization
and may also be correlated with the degree of threat to their jobs. For subordi-
nates, the percentage of people laid off may relate to the experience of a loss
of friends and colleagues and may also reflect the degree of threat that they
anticipate regarding their own jobs.

Two additional control variables were included: managers’ tenure in the
organization (in months) and their level of education (1 5 some high school;
2 5 high school graduate; 3 5 some college or technical; 4 5 college graduate;
5 5 graduate school).

Results

Summary statistics are reported in Table 5.
To test Hypothesis 1, that managers’ perceptions of procedural unfairness
will be associated with lower self-esteem, managers’ self-esteem was regressed
on the measure of perceived procedural unfairness of the layoff and the three
control variables. Results support Hypothesis 1—the more managers felt that
the layoff had been handled unfairly, the more likely they were to report
lower self-esteem, even when controlling for percent of the department laid
off, education, and tenure (b5 .64; F 5 30.36; p , .001).

The relationship between managers’ self-esteem and their reported manage-
rial behaviors (Hypothesis 2) also emerged as expected. Specifically, the lower
the managers’ self-esteem, the less likely they were to report exhibiting the
behaviors needed from managers in times of change (see Table 6, column
1). To test Hypothesis 3, reported managerial behaviors were regressed on
managers’ perceptions of unfairness along with all three control variables.
Results suggest that perceptions of unfairness were associated with less effec-
tive reported managerial behaviors (see Table 6, column 2).

Hypothesis 4 suggested that the relationship between managers’ perceptions
of procedural fairness and their reported managerial behaviors would be medi-
ated by their self-esteem. To test this hypothesis, we conducted a regression
analysis in which the dependent variable (reported managerial behaviors) was
regressed on the independent variable (procedural fairness of the downsizing)
and the mediating variable (managers’ self-esteem).

Results showed strong support for the hypothesized mediation effect. As can
be seen in Table 6, column 3, adding managers’ self-esteem to the regression


Means, Standard Deviations, Ranges, and Intercorrelations (Study 2)

TABLE 5

Variable

1. Managers’ perceptions of procedural fairness
2. Managers’ self-esteem
3. Managers’ behaviors
4. Subordinates’ perceptions of managers’

behaviors

5. Subordinates’ perceptions of immediate work

environment

6. Percent of dept. laid off
7. Managers’ education
8. Managers’ tenure (in months)

Mean

4.08
5.18
5.28

4.69

4.38
4.19
3.90
58.93

SD

1.20
.94
.73

1.55

1.10
7.51
.95
60.72

Range

1

2

—
.64***
.31*

—
.47***

1–7
1–7
1–7

1–7

.09

.35***

.26**

—

Correlations

4

5

6

7

3

—

1–7
0–100
1–5
2–308

.18*
.21
2.18
.05

.33***
.14
2.22*
2.12

.25**
.15
2.09
2.04

.70***
.01
2.11
.03

—
2.07
2.15
.07

—
2.13
2.24

—
2.06

Note. Higher scores reflect more positive evaluations of each of the constructs. Correlations involving managers (subordinates) are based on a total N of 58 (179).
* p , .05.
** p , .01.
*** p , .001.

2
2

W
I
E
S
E
N
F
E
L
D

,

B
R
O
C
K
N
E
R

,

A
N
D
T
H
I
B
A
U
L
T


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

23

Regression Results for Managers’ Self-Esteem as a Mediator of the Relationship

between Procedural Fairness and Managerial Behaviors

TABLE 6

Reported managerial behaviors

Column 1

Column 2

Column 3

Predictor variables

b

F

p

b

F

p

b

F

Procedural fairness
Managers’ self-esteem
Percent of department Laid off
Managers’ education
Managers’ tenure
F
Df
p
Total R2

.49
.09
.02
.07

14.59
.49
.02
.27
4.00
(4, 46)
.01
.26

.28

3.92

.001
n.s.
.09
n.s. 2.02
n.s.
.01

.34
.00
.00
1.26
(4, 46)
.30
.10

.05 2.05
.53
.10
.02
.08

n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

.10
9.79
.55
.02
.31
3.16
(5, 45)
.02
.26

p

n.s.
.01
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

Note. Standardized regression coefficients are reported.

equation eliminated the relationship between perceived fairness and manage-
rial behaviors (i.e., the procedural fairness effect changed from F 5 3.92, p 5
.05 (see column 2) to F 5 .10, p 5 .76 (see column 3). In addition, the effect of
self-esteem remained highly significant (see Table 6, column 3), F 5 9.79,
p , .01. The reduction in the variance in managerial behaviors explained by
procedural fairness after self-esteem was included in the equation was nearly
100% (the R2 for procedural fairness went from .08 to .00 after self-esteem was
included). These results suggest that perceived procedural fairness is linked
to managerial behaviors through its relationship to managers’ self-esteem.

To test Hypothesis 5, subordinates’ individual perceptions of their managers’
behaviors were regressed on managers’ reports of their managerial behaviors,
along with the three control variables. The results of the regression support
Hypothesis 5. Subordinates’ perceptions of their managers’ behaviors were
positively related to managers’ reported behaviors (b5 .25; F 5 6.77, p , .01).
This finding validates managers’ self-reports of their own behaviors, suggesting
that their subordinates corroborate managers’ subjective perceptions.

To test Hypothesis 6, subordinates’ individual perceptions of their immediate
work environment were regressed on their perceptions of their managers’ be-
haviors and the three control variables. The results of the regression support
the hypothesis. Subordinates’ perceptions of their immediate work environ-
ment were positively related to their perceptions of their managers’ behaviors
(see Table 7, column 2).

To test Hypothesis 7, subordinates’ individual perceptions of their immediate
work environment were regressed on managers’ reports of their managerial
behaviors, along with the three control variables. The results of the regression
support Hypothesis 7 (see Table 7, column 1). Subordinates’ perceptions of their
immediate work environment were positively related to managers’ reported
behaviors (F 5 9.39, p , .01). In particular, when managers reported that their


b

.12

F

p

2.86

.10

24

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

TABLE 7

Regression Results for Subordinate Perceptions of Their Managers’ Behaviors as

a Mediator of the Relationships between Managers’ Reported Behaviors and

Subordinates’ Perception of the Immediate Work Environment

Subordinates’ perception of the immediate work environment

Column 1

Column 2

Column 3

Predictor variables

b

F

p

b

F

p

Managers’ reported behaviors
Subordinates’ perceptions of
their managers’ behaviors

.28

9.39

.01

Percent of department laid off 2.12
2.16
Managers’ education
Managers’ tenure
.12
F
Df
p
Total R2

1.83
3.39
1.87
4.54
(4, 113)
.002
.13

.69
n.s. 2.07
.07 2.09
n.s.
.05

112.15
1.23
1.89
.24
30.99
(4, 113)
.001
.51

.001
.65
n.s. 2.09
n.s. 2.09
n.s.
.08

.001
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

89.72
1.65
1.58
1.35
24.45
(5, 112)
.001
.52

Note. Standardized regression coefficients are reported.

behaviors were less effective, their subordinates were more likely to have
negative perceptions of their immediate work environment.

Hypothesis 8 asserts that subordinates’ perceptions of their managers’ behav-
iors mediate the relationship between managers’ reported behaviors and subor-
dinates’ perceptions of the immediate work environment. The results support
this hypothesis. Adding subordinates’ perceptions of their managers’ behaviors
to the regression of subordinates’ perceptions of their immediate work environ-
ment on managers’ reported behaviors (see Table 7, column 3) substantially
reduced the relationship between managers’ reported behaviors and subordi-
nates’ perceptions of the immediate work environment (i.e., results on manag-
ers’ reported behaviors changed from F 5 9.39, p , .01 (see column 1) to F 5
2.86, p . .05 (see column 3).

To state the mediation results differently, adding subordinates’ perceptions
of managers’ behaviors reduced the variance explained by managers’ percep-
tions of their own behaviors by almost 90% (R2 for managers’ reports of their
own behavior went from .09 without subordinates’ perceptions of their behav-
iors to .01 when subordinates’ perceptions were included in the equation).
Moreover, the effect of subordinates’ perceptions of their managers’ behaviors
remained highly significant (see Table 7, column 3, F 5 89.72, p , .001). These
results suggest that subordinates’ perceptions of their managers’ behaviors
mediated the relationship between managers’ reported behaviors and subordi-
nates’ perceptions of the immediate work environment.

Supplementary group-level analyses.

It could be argued on methodological
grounds that the workgroup is the appropriate unit of analysis with which to
test our hypotheses. In particular, the individual-level analyses could be biased
due to the fact that each manager had several subordinates. Conceptually,


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

25

however, individual-level analyses are most appropriate for several reasons. In
particular, we expected that managers may behave differently toward different
subordinates. For example, some subordinates may be high performers while
others perform less well, and some may be motivated by autonomy and a
participative management style while others find such behaviors disconcerting.
Furthermore, an individual subordinate’s unique set of skills, motivations, and
experiences may lead them to have different perceptions of objectively similar
managerial behaviors. The expected variation in managers’ behaviors and sub-
ordinates’ perceptions suggests that the individual subordinate is the most
appropriate level of analysis with which to determine the relationships between
managers’ self-reported behaviors and: (a) subordinates’ perceptions of their
managers’ behaviors, and (b) their perceptions of the immediate work
environment.

To evaluate whether the findings were an artifact of our having chosen the
individual as the unit of analysis, we also explored the relationship between
managers’ self-reported behaviors and subordinates’ aggregated perceptions of
their managers’ behavior and the immediate work environment. That is, we
conducted all of the analyses reported in Table 7 utilizing aggregate measures
of subordinates’ perceptions (and aggregates of all the control variables; sample
size N 5 58). The results were analogous to those reported in Table 7. In
particular, the relationship between managers’ self-reported behaviors and
subordinates’ aggregate perceptions of the work environment was significant
( p , .05), but when the hypothesized mediator (i.e., subordinates’ aggregate
perceptions of their managers’ behavior) was included in the analysis, the
relationship was no longer significant ( p 5 .27). Furthermore, the effects of
the mediating variable remained significant (F 5 160.78; p , .0001) and was,
in fact, greater than the one reported in Table 7, Column 3. Thus, regardless
of whether subordinates’ perceptions of their managers’ behaviors and their
perceptions of their work environment are analyzed at the individual or aggre-
gated level, the results support the predictions.

Discussion

The results of Study 2 suggest that self-reported managerial behaviors follow-
ing a downsizing were more negative when the managers perceived that the
change was handled more unfairly. Also, in Study 2 the correlation between
managers’ perceptions of procedural fairness and their self-esteem was quite
pronounced in an absolute sense (r 5 .64), and much more pronounced than
the corresponding correlation in Study 1 (r 5 .26). One possible reason for the
stronger findings in Study 2 may be that the constructs were assessed more
completely. Specifically, the measures of procedural fairness and managers’
self-esteem used in Study 2 consisted of more items (e.g., the fairness measure
in Study 1 consisted of three items while in Study 2 it consisted of six items,
allowing the latter measure to tap more of the dimensions of procedural fair-
ness). In addition, the self-esteem items in Study 2 were more directly relevant
to the organizational context.


26

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

Of greatest importance, the results suggest that managers’ self-esteem medi-
ates the relationship between perceptions of fairness and their self-reported
behaviors. These findings lend further support to emerging theory and research
suggesting that reduced self-esteem may make managers less effective in their
work role. For example, O’Neill and Lenn (1995) offer anecdotal evidence of a
relationship between the way managers are treated during downsizing and
their self-esteem. The idea that managers’ experience of self-threat may lead
them to be less effective during times of change (e.g., by derogating or distancing
themselves from layoff victims) also has received anecdotal (e.g., Cameron et
al., 1993; Folger & Pugh, 1998) and empirical (Folger & Skarlicki, 1998) sup-
port. The present findings extend those of Cameron et al. (1993), Folger & Pugh
(1998), and Folger and Skarlicki (1998) by showing that managers’ ineffective
behavioral responses may be directed toward layoff survivors as well as layoff
victims. The findings also reveal that managers’ behaviors following a layoff
are related to subordinates’ perceptions of the immediate work environment.

Limitations and Alternative Explanations

Study 2 leaves several issues unresolved. In calling attention to these mat-
ters, we are simultaneously offering some suggestions for future research. The
ambiguities associated with Study 2 may be grouped into two categories. First,
due to various aspects of the research design it is difficult to draw causal
inferences about the various linkages between the variables summarized in Fig.
3. Second, even if the variables were causally linked in the manner described in
Fig. 3, the mechanisms underlying some of the relationships are not entirely
clear, particularly those involving self-esteem. Each of these two categories of
ambiguities will be discussed in turn.

Assessing causality. Consider the variables assessed at the managerial
level. Hypothesis 1 posited that managers who perceived that the downsizing
had been handled more unfairly would report lower self-esteem. The fact that
a significant relationship emerged does not prove that perceptions of unfairness
influenced managers’ self-esteem. An alternative possibility is that the relation-
ship between these two measures is spurious. For example, perhaps workgroups
that perform well may be treated more fairly and may also enhance members’
self-esteem.

Evidence consistent with the predicted relationship between procedural un-
fairness and low self-esteem may be gleaned from previous research. For exam-
ple, experimental studies which allow causal inferences to be drawn have found
that unfairness influences subsequent self-evaluations (e.g., Koper et al., 1993,
Study 2; Mark, 1985; Vermunt et al., 1993). Also, conditions that are likely to
elicit self-threat have been found to influence subsequent attitudes and behav-
iors (such as defensiveness, deception, and distancing) among individuals in
general (e.g., Hodgins et al., 1996; Tyler et al., 1996) and among managers in a
downsizing context in particular (e.g., Cameron et al., 1993; Folger & Skarlicki,


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

27

1998). It is important to emphasize that the research designs in some of these
studies were high in internal validity.

The results at the manager level of analysis also could have been affected
by common methods bias. All three variables (perceptions of fairness, self-
esteem, and managerial behaviors) were measured in the same survey at the
same point in time. Once again, the alternative explanation cannot be elimi-
nated completely. However, it is worth noting that the common methods expla-
nation is unlikely to fully explain the key mediation findings. That is, the
relationship between perceptions of fairness and managerial behaviors was
eliminated when self-esteem was introduced into the equation. If the relation-
ship between perceptions of fairness and managerial behaviors was simply an
artifact of common methods, it would not be obvious why the relationship
between the two was eliminated when managers’ self-esteem was statistically
controlled. Furthermore, the present study found support for Hypotheses 5, 7,
and 8, in which common methods were not employed. Specifically, managers’
behaviors (as rated by the managers) were significantly related to their subordi-
nates’ perceptions of their behaviors and to subordinates’ perceptions of the
work environment. In a related vein, the correlations reported in Table 5
show that managers’ self-esteem was significantly related to their subordinates’
perceptions of (a) the managers’ behaviors, and (b) the work environment.

Explaining the mediating effect of self-esteem. Even if the relationships
involving the self-esteem variable were causal, it is necessary to clarify the
mechanism(s) through which self-esteem played a mediating role. Research
suggests that self-esteem itself is a multi-faceted construct with different sub-
strates and correlates (e.g., Baumeister, 1993). By measuring self-esteem, we
cannot specify with precision whether the underlying mediator of the relation-
ship between perceived fairness and managerial behaviors is self-esteem or
one of its substrates or correlates.

For example, our findings are consistent with sociometer theory (e.g., Leary &
Downs, 1995; Leary, Haupt, Strausser, & Chokel, 1998), which suggests that
self-esteem functions as a gauge measuring individuals’ perceptions of how
others view them. Of relevance to the present study, procedural unfairness
may lead individuals to perceive that they are not valued or respected by the
organization, making salient the threat of rejection. Applied to the present
context, sociometer theory suggests that managers’ less effective behaviors may
be a response to the perception of social rejection emanating from procedural
unfairness. Threat of rejection may be particularly relevant in a downsizing
context, in which survivors have recently witnessed victims being laid off and
thus excluded by the organization. Furthermore, because the organization-
based self-esteem construct combines individuals’ views of themselves with
their perceptions of how others view them, it is difficult to specify which of the
underlying mechanisms may be operating. In sum, future research should be
directed at specifying the mechanism(s) through which self-esteem mediates
the relationship between procedural unfairness and managerial behaviors.


28

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

GENERAL DISCUSSION

The present research is one of the first to focus attention on a critical, but
relatively ignored, constituency of layoff survivors—managers. In recent years,
managers’ jobs have become more susceptible to downsizing while the demands
on managers to lead and guide their workgroups through the process of change
have not diminished. Because of managers’ influential positions as decision
makers and role models, it is especially important to understand their personal
experience of how downsizing is managed (e.g., the relationship between proce-
dural fairness and self-esteem, as in Study 1) and the managerial behaviors
predicted by their personal experience of how downsizing is managed (as exam-
ined in Study 2).

Taken together, the present studies delineate antecedents and consequences
of managers’ personal experience of how layoffs are managed. The results of
Study 1 suggest that procedural fairness is one such antecedent of managers’
personal experience; we found that managers (but not nonmanagers) experi-
enced lower self-esteem in relation to greater procedural unfairness. The results
of Study 2 suggested that managerial behaviors may be a consequence of
managers’ personal experience of how downsizing is managed, i.e., managers’
perceptions of procedural unfairness were associated with less effective mana-
gerial behaviors during times of change. Furthermore, managers’ reports of
less effective behaviors were associated with subordinates’ perceptions of a
less supportive work environment.

In addition, the results shed some light on the processes underlying the
antecedents and consequences of managers’ personal experience of how down-
sizing is managed. Specifically, our findings suggest—in accordance with social
identity theory—that managers’ greater commitment to the organization is
responsible for their more pronounced relationship between perceived proce-
dural unfairness and lower self-esteem. The results of Study 2 also suggest
an explanation of why less effective managerial behaviors may emerge as a
consequence of managers’ personal experience of how downsizing is managed;
we found that the relationship between procedural unfairness and less effective
managerial behaviors is mediated by managers’ self-esteem.

Implications for Procedural Justice Theory

The present findings extend previous research on the relationship between
perceived procedural fairness and self-esteem (Koper et al., 1993, Study 2;
Vermunt et al., 1993). The results of Study 1 suggest that relative to other
employees, managers (and highly committed employees in general) exhibited
a more pronounced relationship between the degree of procedural fairness with
which a layoff was managed and their level of self-esteem. Also, in Study 2
the correlation between managers’ perceptions of procedural fairness and their
self-esteem was substantial (r 5 .64).

The present research is the first to suggest that: (a) perceptions of procedural
fairness are associated with managers’ self-reported behaviors during a signifi-
cant organizational transition, and (b) managers’ self-esteem mediates the


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

29

relationship between perceptions of fairness and their self-reported managerial
behaviors. The findings suggest that the relationship between procedural fair-
ness and self-esteem explored elsewhere (Koper et al., 1993, Study 2; Tyler et al.,
1996; Vermunt et al., 1993) may have important behavioral and organizational
implications. In particular, managers’ lower self-esteem in relation to proce-
dural unfairness may have negative effects that cascade down throughout an
organization, influencing their subordinates’ perceptions of the work environ-
ment. Moreover, the present research suggests that some of an organization’s
most crucial constituencies (i.e., managers and other highly committed em-
ployees) may be especially vulnerable to the negative effects of procedural
unfairness.

Implications for Research on Survivors’ Reactions to Layoffs

Study 1 suggests that a constituency of survivors critical to organizational
renewal (i.e., managers) is likely to experience lower self-esteem during down-
sizings that are perceived to have been managed more unfairly. Study 2 investi-
gates the correlates of managers’ lower self-esteem, suggesting that it may
lead to managerial behaviors that negatively influence the work environment.
The present research focuses on the way that downsizing is managed (rather
than the mere presence of downsizing itself). According to previous research,
managing downsizing in a procedurally fair way (e.g., providing advanced
notice, clearly explaining the reasons for the layoffs) involves actions that may
have little financial cost (Brockner et al., 1995). Furthermore, our results
suggest that unfairly managed downsizings may elicit lower self-esteem. More-
over, managers’ lower self-esteem is associated with ineffective managerial
behaviors and subordinates’ negative evaluations of the immediate work envi-
ronment, suggesting that managers’ personal experience of change may have
far-reaching organizational consequences.

Viewing managers as both agents and recipients of change thus has several
practical implications. In particular, it is possible that layoffs that are handled
fairly may reflect as well as elicit the behaviors required of effective managers
during times of change, without requiring significant expenditure of monetary
resources. However, our findings also suggest that if layoffs are managed un-
fairly (making self-threat and lower self-esteem among managers more likely),
it is in the organization’s interests to provide managers with an opportunity
to reaffirm, or restore, the self (Steele, 1988; Wiesenfeld, Brockner, & Martin,
1999). Specifically, because it reduces managers’ negative reactions to self-
threat, reaffirmation may lead to more effective managerial behaviors follow-
ing change.

Previous research on the determinants of layoff survivors’ productivity and
morale has focused on nonmanagerial employees. The target group in the
present research, in contrast, consisted of managers. Managers generally play
key roles in shaping the reactions of their subordinates, particularly in the
context of significant organizational transitions such as downsizing. Indeed,
the results of Study 2 suggest that subordinates’ perceptions of the favorability


30

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

of the postlayoff work environment are predicted by their managers’ behaviors.
Thus, it is important to identify factors that influence managers’ behaviors
during times of change. By focusing on managers’ personal experience of the
change, the present research serves as a vivid reminder that “managers are
people, too.” That is, factors related to managers’ self-esteem are associated
with their likelihood of enacting the behaviors needed from them in the context
of change and, in turn, their subordinates’ experience of the work context when
change transpires.

REFERENCES

Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression analysis: Testing and interpreting interactions.

Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Argyris, C. (1985). Strategy, change and defensive routines. Marshfield, MA: Pitman.
Aronson, J., Blanton, H., & Cooper, J. (1995). From dissonance to disidentification: Selectivity in

the self-affirmation process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 986–996.

Bandura, A. (1986). Fearful expectations and avoidant actions as coeffects of perceived inefficacy.

American Psychologist, 41, 1389–1391.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psycho-
logical research: Conceptual, strategic and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 1173–1182.

Batson, C. D., Early, S., & Salvarani, G. (1997). Perspective taking: Imagining how another feels
versus imagining how you would feel. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 751–757.
Baumeister, R. F. (1984). Choking under pressure: Self-consciousness and paradoxical effects of
incentives on skillful performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 610–620.
Bedeian, A. G. & Armenakis, A. A. (1998). The cesspool syndrome: How dreck floats to the top of

declining organizations. Academy of Management Executive, 12, 58–63.

Bies, R. J. (1987). The predicament of injustice: The management of moral outrage. In L. L.
Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 9, pp. 289–319).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Bridges, W. (1988). Surviving corporate transition: Rational management in a world of mergers,
layoffs, start-ups, takeovers, divestitures, deregulations, and new technologies. New York:
Doubleday.

Brockner, J., Tyler, T. R., & Cooper-Schneider, R. (1992). The influence of prior commitment to an
institution on reactions to perceived unfairness: The higher they are, the harder they fall.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 241–261.

Brockner, J., & Wiesenfeld, B. M. (1993). Living on the edge (of social and organizational psychol-
ogy): The effects of job layoffs on those who remain. In J. K. Murnighan (Ed.), Social psychology
in organizations: Advances in theory and research (pp. 119–140). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

Brockner, J., & Wiesenfeld, B. M. (1996). An integrative framework for explaining reactions to
decisions: The interactive effect of outcomes and procedures. Psychological Bulletin, 120,
189–208.

Brockner, J., Wiesenfeld, B. M., & Martin, C. L. (1995). Decision frame, procedural justice, and
survivors’ reactions to job layoffs. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
63, 59–68.

Brockner, J., Wiesenfeld, B. M., Reed, T., Grover, S., & Martin, C. (1993). The interactive effect
of job content and context on the reactions of layoff survivors. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 64, 187–197.

Burke, W. W. (1990). The executive practices scale. Pelham, NY: Burke Associates.


FAIRNESS AND MANAGERS’ SELF-ESTEEM

31

Cameron, K. S., Freeman, S. J., & Mishra, A. K. (1993). Downsizing and redesigning organizations.
In G. P. Huber & W. H. Glick (Eds.), Organizational change and redesign (pp. 19–63). New York:
Oxford University Press.

Conlon, D. E. (1993). Some tests of the self-interest and group-value models of procedural justice:
Evidence from an organizational appeal procedure. Academy of Management Journal, 36, 1109–
1124.

Cooper, W. H., & Richardson, A. J. (1986). Unfair comparisons. Journal of Applied Psychology,

71, 179–184.

Fein, S., & Spencer, S. J. (1997). Prejudice as self-image maintenance: Affirming the self through

derogating others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 31–44.

Fischer, K. W., & Tangney, J. P. (1995). Self-conscious emotions and the affect revolution: Framework
and overview. In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fisher (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: Shame, guilt,
embarrassment, and pride (pp. 3–22). New York: Guilford Press.

Folger, R. (1986). Rethinking equity theory: A referent cognitions model. In H. W. Bierhoff, R. L.
Cohen, & J. Greenberg (Eds.), Justice in social relations (pp. 145–162). New York: Plenum Press.
Folger, R. (1993). Reactions to mistreatment at work. In J. K. Murnighan (Ed.), Social psychology
in organizations: Advances in theory and research (pp. 161–183). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.

Folger, R., & Pugh, S. D. (2000). The Churchill paradox in managing hard times: Kicking employees

when they’re down and out. Manuscript under editorial review.

Folger, R., & Skarlicki, D. P. (1998). When tough times make tough bosses: Managerial distancing

as a function of layoff blame. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 79–87.

Hambrick, D. C., & Cannella, A. A. (1989). Strategy implementation as substance and selling.

Academy of Management Executive, 278–285.

Heatherton, T. F. & Polivy, J. (1991). Development and validation of a scale for measuring state

self-esteem. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 895–910.

Heckscher, C. (1995). White-collar blues: Management loyalties in an age of corporate restructuring.

New York: Basic Books.

Hill, L. A. (1992). Becoming a manager: Mastery of a new identity. Boston: Harvard Business

School Press.

Hodgins, H. S., Liebeskind, E., & Schwartz, W. (1996). Getting out of hot water: Facework in social

predicaments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 300–314.

Jick, T. D. (1990). The recipients of change. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Kets de Vries, M. F. R., & Balazs, K. (1997). The downside of downsizing. Human Relations,

50, 11–50.

Koper, G., Van Knippenberg, D., Bouhuijs, F., Vermunt, R., & Wilke, H. (1993). Procedural fairness

and self-esteem. European Journal of Social Psychology, 23, 313–325.

Leary, M. R., & Downs, D. L. (1995). Interpersonal function of the self-esteem motive: The self-
esteem system as a sociometer. In M. H. Kernis (Ed.), Efficacy, agency and self-esteem (pp.
123–144). New York: Plenum.

Leary, M. R., Haupt, A. L., Strausser, K. S., & Chokel, J. T. (1998). Calibrating the sociometer:
The relationship between interpersonal appraisals and state self-esteem, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 74, 1290–1299.

Leventhal, G. S., Karuza, J., & Fry, W. R. 1980. Beyond fairness: A theory of allocation preferences.

In G. Mikula (Ed.), Justice and social interaction (pp. 167–218). New York: Springer-Verlag.

Lind, E. A. & Tyler, T. R. (1988). The social psychology of procedural justice. New York: Plenum Press.
Mark, M. (1985). Expectations, procedural justice, and alternative reactions to being deprived of

a desired outcome. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 21, 114–137

Mowday, R. T., Porter, L., & Steers, R. (1982). Employee-organization linkages. New York: Aca-

demic Press.


32

WIESENFELD, BROCKNER, AND THIBAULT

O’Neill, H. M., & Lenn, D. J. (1995). Voices of survivors: Words that downsizing CEOs should

hear. Academy of Management Executive, 9, 23–33.

O’Reilly, C. A. III, & Chatman, J. (1986). Organizational commitment and psychological attachment:
The effects of compliance, identification, and internalization on prosocial behavior. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 71, 492–499.

Pelham, B. W. (1993). On the highly positive thoughts of the highly depressed. In R. F. Baumeister

(Ed.), Self-esteem: The puzzle of low self-regard (pp. 183–196). New York: Plenum.

Pierce, J. L., Gardner, D. G., Cummings, L. L., & Dunham, R. B. (1989). Organization-based self-
esteem: Construct definition, measurement, and validation. Academy of Management Journal,
32, 622–648.

Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, J. E. (1981). Threat-rigidity effects in organizational

behavior: A multilevel analysis. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26, 501–524.

Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261–302). New York:
Academic Press.

Steele, C. M. and Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of

African Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 482–497.

Turner, J. C. (1982). Toward a cognitive definition of the group. In H. Tajfel (Ed.), Social identity

and intergroup relations (pp. 123–137). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Tyler, T., Degoey, P. & Smith, H. (1996). Understanding why the justice of group procedures matters:
A test of the psychological dynamics of the group-value model. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 70, 913–930.

Van den Bos, K., Bruins, J., Wilke, H. A. M., and Dronkert, E. (1999). Sometimes unfair procedures
have nice aspects: On the psychology of the fair process effect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 77, 324–336.

Vermunt, R., Wit, A., van den Bos, K., & Lind, A. (1993). The effect of inaccurate procedure on
protest: The mediating role of perceived unfairness and situational esteem. Paper presented at
the fourth International Conference on Social Justice, Trier, Germany.

Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wiesenfeld, B. M., Brockner, J., & Martin, C. (1999). A self-affirmation analysis of survivors’
reactions to unfair organizational downsizings. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
35, 441–460.

Received July 30, 1999; published online August 8, 2000

