Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / o b h d p

Gender makes the difference: The moderating role of leader gender
on the relationship between leadership styles and subordinate
performance
An-Chih Wang a, Jack Ting-Ju Chiang b, Chou-Yu Tsai c, Tzu-Ting Lin d, Bor-Shiuan Cheng d,⇑

a Department of Psychology, Chung Yuan Christian University, Taiwan
b Guanghua School of Management, Peking University, China
c School of Management, State University of New York at Binghamton, United States
d Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University, Taiwan

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 3 December 2010
Accepted 4 June 2013
Available online 10 July 2013
Accepted by Douglas Brown

Keywords:
Leader gender
Authoritarian leadership
Benevolent leadership
Role congruency theory
Attribution theory

Introduction

Using a predominantly male research and development (R&D) sample and a predominantly female cus-
tomer service personnel sample, we investigated how authoritarian and benevolent leadership styles
interact with leader gender to inﬂuence subordinate performance (i.e., task performance, citizenship
behavior, and creativity). Our research extends role congruity theory (Eagly & Karau, 2002) by adopting
Kelley’s (1972a, 1972b) attribution principles to offer a more comprehensive framework for explaining
how leader gender affects the impact of leadership styles on subordinate performance. Our results sug-
gest that the negative relationship between authoritarian leadership and subordinate performance is
stronger for female than for male leaders and that the positive relationship between benevolent leader-
ship and subordinate performance is stronger for male than for female leaders. Accordingly, in addition to
leaders’ engaging in gender-role congruent behaviors, a useful strategy is to adopt behaviors that are per-
ceived as a positive deviation from their gender role.

Ó 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Gender stereotypes affect people’s perceptions of appropriate
male and female behavior (Eagly & Karau, 2002; Heilman, 2001).
Men are expected to display ‘‘agentic’’ characteristics, including
assertion, control, competitiveness, and striving for achievement.
In contrast, women are expected to demonstrate ‘‘communal’’
characteristics, such as individualized concern and sympathy
(Eagly, Wood, & Diekman, 2000). These gender stereotypes are
salient in business, and the perception of incongruence between
gender and leadership roles can have an unfavorable impact on
leaders, especially on female leaders. According to role congruity
theory (Eagly & Karau, 2002), prejudice toward women in leader-
ship positions is related to the degree of incongruence between -
female gender and leadership roles. Speciﬁcally, when female
leaders demonstrate agentic leadership behaviors, they create
incongruence between their female gender and leadership roles,
which results in followers’ unfavorable perceptions (e.g., Heilman

⇑ Corresponding author. Address: S305, Department of Psychology, National

Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.

E-mail addresses: wac@cycu.edu.tw (A.-C. Wang), tjchiang@gsm.pku.edu.cn
(J.Ting-Ju Chiang), ctsai3@binghamton.edu (C.-Y. Tsai), d96227102@ntu.edu.tw
(T.-T. Lin), chengbor@ntu.edu.tw (B.-S. Cheng).

0749-5978/$ - see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2013.06.001

& Okimoto, 2007; Heilman, Wallen, Fuchs, & Tamkins, 2004;
Lyness & Heilman, 2006).

Role congruity theory focuses on why female leaders become
the targets of prejudice when they behave in an agentic manner
(Eagly & Karau, 2002). The existing leadership and gender research,
including role congruity theory, falls short, however, in explaining
this phenomenon, and, thus, additional research is needed. Because
role congruity theory does not focus on followers’ performance, it
is not sufﬁcient to explain how leader gender alters how leadership
behaviors affect subordinate performance. To understand how lea-
der gender alters the relationships between leadership behaviors
and subordinate performance, it is necessary to compare the ef-
fects of the same leadership behaviors performed by both female
leaders and male leaders (Eagly, 2007), which has not been ad-
dressed in previous research. Further, recent research (e.g., Ander-
son, Lievens, van Dam, & Born, 2006; Johnson, Murphy, Zewdie, &
Rebecca, 2008) has suggested the need for a more comprehensive
theoretical framework for gender and leadership research. In these
studies, female leaders who adopted gender role-congruent leader-
ship styles did not receive the most positive evaluations from their
subordinates; instead, those who demonstrated favorable agentic
behaviors, such as decisiveness, were particularly liked and valued.
These ﬁndings suggest that role congruity theory cannot provide
an adequate understanding of the relationship between gender
and leadership roles.


102

A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

Therefore,

in the current research, we aim to address the
remaining issues above. Kelley’s (1972a, 1972b) attribution princi-
ples have been widely used to understand the effects of stereotyp-
ing in social and organizational settings (e.g., Johnson et al., 2008;
Jussim, 1986; Jussim, Coleman, & Lerch, 1987) and are proposed to
supplement role congruity theory to provide a more comprehen-
sive theoretical framework for understanding the moderating role
of leader gender on the relationship between leadership styles and
subordinate performance. We examine the interaction between
leadership styles based on authoritarian and benevolent leadership
behaviors and gender roles on subordinate performance in Taiwan.
As the two most prevalent leadership styles in Chinese settings,
authoritarian leadership (i.e., asserting strong discipline and
authority) and benevolent leadership (i.e., caring about subordi-
nates’ personal well-being; e.g., Farh & Cheng, 2000; Redding,
1990; Silin, 1976; Westwood & Chan, 1992) are especially suitable
for investigating the relationship between leadership and gender
roles. Authoritarian leadership is more consistent with male gen-
der-stereotyped characteristics, whereas benevolent leadership is
more congruent with those of female gender-stereotyped charac-
teristics. We postulate that subordinates’ trust in leaders explains
how leader gender and leadership styles jointly affect subordinate
performance, including task performance, citizenship behavior,
and creativity (Chen, Eberly, Chiang, Farh, & Cheng, in press).
Accordingly, we predict that female leaders’ authoritarian leader-
ship, which is incongruent with the gender role expectations of fe-
males, has a stronger effect on subordinate performance than does
male leaders’ authoritarian leadership. In contrast, male leaders’
benevolent leadership, which is incongruent with gender role
expectations of males, has a stronger effect on subordinate perfor-
mance than does female leaders’ benevolent leadership. Although
both attribution principles and role congruity theory well explain
the former prediction of an unfavorable deviation from gender role
expectations, only attribution principles can explain the latter
favorable deviation.

In sum, our research extends role congruity theory by adopting
Kelley’s (1972a, 1972b) attribution principles to offer a more com-
prehensive framework for explaining how leader gender affects the
impact of leadership styles on subordinate performance. Our paper
extends previous literature that primarily examined differences in
how male and female leaders display their leadership styles (e.g.,
Eagly, Johannesen-Schmidt, & Engen, 2003) or differences in how
male and female leaders are perceived and liked (e.g., Anderson
et al., 2006; Eagly, Karau, & Makhijani, 1995; Johnson et al., 2008).

Theory and hypotheses

Attribution principles as a supplement to role congruity theory

Individuals have distinct preferences for men’s and women’s
behavioral patterns, as related to stereotypes (Eagly et al., 2000;
Thornton & Freedman, 1979). For example, agentic behavior is per-
ceived as less desirable in women than in men (Eagly, 2007; Eagly
& Carli, 2003). Even when they are equally effective, female leaders
who act agentically are usually perceived as less effective than
their male colleagues (Heilman & Okimoto, 2007; Heilman et al.,
2004; Lyness & Heilman, 2006). Role congruity theory aims to ex-
plain the prejudice toward female leaders (Eagly & Johannesen-
Schmidt, 2001; Eagly & Karau, 2002) and posits two types of biases
against female leaders. The ﬁrst bias is related to descriptive beliefs
about females: Subordinates form less favorable evaluations of fe-
males’ potential for leadership because leadership ability is more
stereotypical for males than for females. The second bias is related
to prescriptive beliefs about females: Subordinates form less favor-
able evaluations toward females’ leadership behaviors when these
behaviors are perceived as less desirable in females than in males.

Role congruity theory, however, does not explain the recent ﬁnd-
ings that leaders whose behaviors positively deviate from their
gender roles (i.e., male leaders’ demonstrating sensitivity to emo-
tions; female leaders’ showing decisiveness) receive better evalua-
tions than those whose behaviors are congruent with their gender
role expectations (Anderson et al., 2006; Johnson et al., 2008). To
explain the effects of positive deviations from gender role expecta-
tions, we use Kelley’s attribution principles (Kelley, 1972a, 1972b)
as a supplement to role congruity theory.

Central to attribution theory is that an action is more informa-
tive of an actor’s disposition when fewer reasons for the action ex-
ist and when these reasons are generally considered uncommon
(Jones & Davis, 1965). Accordingly, Kelley (1972a) expected that
behavior consistent with observers’ expectations is more likely to
be attributed to situational constraints or to external stimuli, while
behavior that departs from expectations says more about the actor.
Kelley’s later work suggested that this proposition can be broken
down into two mutually exclusive principles: the discounting prin-
ciple and the augmentation principle (Kelley, 1972b; Kelley &
Michela, 1980). The discounting principle predicts that an expected
behavior under situational pressures is less likely to be attributed
to an actor’s behavior-correspondent disposition than is the same
behavior without situational constraints. The expected behavior
is discounted as an indication of one’s identifying disposition be-
cause situational pressures may have caused it. The augmentation
principle postulates that an unexpected behavior under situational
pressures is more likely to be attributed to an actor’s behavior-cor-
respondent disposition than is the same behavior without situa-
tional constraints. Occurring in the face of situational demands,
the unexpected behavior is taken as revealing an actor’s disposi-
tion because it clearly indicates the actor’s response to situational
pressures.

Applying the discounting and augmentation principles of attri-
bution to gender and leadership phenomena, we argue that stereo-
typed gender norms serve as background knowledge that affects
how subordinates compare their leaders’ leadership roles with ste-
reotyped gender roles. Following the discounting principle, when
leaders demonstrate leadership styles consistent with gender role
expectations, their behavior is more likely to be attributed to gen-
der-norm requirements rather than to purposeful and intentional
acts. In contrast, the augmentation principle suggests that, when
leaders display leadership styles that violate gender role expecta-
tions, their behaviors are more likely to be attributed to the leaders
themselves. Accordingly, we predict that, for male leaders, their
gender role-congruent behaviors (e.g., assertiveness, decisiveness,
controlling tendencies) are more likely to be attributed to gender
norms for males. In contrast, their behaviors that deviate from
male gender roles (e.g., empathy, sympathy) are more likely to
be attributed to their disposition or intentions. Similarly, we pre-
dict that, for female leaders, their gender role-congruent behaviors
tend to be attributed to gender norms for females, whereas their
agentic, male-like leadership styles tend to be attributed to their
disposition or intentions. As a result, in the presence of alternative
causes, for both male and female leaders, leadership styles that are
congruent with gender role expectations should have weaker ef-
fects on subordinates. In contrast, in the absence of alternative
causes, for both male and female leaders, leadership styles that
are incongruent with gender role expectations should have stron-
ger effects on subordinates.

Gender role expectations in the chinese context

In the service of a hierarchical and stable social order, Confucian
ethics put forth distinctively different roles for men and women
(Ramusack & Sievers, 1999), and, in Chinese culture, gender role
expectations are strong (Curtin, 1975; Entwisle, Henderson, Short,


A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

103

Bouma, & Zhai, 1995; Greenglass, 1982; Mann, 1990; Ng, 1995;
Tang & Tang, 2001; Yao, 1983). Chinese females are expected to
be passive, compliant, and feminine, whereas Chinese males are
expected to be active, aggressive, and masculine. These gender role
expectations are consistent with agentic and communal prefer-
ences for men’s and women’s behavior, respectively (Eagly et al.,
2000; Thornton & Freedman, 1979). Consistent with Eagly et al., re-
search has shown that these stereotypical gender norms are found
consistently across different cultural settings (e.g., Chang, 1999;
Zhou, 2006).

Authoritarian and benevolent leadership

Authoritarian and benevolent leadership are considered the
predominant leadership styles in Chinese culture (Aycan, 2006;
Chen et al., in press; Farh & Cheng, 2000; Farh, Liang, Chou, &
Cheng, 2008). Authoritarian leadership refers to a leader’s asserting
strong authority and control over subordinates and demanding
unquestioned obedience. Leaders who are highly authoritarian ap-
ply strict discipline when supervising subordinates’ work assign-
ments; they insist on adherence to high standards and reprimand
subordinates for poor performance. They also exhibit high levels
of self-conﬁdence and act in a digniﬁed manner as well as highlight
their authority by making decisions independently and tightly
guarding key information (Farh & Cheng, 2000; Farh et al., 2008).
Benevolent leadership involves individualized and holistic con-
cern for subordinates’ personal and familial well-being (Chen et al.,
in press; Farh & Cheng, 2000). Benevolent leaders show concern for
subordinates’ career development by providing job security, devel-
opmental feedback, coaching, and mentoring, and giving subordi-
nates chances to correct mistakes. Leaders’ care also can be
expressed in their treatment of subordinates as family members
by helping them to overcome personal crises and by extending
concern to subordinates’ family members (Farh et al., 2008; Wang
& Cheng, 2010).

Although, in the Chinese context, both male and female leaders
demonstrate authoritarian and benevolent
leadership (Lin &
Cheng, 2007), authoritarian leadership and agentic characteristics
are more consistent with the Chinese social expectations for
men, whereas benevolent leadership and communal behaviors
are more consistent social expectations for females. Thus, we pro-
pose that, for male leaders, authoritarian leadership is a gender
role-congruent leadership style, while benevolent leadership devi-
ates from male gender role expectations. In contrast, we expect
that, for female leaders, authoritarian leadership deviates from fe-
male gender role expectations, while benevolent leadership is con-
gruent with female gender roles.

Effects of authoritarian and benevolent leadership

Research has argued that authoritarian and benevolent leader-
ship styles have different effects on subordinate performance be-
cause these two leadership styles have different effects on
subordinates’ trust in leaders (Chen et al., in press; Wu, Huang,
Li, & Liu, 2012). Authoritarian leadership that emphasizes control-
ling and demanding behaviors tends to trigger subordinates’ nega-
tive emotions, such as fear and anger, and thereby decreases
subordinates’ trust in leaders (Chen et al., in press; Farh, Cheng,
Chou, & Chu, 2006). In contrast, benevolent leaders, who show con-
cern about subordinates, engender positive emotions, which devel-
op subordinates’ trust in leaders (Chen et al., in press).

Given the positive effects of trust in leaders on subordinate out-
comes, researchers consistently have found benevolent leadership
to be positively related to subordinate outcomes, such as task per-
formance, organizational citizenship behavior, and creativity (e.g.,
Chen et al., in press; Cheng, Huang, & Chou, 2002; Cheng, Hsieh, &

Chou, 2002; Wang & Cheng, 2010). Further, although substantial re-
search evidence has supported the negative relationship between
authoritarian leadership and subordinates’ job attitudes (e.g., Farh
et al., 2008), more recent research suggests that the relationship be-
tween authoritarian leadership and subordinate performance is
likely to depend on the context. For example, authoritarian leader-
ship may be particularly effective in eliciting subordinates’ effort in
urgent situations (Niu, Wang, & Cheng, 2009).

Leader gender as a moderator

How does leader gender moderate the relationship between
authoritarian leadership and subordinate performance? According
to the augmentation principle (Kelley, 1972b), when female lead-
ers adopt authoritarian leadership, subordinates are more inclined
to attribute the authoritarian leadership style to their leaders’ dis-
position and to perceive that their female leaders are intentionally
demonstrating authoritarian leadership behaviors to overcome sit-
uational constraints (i.e., the female gender-role stereotype). The
lack of an alternative explanation (i.e., authoritarian leadership as
a display of gender role-congruent behavior) strengthens the attri-
bution to leaders’ identifying dispositions. In this situation, female
leaders’ authoritarian leadership should have particularly strong
effects, such as a substantial decrease in subordinates’ trust in
the leaders (Chen et al., in press), which is a proximal antecedent
for task performance, citizenship behavior, and creativity (Colquitt,
Scott, & LePine, 2007; Dirks & Ferrin, 2002).

In contrast, for male leaders, authoritarian leadership behaviors
are congruent with expectations of their agentic role. According to
the discounting principle (Kelley, 1972b), male leaders’ authoritar-
ian leadership is less likely to be attributed to their dispositions or
intentions because their authoritarian leadership can be attributed
to their gender roles. Compared to the situation with authoritarian
female leaders, subordinates who work with authoritarian male
leaders are less likely to reduce their trust in their leaders and
thereby lower their performance. Therefore, we propose a moder-
ating effect for leader gender: The negative effects of authoritarian
leadership on subordinate performance are stronger for female
leaders than for male leaders.

Consistent with Kelley’s (1972a, 1972b) attribution principles,
role congruity theory (Eagly & Karau, 2002) also predicts that the
negative effects of authoritarian leadership on subordinate perfor-
mance are stronger for female leaders than for male leaders.
According to this theory, prescriptive bias toward female leaders
occurs when female leaders adopt authoritarian leadership, as it
is incongruent with female leaders’ gender roles. The incongruence
between authoritarian leadership and the female gender role may
decrease subordinates’ trust in female leaders and, hence, decrease
subordinates’ performance.

Hypothesis 1. Leader gender moderates the negative relationship
between authoritarian leadership and subordinate performance
such that this relationship is stronger for female leaders than for
male leaders.

For the moderating effect of leader gender on the relationship be-
tween benevolent leadership and subordinate performance, we con-
sider that role congruity theory (Eagly & Karau, 2002) is insufﬁcient
to explain the more favorable evaluations that male leaders receive
when they engage in benevolent leadership. Following the logic of
descriptive bias in role congruity theory, subordinates should form
less favorable evaluations of males’ benevolent leadership because
it is more stereotypical of females. However, this is not the case, gi-
ven the positive effects of benevolent leadership consistently found
in predominantly male settings (Farh et al., 2008). Thus, the use of
the prescriptive bias to understand the interaction between


104

A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

benevolent leadership and leader gender also is problematic.
Although benevolent leadership is less congruent with male gender
roles, subordinates do not perceive male leaders’ benevolent leader-
ship to be less desirable in males than in females. Thus, we again em-
ploy attribution principles to hypothesize the moderating role of
leader gender in the relationship between benevolent leadership
and subordinate performance.

According to Kelley’s augmentation principle (Kelley, 1972b),
when male leaders demonstrate benevolent leadership behaviors,
subordinates are more likely to attribute their male leaders’ benev-
olent behaviors to the male leaders’ disposition. This attribution
occurs because these benevolent behaviors violate subordinates’
expectations of male gender stereotypes, causing these benevolent
behaviors to appear uncommon and particularly meaningful. As a
result, subordinates tend to perceive their male leaders’ benevo-
lent leadership more favorably than they do their female leaders’.
They develop higher trust in their male leaders, work harder, and
perform more citizenship behaviors.

In contrast, the discounting principle (Kelley, 1972b) indicates
that female leaders’ benevolent leadership is less likely to be
attributed to female leaders’ disposition because such benevolent
behaviors meet subordinates’ expectations toward female leaders’
gender stereotypes. Their benevolent leadership is thus considered
common and less meaningful to subordinates. As a result, the po-
sitive effects of benevolent leadership on trust in leaders and sub-
ordinate performance are likely to be mitigated. Thus, we propose
that the positive effects of benevolent leadership on subordinates’
performance are stronger for male leaders than for female leaders.

Hypothesis 2. Leader gender moderates the positive relationship
between benevolent leadership and subordinate performance such
that this relationship is stronger for male leaders than for female
leaders.

Study 1

In this study, we focused on R&D engineers in Taiwanese
high-tech companies. To fully capture the performance of R&D
engineers, we chose four outcome variables: creativity, task perfor-
mance, altruism toward colleagues, and conscientiousness. Crea-
tivity and task performance served as indicators for R&D
engineers’ in-role performance. Creativity is deﬁned as products,
ideas, or procedures that are original and potentially useful to an
organization (Amabile, 1988; Oldham & Cummings, 1996). Task
performance refers to performance on core tasks deﬁned and as-
signed by a supervisor or by the employer (Tsui, Pearce, Porter, &
Tripoli, 1997). Further, because Tsai and Cheng (2006) noted that
teamwork and devotion of time and effort to work teams are char-
acteristic of R&D units in Taiwanese high-tech corporations, we
used altruism toward colleagues and conscientiousness to measure
R&D engineers’ extra-role citizenship behavior.

Methods

Sample and procedure. The sample for Study 1 is a group of R&D
engineers and their direct supervisors in 15 electronic manufacturers
in Taiwan, where authoritarianism and benevolence are valued (Farh
& Cheng, 2000). We contacted human resources managers in each
company to solicit their help in distributing matching questionnaires
to randomly identiﬁed supervisors and to three subordinates who re-
ported directly to them. Subordinates provided information on their
demographics and their perceptions of their supervisors, and their
corresponding supervisors rated their subordinates’ work outcomes
as well as provided information on their own demographics. Each
respondent received a stamped, self-addressed envelope by which
to return the completed questionnaire to the authors.

the subordinates

A total of 265 completed and usable matching pairs resulted
from a total of 300 dyads, for an overall response rate of 88%. The
mean age of
(n = 265) was 36.71 years
(SD = 5.31), with a mean company tenure of 4.30 years (SD = 4.01).
Over half of those sampled were male (56%) and well-educated
(83% held bachelor’s or higher degrees). Of the supervisors
(n = 100), 65% were male and highly educated (89% held bachelor’s
or higher degrees). The mean age for supervisors was 41.52 years
(SD = 4.96), and their mean tenure was 10.13 years (SD = 6.21).

Measures. A Chinese version of scales for subordinate outcomes
was created following Brislin’s (1986) translation and back-transla-
tion procedure. Because Chinese respondents tend to choose the
mid-point on a Likert scale (Yang & Chiu, 1987), we removed the
mid-point by converting the 5- or 7-point scale into a 6-point scale.
Oldham and Cumming’s (1996) scale was used to measure sub-
ordinates’ creativity (a = .94). The supervisor-rated scale, which
was answered by 1 (very uncharacteristic) to 6, (very characteris-
tic), included ‘‘develops ideas, methods, or products that are both
totally unique and especially useful to the organization,’’
‘‘uses
existing information or materials to develop new ideas, methods,
or products that are useful to the organization,’’ and ‘‘produces cre-
ative work outcomes that are both original and useful to the
organization.’’

Farh, Dobbins, & Cheng’s (1991) 3-item scale was used to mea-
sure task performance (a = .91). The scale, which was answered by
1 (very uncharacteristic) to 6 (very characteristic), included the fol-
lowing supervisor-rated items: ‘‘works efﬁciently,’’ ‘‘completes as-
signed tasks on time,’’ and ‘‘produces accurate, error-free work
outcomes.’’

We used Farh, Earley, and Lin’s (1997) four-item altruism scale
to measure altruism toward colleagues. Altruism has been used to
access citizenship behavior (e.g., Grant & Dutton, forthcoming;
Grant & Gino, 2010). The ratings for altruism use the same super-
visor-rated scale as that for creativity and performance. Our items
included: ‘‘willing to assist new colleagues in adjusting to the work
environment,’’ ‘‘willing to help colleagues solve work-related prob-
lems,’’
‘‘willing to cover work assignments for colleagues when
needed,’’ and ‘‘willing to coordinate and communicate with col-
leagues.’’ The coefﬁcient alpha for this scale was .80.

The conscientiousness scale (a = .89) also was adopted from
Farh, Earley, and Lin (1997). The ﬁve items also were rated on
the same supervisor-rated scale and included: ‘‘complies with
company rules and procedures when nobody watches and no evi-
dence can be traced,’’ ‘‘takes his/her job seriously and rarely makes
mistakes,’’ ‘‘does not mind taking on new or challenging assign-
ments,’’ ‘‘tries hard to self-study to increase the quality of work
outputs,’’ and ‘‘often arrives early and starts to work immediately.’’
Cheng, Chou, Wu, Huang, and Farh’s (2004) scale was used to
test authoritarian leadership (a = .88) and benevolent leadership
(a = .87). Subordinates reported the frequency of perceiving their
supervisors’ authoritarian or benevolent behaviors using a 6-point
scale that ranges from 1 (not at all) to 6 (frequently). Sample items
for authoritarian leadership are: ‘‘My supervisor always has the
last say in the meeting,’’ and ‘‘My supervisor scolds us when we
cannot accomplish our tasks.’’ Sample items for benevolent leader-
ship are: ‘‘Beyond my work relations, my supervisor expresses con-
cern about my daily life,’’ and ‘‘My supervisor will help me when
I’m experiencing an emergency.’’

Control variables. Previous studies have identiﬁed a gender bias
in evaluating males’ and females’ behaviors (Heilman & Okimoto,
2007; Heilman et al., 2004; Lyness & Heilman, 2006). That is, the
same behavior enacted by males and females can be viewed differ-
ently by raters of different sexes. Additionally, a previous study
(Lin & Cheng, 2007) found that varying gender combinations of
leaders and subordinates may affect how subordinates perceive
their leaders’ authoritarian and benevolent leadership. Therefore,


A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

105

we entered the leader’s gender, the subordinate’s gender (both
dummy-coded as 0 for female and 1 for male), and the interaction
term of the former two dummy variables (1 for the male-male
combination and 0 for other gender combinations) into regression
models before testing hypothesized effects.

Further, because two-thirds of the sampled supervisors were
male, our sample reﬂected a predominantly male leadership con-
text, and it is possible that female leaders act differently because
they are not in the majority group. To clarify whether the source
of observed effects was gender, we controlled for percentages of fe-
male leaders within each ﬁrm (0–80%, average = 29%). Addition-
ally, the collecting of subordinate outcomes from supervisors
may introduce potential confounders that contaminate the main
effect of authoritarian/benevolent leadership. For example, subor-
dinates who have long-term relationships with their supervisors
may see greater benevolence. Therefore, we also controlled for
the length of a supervisor–subordinate relationship (in years).

Analytic strategy. Our data revealed a nested structure (i.e., on
average, 2.65 subordinates under one supervisor). To control for
the nesting effect, we adopted hierarchical
linear modeling
(HLM). Speciﬁcally, authoritarian and benevolent leadership styles
were operationalized as the mean score of followers under the
same leader (means were group centered; cf. Enders & Toﬁghi,
2007). In the multilevel model, authoritarian leadership, benevo-
lent leadership, and leader gender were entered as group-level
variables, while subordinate outcomes were entered as individ-
ual-level variables.

We followed Bliese’s (2000) recommendation to justify the
aggregation of individual perceptions of leadership to the unit level
of analysis. We ﬁrst assessed within-group agreement using the
rwg statistic. For authoritarian leadership, the range of each group’s
rwg was .78–.91, and the mean rwg was .84. For benevolent leader-
ship, the range of each group’s rwg was .84–.98, and the mean rwg
was .92. These statistics suggested sufﬁcient within-group agree-
ment for both authoritarian and benevolent leadership. Second,
we computed ICC1 and ICC2 as well as performed one-way ANOVA
tests to assess the proportion of between-group variance. For both
authoritarian and benevolent leadership, the between-group vari-
ICC1 = .24,
ance was
ICC2 = .78, F = 3.01, p < .01; benevolent
ICC1 = .28,
ICC2 = .85, F = 5.23, p < .01). These results provided statistical justi-
ﬁcation for our aggregation of authoritarian and benevolent leader-
ship to the unit level.

satisfactory (authoritarian leadership:
leadership:

Results

Conﬁrmatory factor analyses. Because the outcome variables in
our study were conceptually related and derived from the same
source (i.e., supervisor survey), we performed a series of conﬁrma-
tory factor analyses (CFAs) to verify the distinctiveness of our con-
structs before formally testing hypotheses. Analyses were
conducted at the item level. A CFA of the four-factor baseline model
yielded ﬁt indices within an acceptable range (x2 = 175.10, df = 84,
RMSEA = .062, CFI = .96, IFI = .96). These results were compared
with those of two alternative models: Model 1, in which creativity
and task performance were combined into one factor, and the other
two factors from the same organizational citizenship behavior scale
(Farh et al., 1997) were combined into another factor; and Model 2,
in which all four factors were combined into one overall factor. As
shown in the upper half of Table 1, signiﬁcant chi-square differ-
ences and model ﬁt indices indicated that both alternative models
obtained a poorer ﬁt than did the proposed baseline model.

Descriptive statistics. Means, standard deviations, and correla-
tions for all variables appear in Table 2. Correlational results indi-
cate that authoritarian leadership was negatively related to
creativity (r =  .15, p < .05) and task performance (r =  .15,

p < .05) but unrelated to altruism toward colleagues (r =  .01,
n.s.) and conscientiousness (r =  .11, n.s.). Benevolent leadership
was positively related to all studied outcomes (creativity, r = .23;
task performance, r = .22; altruism toward colleagues, r = .23; and
conscientiousness, r = .21, ps < .01).

Authoritarian leadership  leader gender interaction. Table 3 pre-
sents the HLM results for each dependent variable. All independent
variables were centered before being entered into regression mod-
els. Hypothesis 1 predicts that leader gender moderates the rela-
tionship between authoritarian leadership and subordinate
outcomes (i.e., creativity, task performance, altruism toward col-
leagues, and conscientiousness in Study 1) such that female lead-
ers’ authoritarian leadership would have a stronger negative
effect on subordinates’ outcomes than that of male leaders’. Model
1 shows that the coefﬁcient for the interactive effect between
authoritarian leadership and leader gender on creativity was sig-
niﬁcantly positive after the control variables, the two leadership
behaviors, and the moderator (leader gender) were entered in
the regression equation. Similarly, as shown in Model 3, a signiﬁ-
cant, positive interactive effect of authoritarian leadership and lea-
der gender on altruism toward colleagues was found. However, we
did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant interactive effects of authoritarian leader-
ship and leader gender on task performance and conscientiousness
(see Models 2 and 4).

To further understand the interactive effects, we plotted them
in Fig. 1, following Aiken and West’s (1991) suggestion. For crea-
tivity (Fig. 1a), the slope for the female leader group was signiﬁ-
cantly negative ( .44, p < .01), whereas the slope for the male
leader group decreased to a non-signiﬁcant level (.09, n.s.). For
altruism toward colleagues (Fig. 1b), the sign of the slope for
the female leader group was negative ( .17, n.s.), whereas that
for the male leader group became positive (.15, n.s.). Although
the patterns for altruism toward colleagues were not completely
consistent with Hypothesis 1, we found that the negative effects
of female leaders’ authoritarian leadership on subordinates’ crea-
tivity were stronger than that of male leaders’. This provided sup-
port for Hypothesis 1.

Benevolent leadership  leader gender interaction. Hypothesis 2
posits that leader gender moderates the relationship between
benevolent leadership and subordinate performance such that
male leaders’ benevolent leadership has a stronger, positive effect
on subordinate performance than that of female leaders’. The HLM
results in Table 3 show that the interactive effects of leader gender
and benevolent leadership on all four dependent variables were in
the predicted direction. The interactions were further plotted to
examine whether the patterns of these interactive effects support
Hypothesis 2.

Fig. 1c demonstrates the interaction effect of benevolent leader-
ship and leader gender on creativity. The slope for the male leader
group was positive and signiﬁcant (.31, p < .05), whereas the slope
for the female leader group was not signiﬁcant ( .03, n.s.). Fig. 1d
demonstrates a similar interactive effect on task performance. The
slope for the male leader group was strongly positive (.39, p < .01),
while the slope for the female leader group was not signiﬁcant
( .01, n.s.). Fig. 1e shows the benevolent leadership  leader gen-
der interactive effect on altruism toward colleagues. The slope
for the male leader group was positive (.34, p < .05), and the slope
for the female leader group was not signiﬁcant ( .05, n.s.). Finally,
Fig. 1f depicts the moderating effect of leader gender on the rela-
tionship between benevolent leadership and conscientiousness.
Again, only the slope for the male leader group was positive and
signiﬁcant (.41, p < .01), while the slope for the female leader group
was non-signiﬁcant (.08, n.s.). Together, these results provide
strong support for Hypothesis 2 that male leaders’ benevolent
leadership had stronger effects on subordinate performance than
did female leaders’.


106

A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

Table 1
Comparison of measurement models for outcome variables.

Model

Factors

Study 1 (the R&D engineer sample)
Creativity, task performance, altruism, and conscientiousness
Null model
Baseline
model
Model 1

All indicators are independent
Four factors

Two factors; creativity and task performance were combined into one factor, and the other two were
combined into another factor
One factor; all factors were combined into one factor

Model 2

Study 2 (the customer service personnel sample)
Task performance and conscientiousness
Null model
Baseline
model
Model 1

All indicators are independent
Two factors

One factor; both factors were combined into one factor

x2

df

Dx2

RMSEA CFI

IFI

2394.90
175.10

105
84

.062

.96

.96

964.19

89

789.09**

.194

.65

.65

1558.64

90

1383.54**

.250

.58

.58

1605.00
80.66

461.18

28
19

20

.052

.96

.96

380.52**

.137

.72

.72

Note. CFI: comparative ﬁt index; IFI: incremental ﬁt index; RMSEA: root mean square error of approximation.
** p < .01.

Table 2
Means, standard deviations, and correlations of the variables in Study 1.

Variables

1. Creativity
2. Task performance
3. Altruism toward colleagues
4. Conscientiousness
5. Authoritarian leadership
6. Benevolent leadership
7. Leader’s gender (0 = female, 1 = male)
8. Subordinate’s gender (0 = female, 1 = male)
9.% of female leaders within each ﬁrm
10. Length of relationship (years)

M

3.87
4.53
4.39
4.53
2.87
3.90
0.65
0.56
0.29
2.13

SD

0.81
0.74
0.78
0.73
0.79
0.72
0.48
0.50
0.29
2.18

1

(.94)
.51**
.52**
.46**
 .15*
.23**
.18**
.12
 .02
.02

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

(.91)
.53**
.55**
 .15*
.22**
.12
.02
 .13*
.18**

(.80)
.48**
 .01
.23**
.12
.08
 .05
.16*

(.89)
 .11
.21**
.19**
.07
 .07
.10

(.88)
 .23**
 .15*
 .11
.01
 .07

(.87)
.01
.11
 .13*
.00

.41**
 .38**
.02

 .33**
 .02

.00

Note. N = 261–265. Internal consistency reliabilities are in parentheses. Authoritarian leadership, benevolent leadership, leader’s gender, and the percentage of female leaders
were assigned to each subordinate.
* p < .05.
** p < .01.

Table 3
Results for regression analyses in Study 1.

Independent variables

Model 1: Creativity

Model 2: Task performance

Model 3: Altruism toward colleagues

Model 4: Conscientiousness

Intercept
Subordinate’s gender (SG)
Leader’s gender (LG)
SG  LG
% of female leaders
Length of relationship
Main effects
Authoritarian leadership (AL)
Benevolent leadership (BL)
Interactions
AL  LG
BL  LG
Pseudo DR2 for the interactions
Pseudo R2 for the model
r2
s00

c

3.66**
 0.07
0.24
0.19
0.16
0.00

 0.44**
 0.03

0.53**
0.34*
.08
.21
0.41
0.20

SD

0.12
0.18
0.17
0.22
0.24
0.02

0.14
0.13

0.16
0.17

c

4.43**
0.10
0.21
 0.27
 0.45*
0.05*

 0.07
 0.01

0.03
0.40**
.05
.15
0.39
0.10

SD

0.10
0.16
0.14
0.21
0.20
0.02

0.12
0.11

0.14
0.15

c

4.31**
 0.07
0.02
0.21
 0.17
0.05*

 0.17
 0.05

0.32*
0.39*
.04
.14
0.49
0.09

AL, BL, LG, and% of female leaders were unit variables while others individual variables.
* p<.05.
** p<.01.

SD

0.11
0.18
0.16
0.22
0.21
0.02

0.12
0.12

0.15
0.16

SD

0.11
0.16
0.16
0.21
0.22
0.02

0.12
0.12

0.15
0.16

c

4.40**
 0.20
0.15
0.30
 0.06
0.01

 0.15
0.08

0.15
0.33*
.03
.11
0.36
0.15

Discussion

In Study 1, we found that the positive effect of benevolent lead-
ership on subordinate performance becomes weaker for female
leaders. In support of Kelley’s (1972b) discounting principle, these
results suggest that female leaders’ benevolent behavior is more

likely to be attributed to females’ stereotyped gender roles. In con-
trast, benevolent leadership had a stronger, positive effect on sub-
ordinate performance for male leaders. As the augmentation
principle (Kelley, 1972b) predicts, the strengthened effect of
benevolent
leadership reveals that male leaders’ benevolent
leadership is more likely to be considered intentional. Our results


A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

107

(a)

(c)

(e)

(b)

(d)

(f)

Fig. 1. The interactive effects observed in Study 1.

suggest that both the descriptive and prescriptive biases proposed
by role congruity theory (Eagly & Karau, 2002) cannot offer valid
predictions in regard to the moderating role of leader gender on
the relationship between benevolent leadership and subordinate
performance. Attribution principles (Kelley, 1972b), however, offer
an adequate theoretical framework.

Our ﬁndings for Hypothesis 2 are particularly important be-
cause they indicate that both female and male leaders are subject
to the comparison between leadership roles and their stereotyped

gender roles. A study by Scott and Brown (2006) found that per-
ceivers have difﬁculty with encoding leadership behaviors into
their underlying prototypical leadership traits when the leadership
behaviors imply an agentic trait but are performed by female lead-
ers. Scott and Brown’s ﬁndings suggest that female leaders are sub-
ject to the comparison between leadership and gender roles, but
they did not examine whether similar effects exist for male leaders.
When we focused on male leaders, we found that their benevolent
on subordinate
leadership had stronger positive

effects


108

A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

performance. Therefore, our ﬁndings, together with Scott and
Brown’s (2006), could lead to the conclusion that it is natural for
subordinates to focus on leadership behaviors in view of gender
roles.

In contrast, for authoritarian leadership, although we found that
authoritarian leadership and leader gender interact to affect subor-
dinates’ creativity, we did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant interactive effect of
authoritarian leadership and leader gender on subordinates’ task
performance. One possible explanation is that task performance
serves as a basic, well-deﬁned job requirement (Tsui et al., 1997)
and thus is less likely to be inﬂuenced by an unfavorable reaction
to the role-deviating quality of female leaders’ authoritarian lead-
ership. In contrast, creativity is usually more difﬁcult to clearly de-
ﬁne, and thus it is more difﬁcult to specify a ‘‘minimum’’ level of
creativity that an employee has to produce.

We also found that neither males’ nor females’ authoritarian
leadership had signiﬁcant effects on altruism toward colleagues
and conscientiousness. This result may suggest that the relation-
ship between authoritarian leadership and organizational citizen-
ship behavior may be much more complicated than we had
expected. For example, Bolino (1999) argued that, in addition to
being an authentic form of altruism, organizational citizenship
behaviors also can come from subordinates’ wanting to maintain
a positive self-image. Thus, we suspect that, although prior re-
search constantly reported the negative effect of authoritarian
leadership (e.g., Farh et al., 2008), subordinates under an
authoritarian leader may engage in organizational citizenship
behavior due to their desire to be good citizens in front of a pow-
erful authoritarian leader. Future research should further divide
organizational citizenship behaviors into sub-constructs based on
motives as well as investigate how authoritarian leadership relates
to these sub-contracts.

Moreover, our correlation results appear to indicate that female
leaders are engaging in more authoritarian leadership than are
male leaders and that there are no differences in benevolent lead-
ership between female leaders and male leaders. One reasonable
explanation is that, because perhaps when subordinates rated their
leaders, the effects of attribution principles (i.e., discounting and
augmentation) already had taken place. Thus, the correlations
may indicate that the ratings for female leaders’ authoritarian lead-
ership and those for male leaders’ benevolent leadership are
inﬂated.

One important limitation of Study 1 is that our sample was pre-
dominantly male, although we did control the percentage of fe-
male leaders in each company. Given that an R&D engineer’s role
is generally deﬁned by masculine characteristics, a female leader’s
behavior in this role may be very different from that seen in other
neutral or less-masculine roles. Thus, we conducted Study 2 to
reexamine our hypotheses in a predominantly female setting. We
attempt to test whether the stronger effect of female leaders’
authoritarian leadership as well as those of male leader s’ benevo-
lent leadership, found in Study 1, were limited to the masculine
nature of the sample.

Study 2

The purpose of Study 2 was to examine our hypotheses using a
predominantly female sample. Given that leader gender is the pro-
posed moderator, consistent ﬁndings between the two studies
would support the generalizability of the hypothesized effects.
Thus, we collected data from customer service units, which are
predominantly female, in a large Taiwanese commercial bank.
Customer service personnel are responsible for determining the
appropriate ﬁnancial products for customers’ needs and for selling
these products either in person or over the phone. At the time of

data collection, 74% of the customer service personnel and 67% of
the unit supervisors were female.

Although we used four outcomes (i.e., creativity, task perfor-
mance, altruism toward colleagues, and conscientiousness) to
measure R&D engineers’ performance in Study 1, only task perfor-
mance and conscientiousness were selected to assess customer
service personnel’s work outcomes in Study 2. Creativity was
dropped because the sampled bank did not require its customer
service personnel to develop new products, ideas, or suggestions.
Rather, these personnel members were asked to meet sales stan-
dards by following concrete work procedures and schedules. We
also dropped altruism toward colleagues because each of the sam-
pled customer service personnel provided service for distinct cus-
tomers; they worked independently and seldom had task-related
interaction with coworkers under the same supervisor.

Methods

Sample and procedure. The sample was comprised of customer
service personnel and their immediate unit supervisors from a Tai-
wanese commercial bank. A human resources manager in the
headquarters helped us contact the customer service unit in each
of the 72 branches. One of the authors and two research assistants
visited each branch and distributed matching questionnaires to the
customer service unit supervisor and to four randomly selected
subordinates in the unit. Completed surveys were returned to the
author onsite.

We dropped data from eight of the sampled unit supervisors
due to the short length of the supervisor–subordinate relationship
(less than six months). Among questionnaires from the remaining
64 units, we eventually received 223 completed and usable match-
ing pairs (response rate = 87%). The mean age of the sampled sub-
ordinates (n = 223) was 34.39 years (SD = 5.89), with a mean
company tenure of 9.21 years (SD = 5.62). The majority of the sam-
ple was female (77%) and well-educated (33% completed two-year
college programs; 65% held bachelor’s or higher degrees). Most of
the sampled supervisors (n = 64) also were female (66%) and highly
educated (32% completed two-year college programs; 68% held
bachelor’s or higher degrees). The mean age for supervisors was
45.32 years (SD = 3.69), and their mean tenure was 20.06 years
(SD = 4.61).

Measures. We assessed authoritarian leadership, benevolent
leadership, task performance, and conscientiousness by the same
scales used in Study 1. All scales had satisfactory internal consis-
tency (authoritarian leadership: a = .88; benevolent leadership:
a = .95; for task performance: a = .93; and conscientiousness:
a = .85).

Control variables. Again, we entered the leader’s gender, the sub-
ordinate’s gender (both dummy-coded as 0 for female and 1 for
male), and the interaction term of the former two dummy variables
into regression models before testing the hypothesized effects to
control for the supervisor–subordinate gender combination. In
addition, we controlled for the length of a supervisor–subordinate
relationship (in years). Finally, because respondents in this sample
had relatively long company tenure and, as such, may have had
more work experience and, thereby, better performance, we added
company tenure as a control.

Analytic strategy. Similar to our R&D engineer sample in Study 1,
in our customer service personnel sample, 3.48 subordinates, on
average, reported to the same supervisor. Thus, we again used
HLM to control for supervisor effects (i.e., authoritarian and benev-
olent leadership as well as leader gender were entered into regres-
sion models as group-level variables, while task performance and
conscientiousness were treated as individual-level variables).
Within-group agreements for both leadership constructs were
computed. For authoritarian leadership, the range of each group’s


A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

109

rwg was .80–.96, and the mean rwg was .90. For benevolent leader-
ship, the range of each group’s rwg was .82–.97, and the mean rwg
was .91. Additionally, substantial between-group variance existed
for both authoritarian and benevolent leadership (authoritarian
leadership: ICC1 = .27, ICC2 = .82, F = 4.27, p < .01; benevolent lead-
ership: ICC1 = .29, ICC2 = .88, F = 5.89, p < .01). Taken together, the
above results provided statistical justiﬁcation for our data aggrega-
tion and use of HLM.

Results

Conﬁrmatory factor analyses. We ﬁrst performed CFA to verify the
distinctiveness of our outcomes (i.e., task performance and consci-
entiousness). Analyses were conducted at the item level. The two-
factor baseline model yielded satisfactory ﬁt indices (x2 = 80.66,
df = 19, RMSEA = .052, CFI = .96, IFI = .96). The above results were
compared with an alternative model in which two factors were com-
bined into one overall factor. As shown in the lower half of Table 1,
the alternative model obtained a poorer ﬁt than did the proposed
model, which suggests that construct distinctiveness was obtained.
Descriptive statistics. Means, standard deviations, and correla-
tions for all variables in Study 2 appear in Table 4. Correlational re-
sults indicate that authoritarian leadership was negatively related
to both outcomes (task performance: r =  .24, p < .01; conscien-
tiousness: r =  .37, p < .01), while benevolent leadership was pos-
itively related to both outcomes (task performance: r = .36,
p < .01; conscientiousness: r = .41, p < .01).

Authoritarian leadership  leader gender interaction. Table 5 pre-
sents the HLM results. As Hypothesis 1 predicts, leader gender
moderates the relationship between authoritarian leadership and
subordinate performance (i.e., task performance and conscien-
tiousness in Study 2) such that female leaders’ authoritarian lead-
ership had a stronger, negative effect on subordinates’ task
performance and conscientiousness than that of male leaders’.
Model 1 shows that the coefﬁcient for the authoritarian leader-
ship  leader gender interaction on task performance was signiﬁ-
cantly positive. Again, interactive effects were plotted for male
and female leaders (Aiken & West, 1991). For task performance
(Fig. 2a), the slope for the female leader group was negative but
not signiﬁcant ( .16, n.s.), whereas the slope for the male leader
group was positive (.28, p < .05). This pattern was consistent with
Hypothesis 1, that female leaders’ authoritarian leadership had a
stronger negative effect on subordinates’ task performance. In
addition, as expected, the direction of the interactive effect of
authoritarian leadership and leader gender on conscientiousness
was positive (Table 5, Model 2). However, this effect did not reach
signiﬁcance due to its relatively large standard error. Therefore,
Hypothesis 1 received only partial support.

Benevolent leadership  leader gender interaction. Hypothesis 2
posits that leader gender moderates the relationship between

benevolent leadership and subordinate performance in such a
way that male leaders’ benevolent leadership has a stronger posi-
tive effect on subordinate performance than that of female leaders’.
Model 1 in Table 5 shows a signiﬁcant interactive effect of benev-
olent leadership and leader gender on task performance. As shown
in Fig. 2b, the positive slope for the male leader group was higher
(.62, p < .01) than that for the female leader group (.19, p < .05).
Thus, our results provide support for Hypothesis 2, that male lead-
ers’ benevolent leadership had a stronger positive effect on subor-
dinates’ task performance than did female leaders’. However, as
seen in Table 5 (Model 2), the interactive effect of benevolent lead-
ership and leader gender on subordinates’ conscientiousness was
not signiﬁcant due to the relatively large standard error.

Discussion

The results for Study 2 provided some support for Hypothesis 2,
that the positive effect of benevolent leadership on subordinate
performance is stronger for male than for female leaders. In con-
trast, female leaders’ benevolent leadership had a weaker effect
on subordinates’ task performance than did male leaders’. However,
unlike Study 1, which indicated that female leaders’ benevolent
leadership did not signiﬁcantly relate to any of the subordinate out-
comes, Study 2 showed that female leaders’ benevolent leadership
was positively associated with task performance. Consistent with
Eagly et al.’s (1995) suggestion that female leaders are more effec-
tive in predominantly female settings, our ﬁndings indicate that fe-
male leaders in predominantly female settings are able to adopt
behavior that is congruent with gender roles, such as benevolent
leadership, to enhance subordinate performance. However, their
benevolent leadership is not as effective as that of their male coun-
terparts. It is thus likely that our hypothesis for the interaction be-
tween benevolent leadership and leader gender holds across both
predominantly male and female settings, but the strength of it
may vary across different settings. In predominantly male settings,
the moderating effect of leader gender may become stronger so that
female leaders’ benevolent leadership has weaker (or even non-sig-
niﬁcant) effects. In predominantly female settings, the same mod-
erating effect is weaker, and female leaders are much more able
to utilize benevolent leadership. Future research is recommended
to further explore the role of context.

Consistent with Hypothesis 1, our results suggest that female
leaders’ authoritarian leadership had a stronger negative effect on
subordinates’ task performance than did that of male leaders. Sur-
prisingly, we obtained a positive relationship between authoritarian
leadership and task performance for male leaders in the customer
service setting. Our explanation is that, because male leaders’
authoritarian leadership is congruent with gender role expectations
for males, at least to some extent, subordinates attribute their male
leaders’ authoritarianism to the display of stereotyped gender roles.

Table 4
Means, standard deviations, and correlations of the variables in Study 2.

Variables

1. Task performance
2. Conscientiousness
3. Authoritarian leadership
4. Benevolent leadership
5. Leader’s gender (0 = female, 1 = male)
6. Subordinate’s gender (0 = female, 1 = male)
7. Subordinate’s tenure in the company (years)
8. Length of relationship (years)

M

4.52
4.37
3.29
3.85
0.34
0.23
9.21
2.62

SD

0.91
0.84
0.62
0.80
0.48
0.42
5.62
1.77

1

(.93)
.62**
 .24**
.36**
.09
 .02
.22**
.04

2

3

4

5

6

7

(.85)
 .37**
.41**
.04
.07
.14*
 .05

(.88)
 .43**
.09
.06
 .18*
.07

(.95)
.05
.08
 .07
 .06

 .01
.01
 .01

 .08
.08

.12

Note. N = 190–219. Internal consistency reliabilities are in parentheses. Authoritarian leadership, benevolent leadership, and leader’s gender were assigned to each
subordinate.
* p < .05.
** p < .01.


110

A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

Table 5
Results for regression analyses in Study 2.

Independent variables

Model 1: Task performance

Model 2: Conscientiousness

Intercept
Subordinate’s gender (SG)
Leader’s gender (LG)
SG  LG
Subordinate’s tenure
Length of relationship

Main effects
Authoritarian leadership (AL)
Benevolent leadership (BL)

Interactions
AL  LG
BL  LG
Pseudo DR2 for the interactions
Pseudo R2 for the model
r2
s00

c

4.53**
 0.10
 0.04
0.14
0.03**
0.01

 0.16
0.19*

0.44**
0.43**
.06
.18
0.32
0.31

AL, BL, and LG were unit variables, while others were individual variables.
* p < .05.
** p < .01.

SD

0.12
0.10
0.21
0.18
0.01
0.03

0.11
0.09

0.21
0.16

c

4.26**
0.24
0.08
 0.21
0.01
 0.01

 0.30*
0.23*

0.29
0.33
.02
.13
0.35
0.29

SD

0.10
0.15
0.17
0.17
0.01
0.03

0.13
0.11

0.20
0.18

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. The interactive effects observed in Study 2.

When this attribution is strong, male leaders’ authoritarian leader-
ship becomes legitimate. Because the job description for customer
service personnel is relatively concrete and well-deﬁned, we suspect
that controlling but expectable supervision styles, such as male
leaders’ authoritarian leadership, may have the potential to increase
performance levels of employees in such settings.

General discussion

While gender and leadership phenomena have received much
research attention, a careful examination that includes a compari-
son between leadership and gender roles for both male and female
leaders is still rare. Using attribution principles (Kelley, 1972a,
1972b) to supplement the role congruity theory (Eagly & Karau,
2002), our research demonstrated the moderating role of leader
gender on the relationship between leadership styles and subordi-
nate performance in two different settings (i.e., R&D engineers and
customer service units). As expected, we found that the positive ef-
fects of benevolent leadership on subordinate performance were
stronger for male than for female leaders. For two of the studied

variables (i.e., creativity in Study 1 and task performance in Study
2), we also found that the negative effects of authoritarian leader-
ship on subordinate performance were stronger for female than for
male leaders.

Although our results demonstrate some generalizability across
our Study 1 and Study 2 settings, nuanced differences existed be-
tween our ﬁndings, particularly for authoritarian leadership, in
Study 1 and Study 2.
In particular, the relationship between
authoritarian leadership and subordinate performance differed be-
tween the two studies. Whereas the moderating effects of leader
gender on the relationship between benevolent leadership and
subordinate performance existed across both predominantly male
and female settings, the moderating effects on the relationship be-
tween authoritarian leadership and subordinate performance are
more complex. Our results echo previous ﬁndings that the positive
relationships between benevolent leadership and subordinates’
work outcomes are relatively stable (Wang & Cheng, 2010),
whereas the negative effects of authoritarian leadership on subor-
dinate performance may be less stable and depend on the context
(Farh et al., 2008; Niu et al., 2009). Future research is thus sug-
gested to further examine the effects of authoritarian leadership


A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

111

on outcomes in different contexts as well as the possible mecha-
nisms that explain the different effects of authoritarian leadership.
In addition, we also recommend that future research clarify un-
der which conditions authoritarian leadership can have a positive
effect on subordinates’ work outcomes. Across our two studies,
authoritarian leadership had negative effects on only two (i.e., cre-
ativity in Study 1 and conscientiousness in Study 2) out of the six
outcomes. When the moderating effects of leader gender were con-
sidered, only female leaders’ authoritarian leadership had a signif-
icant, negative effect on their subordinates’ creativity. Our ﬁndings
thus suggest that, although prior research mainly concluded that
authoritarian leadership is negatively related to subordinate per-
formance (e.g., Farh et al., 2008), authoritarian leadership might
have a positive impact on subordinate performance, as well, which
has not yet been well explored.

Theoretical contributions

Our research suggests that the discounting and augmentation
attribution principles (Kelley, 1972a, 1972b) provide a more com-
prehensive understanding of the relationship between leadership
and gender roles and supplement role congruity theory. According
to our ﬁndings, male and female leaders’ authoritarian and benev-
olent leadership had different effects on subordinate performance.
Thus, future researchers should be cautious about following prior
research (e.g., Eagly, 2007; Eagly et al., 1995) that simply argues
that male and female leaders are equally effective. Because no
one can eradicate gender stereotyping (Deaux & LaFrance, 1998;
Heilman, 2001), leader gender, as a natural background for subor-
dinates’ perceptions of leadership behavior, can substantially alter
the associations between leadership constructs and subordinates’
outcomes. In support of Kelley’s (1972a, 1972b) principles of attri-
bution, our results suggest that, for both male and female leaders,
leadership styles that are incongruent with gender role stereotypes
have stronger effects, either positive or negative, on subordinate
performance than do those in line with gender role expectations.
Based on our ﬁndings across two settings, the argument that fe-
male leaders should be particularly effective when they adopt gen-
der-congruent leadership roles (Eagly, 2007; Eagly & Carli, 2003)
may not always be true. The signiﬁcant interactive effects of
benevolent leadership and leader gender on subordinate perfor-
mance in both Studies 1 and 2 revealed that female leaders’ benev-
olent leadership, which is congruent with female gender-role
prescriptions, has weaker effects on subordinate performance than
does male leaders’, especially in predominantly male settings. We,
therefore, call for a revision of the current views on gender and
leadership by carefully considering this effect from an attribution
perspective.

At a ﬁrst glance, our results appear to send a pessimistic mes-
sage for female leaders, whose authoritarian leadership behavior
had stronger negative effects on two of the studied variables across
the two studies and whose benevolent leadership had weaker po-
sitive effects on most of the studied subordinate outcomes. How-
ever,
in this research, we considered only authoritarian and
benevolent leadership, the two most prevalent leadership styles
in Taiwanese organizations (Farh & Cheng, 2000). As future
research examines a larger set of leadership behaviors, the true fe-
male advantage can be more clearly identiﬁed. For example, female
leaders can be more effective than are their male counterparts
when adopting ‘‘favorable’’ agentic behaviors, such as decisiveness
and braveness (Anderson et al., 2006; Johnson et al., 2008). The
same attribution principles used in our research predict that these
favorable violations of gender stereotypes should generate stron-
ger positive effects on subordinate performance than the same
behaviors that male leaders adopt and that favorable departure
of leader roles from gender roles may be a good thing for both male

and female leaders. Thus, our attribution perspective of gender and
leadership suggests that female leaders should ﬁnd effective strat-
egies by adopting leadership roles that favorably deviate from their
gender roles. We encourage future researchers to probe this impor-
tant direction.

In addition, our ﬁndings challenge the common view that ‘‘[fe-
male leaders’] conforming to their gender role can produce a fail-
ure to meet the requirements of their leader role’’ (Eagly &
Johannesen-Schmidt, 2001, p. 786). Consistent with our attribution
argument, the signiﬁcant interactive effects of authoritarian lead-
ership and leader gender on creativity in Study 1, as well as similar
effects on task performance in Study 2, to some extent, indicate
that it may not be unfavorable for female leaders to devote them-
selves to conforming to stereotyped gender roles. More speciﬁcally,
when female leaders were low in authoritarian leadership, subor-
dinates’ outcomes were not signiﬁcantly lower than for those un-
der male leaders with similar levels of authoritarian leadership.
Thus, female leaders’ conforming to non-agentic gender roles is
not necessarily a disadvantage.

Finally, our ﬁndings are particularly meaningful to research on
leadership in Chinese-inﬂuenced settings because the develop-
ment of the authoritarian and benevolent leadership constructs is
based primarily on observations of male leaders (e.g., Redding,
1990; Silin, 1976; Westwood & Chan, 1992). When identifying
the moderating role of leader gender, future research should care-
fully distinguish between male and female leaders’ authoritarian
and benevolent leadership. In this research, we demonstrated that
adopting benevolent leadership is a useful strategy for male lead-
ers, who still hold the majority of leadership positions in contem-
porary Chinese business settings. However, this is not the case for
female leaders. Given that females are increasingly entering lead-
ership roles in modern Chinese settings (Grant Thornton., 2007;
Lin & Cheng, 2007), we need to investigate whether female leaders
can achieve high performance via other leadership models instead
of via the prevalent authoritarian or benevolent leadership model.

Limitations

The mediating role of subordinates’ trust in leaders in the rela-
tionship between authoritarian/benevolent leadership and subor-
dinate outcomes is one of the primary tenets of the argument
being proposed. However, we did not empirically test subordi-
nates’ trust in either study. Incorporating subordinates’ trust into
a research framework would help future researchers to better
understand how gender-bias perceptions of authoritarian/benevo-
lent leadership are related to subordinate outcomes.

Another limitation is that, given that attribution principles are a
key theoretical mechanism of this research, we did not measure
subordinates’ expectations or attributions. One recent study has
suggested that subordinates’ attribution of their leaders’ behavior
mediates the relationship between leaders’ emotional expression
and subordinates’ responses (Schaubroeck & Shao, 2012). Future
research should empirically test whether attribution mechanisms
also moderate the relationship between leadership styles and sub-
ordinate responses. In particular, we recommend experimental de-
signs that manipulate subordinates’ attribution of their leadership
perceptions. Such designs can examine the role of subordinate
attribution and offer meaningful replications of our ﬁndings.

In addition, caution should be exercised in regard to the differ-
ent ﬁndings across our two studies. Although the general patterns
of our results were consistent with proposed hypotheses, future re-
search should simultaneously consider leader gender, contextual
factors, and different outcomes to better understand the effects
of authoritarian and benevolent leadership.

There were also several minor limitations. First, because the
leadership constructs were

authoritarian and benevolent


112

A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

developed primarily from interviews with and observations of
male leaders (Farh & Cheng, 2000), the interactive effects found
in our research might be a reﬂection of the fact that key female fea-
tures might not have been included in the original deﬁnitions of
the two leadership constructs. Hence, the observed effects in our
research might be weaker for other gender bias-free leadership
constructs. Second, although the cross-sectional design of this
study did not compromise our examination of moderating effects,
reverse causality is nevertheless a possibility (e.g., high levels of
work outcomes lead to less authoritarian leadership or more
benevolent leadership). Thus, researchers should apply a longitudi-
nal design to control for reciprocal causality.

Third, the generalizability of our results for different cultures
must be examined. For example, although Eastern cultures tend
to have particularly strong expectations in regard to how males
and females should behave, most Western societies, who do not
have as strong an expectation, also prefer non-agentic women over
agentic ones in leadership settings (Eagly, 2007). Future research
should further clarify whether results similar to ours also are found
in non-Chinese settings. Finally, recent research has revealed that,
to the extent that individuals have a traditional gender ideology,
they exhibit stronger stereotypical preferences (Eastwick et al.,
2006). Future research is, therefore, recommended to empirically
investigate the joint effects of cultural values or contexts and a lea-
der’s gender.

Practical implications

Women are still the minority of executives and managers in
modern organizations. To compensate for their minority-related
disadvantages, female leaders tend to act like male leaders (Ragins,
1991). In Chinese-inﬂuenced settings, similarly, female leaders of-
ten conform to an authoritarian leadership role (Lin & Cheng,
2007). Our results, however, suggest that doing so leads to an
incongruity of leader and gender roles that activates unfavorable
effects, such as a considerable decrease in subordinates’ creativity.
This study also showed that female leaders’ benevolent leadership
has a weaker positive effect on subordinate performance because
their efforts to offer benevolence tend to be attributed to their gen-
der roles rather than to their disposition or intention. Therefore, fe-
male leaders face a dilemma unimaginable to male leaders: They
should not violate stereotypical gender prescriptions (by demon-
strating high levels of authoritarian leadership), but they also
should not overly rely on gender-congruent leadership styles (such
as benevolent leadership). Female leaders who treat subordinates
as family members, help subordinates with personal crises or ca-
reer development, or try to understand why subordinates do not
perform well may not obtain expected levels of favorable subordi-
nates’ outcomes because their ‘‘motherly’’ benevolence seems too
ordinary and effortless. We suggest that female leaders, in addition
to adopting benevolent leadership, may consider adopting some
favorable agentic behaviors such as decisiveness and braveness
(Anderson et al., 2006; Johnson et al., 2008), which may enhance
their leadership effectiveness.

In contrast, our results indicate that male leaders’ authoritarian
leadership has a less- detrimental effect and that their benevolent
leadership is strongly related to creativity, task performance, altru-
ism toward colleagues, and conscientiousness. When male leaders
are considered to be benevolent leaders, the incongruity of leader
and gender roles strengthens the association between benevolent
leadership and subordinate performance. Based on our results, the
strategy that male leaders should use to promote subordinate work
outcomes deviates from stereotypical gender-role expectations. In
the work domain, male leaders should provide subordinates with
necessary coaching and mentoring, allow subordinates opportuni-
ties to correct mistakes, and show concern for subordinates’ career

development. Beyond the work domain, they should create psycho-
logically safe environments by assisting subordinates during per-
sonal crises,
treating subordinates as family members, and
showing holistic concern beyond professional relationships. Such
efforts are more effective in encouraging subordinate performance
than are the same efforts by female leaders.

Conclusion

Although recent research on gender and leadership has exam-
ined the differences in females’ and males’ leadership styles (e.g.,
Eagly et al., 2003) as well as the prejudice that female leaders expe-
rience (Eagly & Karau, 2002; Heilman & Okimoto, 2007; Heilman
et al., 2004; Lyness & Heilman, 2006), there is still an assumption
that female leaders are as effective as their male counterparts
when they adopt the same leadership styles. Our ﬁndings suggest
that leader gender moderates the effects of authoritarian and
benevolent leadership, the two relevant leadership styles in Chi-
nese-inﬂuenced regions, on subordinate performance. Accordingly,
adopting these two leadership styles may not be the best leader-
ship strategy for female leaders. Thus, future leadership research
should pay more attention to the relationship between leadership
and gender roles to understand the female advantage in leadership
asserted in existing literature and articles (Eagly & Carli, 2003).
After all, females and males are different, and female leaders need
to have an exclusive model of leadership rather than to use existing
ones that were developed primarily for male leaders.

Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge Zhijun Chen for his insightful
comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript. The earlier version
of this manuscript was presented at the 2011 Annual Meeting of
the Academy of Management, San Antonio, Texas. This research
project was partly sponsored by the 2008-09 rotary scholarship,
Chung Hwa Rotary Foundation (awarded to the ﬁrst author).

References

Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting

interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Amabile, T. M. (1988). A model of creativity and innovation in organizations. In B.
M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior
(pp. 123–167). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Anderson, N., Lievens, F., van Dam, K., & Born, M. (2006). A construct-driven
investigation of gender differences in a leadership-role assessment center.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 555–566.

Aycan,

Z.

(2006).

Paternalism:

and
operationalization. In K. S. Yang, K. K. Hwang, & U. Kim (Eds.), Scientiﬁc
advances in indigenous psychologies: Empirical, philosophical, and cultural
contributions (pp. 445–466). London, UK: Sage.

reﬁnement

conceptual

Towards

Bliese, P. D. (2000). Within-group agreement, non-independence, and reliability:
Implications for data aggregation and analysis. In K. K. Klein & S. J. Kozlowski
(Eds.), Multilevel theory, research, and methods in organizations (pp. 349–381).
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Bolino, M. C. (1999). Citizenship and impression management: Good soldiers or

good actors? Academy of Management Review, 24, 82–98.

Brislin, R. W. (1986). The wording and translation of research instruments. In W. J.
research

Looner & J. W. Berry (Eds.), Field methods
(pp. 137–164). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

in cross-cultural

Chang, L. (1999). Gender role egalitarian attitudes in Beijing, Hong Kong, Florida,

and Michigan. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 30, 722–741.

Chen, X. P., Eberly, M. B., Chiang, T. J., Farh, J. L., & Cheng, B. S. (in press). Affective
trust
in Chinese leaders: Linking paternalistic leadership to employee
performance. Journal of Management, 2013, (in press), Available from:<http://
jom.sagepub.com/content/early/2011/06/08/0149206311410604.full.pdf+html>.
Cheng, B. S., Chou, L. F., Wu, T. Y., Huang, M. P., & Farh, J. L. (2004). Paternalistic
leadership and subordinate responses: Establishing a leadership model in
Chinese organizations. Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 7, 89–117.

Cheng, B. S., Hsieh, P. Y., & Chou, L. F. (2002). The principal’s leadership, leader-
member exchange quality, and the teacher’s extra-role behavior: The effects of
transformational and paternalistic leadership. Indigenous Psychological Research
in Chinese Societies, 17, 105–161 (in Chinese).


A.-C. Wang et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 122 (2013) 101–113

113

Cheng, B. S., Huang, M. P., & Chou, L. F. (2002). Paternalistic leadership and its
Journal of

effectiveness: Evidence from Chinese organizational
Psychology in Chinese Societies, 3, 85–112 (in Chinese).

teams.

Colquitt, J. A., Scott, B. A., & LePine, J. A. (2007). Trust, trustworthiness, and trust
propensity: A meta-analytic test of their unique relationships with risk taking
and job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 909–927.
Curtin, K. (1975). Women in China. New York, NY: Pathﬁnder Press.
Deaux, K., & LaFrance, M. (1998). Gender. In D. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (4th ed., pp. 788–827). New York, NY:
Random House.

Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2002). Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic ﬁndings and
Journal of Applied Psychology, 87,

implications for research and practice.
611–628.

Eagly, A. H. (2007). Female leadership advantage and disadvantage: Resolving the

contradictions. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 31, 1–12.

Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L. L. (2003). The female leadership advantage: An evaluation of

the evidence. Leadership Quarterly, 14, 807–834.

Eagly, A. H., & Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C. (2001). The leadership styles of women

and men. Journal of Social Issues, 57, 781–797.

Eagly, A. H., Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C., & Engen, M. L. (2003). Transformational,
transactional, and laissez-faire leadership styles: A meta-analysis comparing
women and men. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 569–591.

Eagly, A. H., & Karau, S. J. (2002). Role congruity theory of prejudice toward female

leaders. Psychological Review, 109, 573–598.

Eagly, A. H., Karau, S. J., & Makhijani, M. G. (1995). Gender and the effectiveness of

leaders: A meta-analysis. Psychology Bulletin, 117, 125–145.

Eagly, A. H., Wood, W., & Diekman, A. B. (2000). Social role theory of sex differences
and similarities: A current appraisal. In T. Eckes & H. M. Trautner (Eds.), The
developmental social psychology of gender (pp. 123–174). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

Eastwick, P. W., Eagly, A. H., Glick, P., Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C., Fiske, S. T., Blum,
A., et al. (2006). Is traditional gender ideology associated with sex-typed mate
preferences? A test in nine nations. Sex Roles, 54, 603–614.

Enders, C. K., & Toﬁghi, D. (2007). Centering predictor variables in cross-sectional
multilevel models: A new look at an old issue. Psychological Methods, 12,
121–138.

Entwisle, B., Henderson, G. E., Short, S. E., Bouma, J., & Zhai, F. (1995). Gender and

family business in rural China. American Sociological Review, 60, 36–57.

Farh, J. L, & Cheng, B. S (2000). A cultural analysis of paternalistic leadership in
Chinese organizations. In Management and organizations in the Chinese context
(pp. 85–127). London, UK: Macmillan.

Farh, J. L., Cheng, B. S., Chou, L. F., & Chu, X. P. (2006). Authority and benevolence:
Employees’ responses to paternalistic leadership in China. In A. S. Tsui, Y. Bian,
& L. Cheng (Eds.), China’s domestic private ﬁrms: Multidisciplinary perspectives on
management and performance (pp. 230–260). New York, NY: Sharpe.

Farh, J. L., Dobbins, O., & Cheng, B. S. (1991). Culture relativity in action: A
comparison of self-ratings made by Chinese and U.S. workers. Personnel
Psychology, 44, 129–147.

Farh, J. L., Earley, P. C., & Lin, S. C. (1997). Impetus for action: A cultural analysis of
society.

citizenship behavior

in Chinese

justice
Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, 421–444.

and organizational

Farh, J. L., Liang, J., Chou, L. F., & Cheng, B. S. (2008). Paternalistic leadership in
Chinese organizations: Research progress and future research directions. In C. C.
Chen & Y. T. Lee (Eds.), Business leadership in China: Philosophies, theories, and
practices (pp. 171–205). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Grant, A. M., & Dutton,

forthcoming). Beneﬁciary or
benefactor: The effects of reﬂecting about receiving versus giving on prosocial
behavior. Psychological Science, 23, 1033–1039.

J. E. (ant and Dutton,

Grant, A. M., & Gino, F. (2010). A little thanks goes a long way: Explaining why
gratitude expressions motivate prosocial behavior. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 98, 946–955.

Grant Thornton (2007). International business report 2007: Global overview. <http://
www.grantthorntonibos.com/ﬁles/international_business_report_2007_global_
overview.pdf>.

Greenglass, E. R. (1982). A world of difference: Gender roles in perspective. Toronto,

Canada: John Wiley and Sons.

Heilman, M. E. (2001). Description and prescription: How gender stereotypes
prevent women’s ascent up the organizational ladder. Journal of Social Issues, 57,
657–674.

Heilman, M. E., & Okimoto, T. G. (2007). Why are women penalized for success at
male tasks? The implied communality deﬁcit. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92,
81–92.

Heilman, M. E., Wallen, A. S., Fuchs, D., & Tamkins, M. M. (2004). Penalties for
success: Reactions to women who succeed at male gender-typed tasks. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 89, 416–427.

Johnson, S. K., Murphy, S. E., Zewdie, S., & Rebecca, J. R. (2008). The strong, sensitive
type: Effects of gender stereotypes and leadership prototypes on the evaluation
of male and female leaders. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 106, 39–60.

Jones, E. E., & Davis, K. E. (1965). From acts to dispositions: The attribution proces in
In L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in experimental social

social psychology.
psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 219-266), New York: Academic Press.

Jussim, L. (1986). Self-fulﬁlling prophecies: A theoretical and integrative review.

Psychological Review, 93, 429–445.

Jussim, L., Coleman, L. M., & Lerch, L. (1987). The nature of stereotypes: A
comparison and integration of three theories. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 52, 536–546.

Kelley, H. H. (1972a). Attribution in social interaction. In E. E. Jones, D. E. Kanouse, H.
H. Kelley, R. E., Nisbett, S. Valins, & B. Weiner (Eds.), Attribution: Perceiving the
causes of behavior (pp. 1–26). Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press.

Kelley, H. H. (1972b). Causal schemata and the attribution process. In E. E. Jones, D.
E. Kanouse, H. H. Kelley, R. E., Nisbett, S. Valins, & B. Weiner (Eds.), Attribution:
Perceiving the causes of behavior (pp. 151–174). Morristown, NJ: General
Learning Press.

Kelley, H. H., & Michela, J. L. (1980). Attribution theory and research. Annual Review

of Psychology, 31, 457–501.

Lin, T. T., & Cheng, B. S. (2007). Sex role ﬁrst, leader role second? Sex combination of
supervisor and subordinate, length of work relationship, and paternalistic
leadership. Chinese Journal of Psychology, 49, 433–450 (in Chinese).

Lyness, K. S., & Heilman, M. E. (2006). When ﬁt is fundamental: Performance
evaluations and promotions of upper-level female and male managers. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 91, 777–785.

Mann, S. (1990). Women’s and gender history in global perspective: East Asia.

Washington, DC: American Historical Association.

Ng, C. (1995). Bringing women back in: Family change in Hong Kong. In V. Pearson &
B. K. P. Leung (Eds.), Women in Hong Kong (pp. 75–100). Hong Kong: Oxford
University Press.

Niu, C. P., Wang, A. C., & Cheng, B. S. (2009). Effectiveness of a moral and benevolent
leader: Probing the interactions of the dimensions of paternalistic leadership.
Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 12, 32–39.

Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A. (1996). Employee creativity: Personal and contextual

factors at work. Academy of Management Journal, 39, 607–634.

Ragins, B. (1991). Gender effects in subordinate evaluations of leaders: Real or

artifact? Journal of Organizational Behavior, 12, 259–268.

Ramusack, B., & Sievers, S. (1999). Women in Asia: Restoring women to history.

Bloomington, IA: Indiana University Press.

Redding, S. G. (1990). The spirit of Chinese capitalism. New York, NY: Walter de

Gruyter.

Schaubroeck, J. M., & Shao, P. (2012). The role of attribution in how followers
respond to the emotional expression of male and female leaders. Leadership
Quarterly, 23, 27–42.

Scott, K., & Brown, D. J. (2006). Female ﬁrst, leader second? Gender bias in the
encoding of leadership behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 101, 230–242.

Silin, R. H. (1976). Leadership and value: The organization of large-scale Taiwanese

enterprises. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Tang, T. N., & Tang, C. S. (2001). Gender role internalization, multiple roles, and
Chinese women’s mental health. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 25, 181–196.
Thornton, A., & Freedman, D. (1979). Changes in the sex role attitudes of women:

1962–1977. American Sociological Review, 44, 831–842.

Tsai, T., & Cheng, B. S. (2006). The silicon dragon: High-tech industry in Taiwan.

Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Tsui, A. S., Pearce, J. L., Porter, L. W., & Tripoli, A. M. (1997). Alternative approaches
to the employee-organization relationship: Does investment in employees pay
off? Academy of Management Journal, 40, 1089–1121.

Wang, A. C., & Cheng, B. S. (2010). When does benevolent leadership lead to
creativity? The moderating role of creative role identity and job autonomy.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 31, 106–121.

Westwood, R. I., & Chan, A. (1992). Headship and leadership. In R. I. Westwood (Ed.),
Organizational behavior: A Southeast Asian perspective (pp. 123–139). Hong
Kong: Longman Group.

Wu, M., Huang, X., Li, C. W., & Liu, W. (2012). Perceived interactional justice and
trust-in-supervisor as mediators for paternalistic leadership. Management and
Organization Review, 8, 97–121.

Yang, C. F., & Chiu, C. Y. (1987). The dilemma facing Chinese subjects in answering
questionnaires: Reﬂecting on the over-reliance on Western rating scales in
research. Chinese Journal of Psychology, 29, 59–78 (in Chinese).

Yao, E. S. L. (1983). Chinese women: Past and present. Mesquite, TX: Ide House.
Zhou, L. Y. (2006). American and Chinese college students’ anticipations of their
postgraduate education, career, and future family roles. Sex Roles, 55, 95–110.

