How do corporate reputation and customer

satisfaction impact customer defection?
A study of private energy customers in

Germany

Gianfranco Walsh and Keith Dinnie

Department of Marketing, Strathclyde Business School, Glasgow, UK, and

Department of Marketing and Management, University of Hannover, Hannover, Germany

Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Abstract
Purpose – To analyze whether perceived corporate reputation and customer satisfaction are directly associated with customer intention.
Design/methodology/approach – Using structural equation modeling, the study is based on the responses to a written questionnaire of 462
customers of a large German utility.
Findings – A non-signiﬁcant and weak relationship was found between corporate reputation and switching intention. The postulated impact of
customer satisfaction on customer switching intention was conﬁrmed. Corporate reputation and customer satisfaction were found to be strongly
correlated.
Research limitations/implications – The sample includes only one company’s customers, so the ﬁndings may not be generalized to other industries.
Future research in other service industries is called for.
Practical implications – The threat of customer defection in deregulated markets requires power supply companies to examine the marketing
instruments and measures required to inhibit customer willingness to switch power suppliers. This study demonstrates the need to focus on monitoring
and increasing customer satisfaction.
Originality/value – The importance of reputation and satisfaction will ultimately be assessed on the basis of their customer-related consequences and
their economic relevance to companies. The construct of corporate reputation has attracted signiﬁcant attention among marketing scholars, although
almost no work can be found that focuses on the most important stakeholder group, namely customers. This paper addresses this research gap. The
identiﬁcation of context-speciﬁc reputation and satisfaction effects on customer defection offers both practical
implications for marketers and
contributes to the theoretical knowledge base of an increasingly important domain in services marketing.

Keywords Corporate image, Customer loyalty, Customer satisfaction, Germany

Paper type Research paper

An executive summary for managers can be found at
the end of this article.

Introduction

The promotion of private ownership and increased efﬁciency
has led to the abrogation of state-owned services in most
European Union (EU) countries. Many countries, including
the UK and Germany, began with liberalizing the
telecommunications sector. In the UK, partial deregulation
of the sector began in 1988, in Germany in 1995 when the
Deutsche Bundespost was disintegrated and transformed into
several public companies.

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0887-6045.htm

Journal of Services Marketing
20/6 (2006) 412– 420
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited [ISSN 0887-6045]
[DOI 10.1108/08876040610691301]

412

The liberalization of

the EU energy market drives
competition, although critics argue that the asymmetrical
enforcement of the EU’s directive by some member states
keeps preventing the emergence of a truly integrated
transnational market. Germany opted for a full liberalization
and has become one of the most strongly liberalized markets
in the EU. As a consequence, the strategies of Germany’s
municipal utilities (so-called Stadtwerke) have dramatically
changed since the liberalization of
the energy sector.
According to some projections, of 900 municipal utilities
(the terms “municipal utilities”, “utilities”, “energy
suppliers”, and “energy supply companies” are used
synonymously throughout this paper) in the pre-competitive
environment, only a few will survive.

Currently, German consumers can exercise choice with
regard to electricity and natural gas. Traditionally, German
households tend to purchase all their energy and energy-
related services (e.g. technical maintenance) from one local or
regional energy supplier. Switching energy suppliers would

The authors thank the anonymous JSM reviewers who gave helpful
comments.


A study of private energy customers in Germany

Journal of Services Marketing

Gianfranco Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Volume 20 · Number 6 · 2006 · 412 – 420

retention (or

the drivers of

hence involve taking a household’s entire business to another
company. Energy suppliers are thus challenged to focus their
marketing activities on customer management and to
minimize the defection of those customers willing to switch
suppliers to the competition. Especially in the service
marketing literature, customer
its inverse,
switching) is considered a central theme of the relationship
marketing concept (e.g. Oliva et al., 1992; Reichheld, 1993).
Identifying
retention and
understanding their effects on retention are an important
avenue of future relationship marketing research (e.g. Lemon
et al., 2002; Verhoef, 2003). In this context, Crosby and
Stephens (1987) argue that relationship marketing can be
used as a tool when services are difﬁcult to evaluate by
consumers,
suggesting that key relationship-marketing
concepts are highly relevant in the context of energy ﬁrms.
Services are intangible by nature and energy supply ﬁrms are
confronted with the task of creating customer satisfaction and
retention with intangible offerings.

customer

Various strategies are being discussed in both marketing
research and practice with regard to successfully countering
customer willingness to switch suppliers (see, e.g. Rowlands
et al., 2004). Besides the possibilities of inhibiting customer
willingness to switch (e.g. by means of alternative contract
models and/or new price models and price reductions), in
particular customer
satisfaction as well as corporate
reputation management can be considered to be promising
approaches for energy supply companies. The reason for this
is that it has been repeatedly found that in comparison to
companies in other sectors, German energy supply companies
exhibit deﬁcits with regard to corporate reputation and
customer satisfaction (e.g. Kundenmonitor Deutschland, 2001;
manager magazin, 2002).

reputation (i.e.

Despite the economic relevance of customer willingness to
switch suppliers in the energy sector, there has not yet been a
the question as to how far
systematic investigation of
perceived corporate
customer-based
corporate reputation) and customer satisfaction inﬂuence
switching intentions. Against this background, this study has
several objectives. First, we discuss the relevance of customer-
based corporate reputation and customer satisfaction for
customer switching behavior. Second, customers’ perceived
corporate reputation and their satisfaction level with their
current energy suppliers is measured. Third, the effects of
these two variables on customer switching behavior are
examined. Finally, the marketing implications of our research
are discussed.

Theoretical background

The concept of corporate reputation and its relevance
for switching behavior
The majority of existing empirical studies treated corporate
reputation as a uni-dimensional construct (e.g. Ganesan,
1994; Doney and Cannon, 1997), whereas more recent
approach recognize its multi-dimensional nature (e.g.
Fombrun et al., 2000; Davies et al., 2002).

Fombrun et al. (2000, p. 243) deﬁne corporate reputation
as a “collective assessment of a company’s ability to provide
valued outcomes to a representative group of stakeholders”.
In this sense reputation can be taken to be the sum of the
perception of all relevant stakeholders with reference to the
services, persons and communicative activities of a company

413

and,

in order

responsibility;

environmental

it has been suggested that
to possess

as well as the result over time of corporate activity in the
minds of
the stakeholders. While the widely accepted
reputation quotient (RQ) advanced by Fombrun et al.
comprises six dimensions (emotional appeal; products and
services; vision and leadership; workplace environment; social
and
ﬁnancial
the RQ may
performance),
inter-cultural
require reﬁnement
applicability. Walsh and Wiedmann (2004),
for example,
evaluated the RQ in a study of corporate reputation in
Germany and found that the original six dimensions failed to
adequately capture the corporate reputation construct in a
German cultural setting. Four additional German dimensions
were suggested by Walsh and Wiedmann – fairness,
sympathy, transparency and perceived customer orientation.
Construct validity may therefore be regarded as a central issue
when investigating the nature and inﬂuence of corporate
reputation in varying cultural settings.

Whereas corporate reputation is rightly regarded as a
multidimensional construct, with a diverse range of
stakeholders, the current study focuses strictly on customer-
based corporate reputation (i.e. corporate reputation as
perceived by customers). This reﬂects the present study’s
speciﬁc goal, namely, an investigation into the inﬂuence of
corporate reputation and customer satisfaction on customer
defection. Focusing on customers (as opposed to other
stakeholder groups) is in agreement with more recent work on
customer reputation and customer satisfaction that focuses on
the stakeholder group of customers
(e.g. Walsh and
Wiedmann, 2004; Caruana et al., 2004).

It is assumed that corporate reputation has a positive effect
on various commercially relevant economic and pre-economic
dimensions. According to Groenland (2002), a positive
corporate reputation has, for instance, a positive inﬂuence
on consumer trust in the respective company. With regard to
customers, previous studies suggest that corporate reputation
exerts an inﬂuence on perceived risk (e.g. Lantos, 1983), and
loyalty (Roberts and Dowling, 2002), all of which can
positively or negatively affect ﬁrm proﬁts.

However, a cautionary note is struck by Rose and Thomsen
(2004) with regard to what
they term the conventional
wisdom that corporate reputation has an impact on ﬁrm value
– the market to book value of equity. Rose and Thomsen
contend that corporate ﬁnancial performance affects
reputation rather than vice-versa. While not questioning that
reputation is vital for the survival of the ﬁrm in the long run,
they argue that
reputation may inﬂuence stock market
performance via proﬁtability and growth rather than having
a direct effect on the stock markets. The present study takes a
similarly nuanced perspective in the context of corporate
reputation and customer satisfaction by positing that the
reputation-satisfaction link may be a reciprocal, rather than
uni-directional, relationship.

The positive effects of reputation postulated in the literature
are based primarily on the reduction of uncertainty (Akerlof,
1970), which also plays a substantial role in the marketing of
energy. Utilities can be classiﬁed as service ﬁrms as (opposed
to goods or product ﬁrms) because of the intangibility of their
offering. Power suppliers in particular are companies whose
core services – power in the form of electricity and energy –
can hardly be distinguished by consumers due to the nearly
perfect homogeneity of the products. Energy products can be
classiﬁed as credence goods because the quality may not be


A study of private energy customers in Germany

Journal of Services Marketing

Gianfranco Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Volume 20 · Number 6 · 2006 · 412 – 420

known even after purchase. The value of energy products
must be taken on trust.

rather

towards the price,

Customers’ evaluations of energy supply companies is
therefore not oriented towards the concrete services obtained,
but
towards the customers’
(interactive) experience with their power supply company,
and/or service surrogates, which serve as evaluation criteria in
place of the service obtained. In the literature, the spillover
effect of this type of surrogate information on the rating of
services is referred to as the irradiation phenomenon (Spiegel,
1958).

Brand and corporate reputations are important surrogates.
Brands play a subordinate role due to product homogeneity in
the energy sector, whereas corporate reputations are highly
relevant. If a company’s reputation is positive, then it can be
assumed that its services will also be perceived positively by its
customers, which should have an immediate effect on
customer willingness to switch power supply companies.
Correspondingly, we postulate that a positive corporate
reputation has a signiﬁcantly negative inﬂuence on customer
switching intention.

The relevance of customer satisfaction for switching
behavior
With reference to the various relevant aspects of customer
behavior, satisfaction represents a central determinant from
which come different types of inﬂuence on other variables and
the economic success of a company (e.g. Anderson et al.,
1994). Numerous empirical studies in the context of goods
and services have shown that customer satisfaction has a
positive effect on different variables such as customer loyalty
(e.g. Biong, 1993; Fornell et al., 1996) and recommendation
behavior (e.g. Swan and Oliver, 1989; Mooradian and Oliver,
1997; Selnes and Gronhaug, 1997), but that it has a negative
effect on customer switching intention (e.g. Mittal et al.,
1998; Hennig-Thurau et al., 2002). This negative relationship
is plausible because when customers switch despite customer
satisfaction, switching could result in numerous potential
monetary and non-monetary risks (e.g. a higher price, worse
service or higher transaction costs).

Examining the satisfaction-loyalty link becomes even more
relevant because only few dissatisﬁed customers voice their
complaints (e.g. Stephens and Gwinner, 1998), making it
difﬁcult for service ﬁrms to address service-delivery problems
and avoid defection. Only between 5 and 10 per cent of
dissatisﬁed customers complain after a service breakdown,
whereas silent switching and the ensuing negative word-of-
mouth is far more common (Dube and Maute, 1996).

The management of customer satisfaction plays a large role
in the current marketing strategies of power
supply
companies. In the pre-liberalization era,
in power supply
companies market handling and service structures have
evolved that do not yet
the demands of modern
marketing management. There is a lot to catch up on with
regard to the management of customer satisfaction in the
energy market.
that
dissatisfaction with the services provided is the primary
reason for defection in the electricity market. Hence, we can
assume that customer satisfaction has a signiﬁcant negative
inﬂuence on customer switching intention.

Indeed, Zinnbauer

(2001)

shows

fulﬁll

The reputation-satisfaction link
Besides the inﬂuence outlined above of reputation and
customer satisfaction on switching intention, there is also a
link between reputation and customer satisfaction. Davies et al.
(2002) demonstrated the positive impact of corporate
reputation on customer satisfaction in the retailing context. It
can be assumed that this kind of positive inﬂuence will also hold
in the energy market as reputation represents an essential
anchor for the perception of satisfaction,
in particular in
markets in which surrogates are important. Hennig-Thurau
et al. (2002) demonstrated that customers who are satisﬁed with
the performance of a company, are more likely to engage in
positive word-of-mouth,
thus positively reinforcing the
company’s reputation. However, Harrison-Walker (2001)
makes the interesting and strategically important observation
that
service quality on word-of-mouth
communication appears to be industry-dependent. The
generalizability of the ﬁndings of Hennig-Thurau et al. (2002)
regarding customer propensity to engage in positive word-of-
mouth activity must therefore be treated with some caution.

the effect of

Method

Questionnaire and data collection
The items used in the present investigation are based on
theoretical considerations on corporate reputation and were
derived from previous studies (e.g., Fombrun et al., 2000;
Davies et al., 2002) and standard scales for measuring
customer satisfaction (e.g. Bitner, 1990; Biong, 1993;
Hennig-Thurau et al., 2002). However, unlike more recent
previous studies we decided to use a more parsimonious
reputation measure.

There were two main reasons for using an abbreviated
scale. First, respondent participation is enhanced with a
shorter instrument because multi-item measures can lead to
participant fatigue, boredom and inattention (Drolet and
Morrison, 2001), which in turn can lead to inappropriate
behavior,
inﬂating across-item error term correlation and
undermining respondent reliability. Second, existing multi-
dimensional scales have not yet been validated in Germany.

In order to optimize the questionnaire, a pre-test was
conducted with 20 persons. Of the ten items for measuring
corporate reputation, seven remained on the questionnaire
following the preliminary test. The eight items for establishing
customer satisfaction posed no problems to the respondents
and thus also remained on the ﬁnal questionnaire.
items were measured on
ﬁve-point Likert-type scales where 1¼“agree completely” and
5¼“disagree completely.”

Unless otherwise indicated, all

In the summer of 2002, a total of 1,850 customers of a large
German municipal utility were written to and requested to ﬁll
out the accompanying questionnaire. Several methods were
used to control and avoid non-response error. First, a postal
survey was chosen to minimize participation refusal due to
time constraints or inconvenience. Second, the questionnaire
was relatively short. Third, as an incentive, several prizes were
offered in a rafﬂe to participants. Fourth, the customer
addresses provided by the power supplier were randomly
selected from the company’s customer data base. A total of
498 questionnaires were returned. After the elimination of
incomplete or incorrectly ﬁlled out questionnaires, 462 cases
remained in the sample.

414


A study of private energy customers in Germany

Journal of Services Marketing

Gianfranco Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Volume 20 · Number 6 · 2006 · 412 – 420

Measures
An exploratory factor analysis (EFA) (principal component
analysis with subsequent varimax rotation) was performed for
all corporate reputation items, which led to a single-factor
solution with an explained variance of 70.22 per cent. At
0.94, the measure of sampling adequacy was very satisfactory.
With a Cronbach’s a value of 0.94, the corporate reputation
factor can be considered to be very reliable (Nunnally, 1978,
p. 245).

A conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) was performed to test
the stability of the exploratory single-factor solution. The
indicators were assigned in accordance with the EFA factor
loadings (Table I). The CFA was performed with the program
LISREL 8.52 using the maximum likelihood algorithm.

Model

identiﬁcation was achieved, and the ﬁt

indices
suggested that the model adequately represented the input
data, with Goodness of Fit index (GFI) being 0.94, Normed
Fit ðNFIÞ ¼ 0:98, Adjusted Goodness of Fit (AGFI) being
0.089, a Root Mean Square Residual (RMR) of 0.024, Root
Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) being 0.10,
and a competitive ﬁt of Comparative Fit (CFI) of 0.98.

A popular rule of thumb is that 0.70 is an acceptable
threshold for composite reliability, with each indicator
reliability above 0.50 (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). The
values for all seven indicators were above the required
threshold values (lowest ¼ 0:57; highest ¼ 0:77). The average
variance extracted (AVE) of the factor was 0.68 and clearly
surpassed the threshold of 0.50 (Bagozzi and Yi, 1988). Table
I provides a summary of the RFA and CFA results.

An EFA was also performed for all customer satisfaction
items. It led to a single-factor solution with an explained
variance of 65.37 per cent. At 0.93, the measure of sampling
adequacy was extremely satisfactory. With a Cronbach’s a
value of 0.92,
the customer satisfaction factor can be
considered to be very reliable (Table II).

A CFA was also performed to test the stability of the
customer satisfaction factor established. The indicators were
again assigned in accordance with the EFA factor loadings
(Table II). All the ﬁt indices indicated acceptable model it
(e.g. Hulland et al., 1996). The ﬁt indices were GFI ¼ 0:95,
CFI ¼ 0:89, NFI ¼ 0:84, AGFI ¼ 0:90, RMR ¼ 0:06 and
RMSEA ¼ 0:10. The AVE of the customer satisfaction factor
was 0.55.

Respondents’ intentions to switch energy suppliers were
measured with the following item: “How probable it is that
you will switch energy suppliers”: very certain, probable,

probably not, and very improbable. Some previous studies
that have analyzed this construct used a multi-item
measurement approach for it. However, the key reason for
those multi-items scales is the intention to capture the
different components of customer retention or loyalty (i.e.
cognitive, affective, and habitual). Since the different
components of
loyalty are not an issue studied in our
research, we feel that a single-item measurement for customer
switching intention is appropriate in this study.

A total of 139 respondents indicated that they would very
certainly or probably switch their current energy supplier,
while 323 respondents excluded switching energy suppliers
either deﬁnitely or to a high degree.

independent variables and each inﬂuences

Structural model
In a subsequent step, the inﬂuence of perceived corporate
reputation and customer satisfaction on switching intention
was examined using structural equation modeling. The
conceptual model was tested simultaneously with LISREL
8.52 using the maximum likelihood algorithm. “Corporate
reputation” and “Customer satisfaction” were speciﬁed as
latent
the
dependent variable “Switching intention.” Some items had
to be dropped to improve model ﬁt. In the ﬁnal model, seven
indicators were used to measure corporate reputation and ﬁve
indicators were used to measure customer satisfaction. With a
path coefﬁcient of 2 0.54, customer satisfaction has a
considerably stronger direct impact on switching intention
than perceived corporate reputation, which has a path
coefﬁcient of 2 0.07. At the same time there is a strong
correlation between customers’ perceived reputation of a
company and their
satisfaction with the same (0.85)
(Figure 1). The high correlation suggests a conceptual
closeness of corporate reputation to customer satisfaction.

Results and discussion
The expected negative relationship between corporate
reputation and switching intention could only be conﬁrmed
in its tendency. The non-signiﬁcant and weak relationship
between corporate reputation and switching intention may be
due to the fact that in its current form (including its name),
the respective power supply company has only existed for a
few years and has thus had little opportunity to develop a
strong reputation. It is also conceivable that the relationship is
moderated by variables that were not considered in this study.
For example, Homburg and Giering (2001) examined the

Table I Eigenvalue, reliability, factor loadings and indicator reliabilities for the single-factor solution (corporate reputation)

Eigenvalue (g) and

Indicator reliabilities

Factor: corporate reputation

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

I consider my energy supplier to be progressive and innovative
I believe that my energy supplier is ﬂexible
My energy supplier is customer-oriented
I consider my energy supplier to be a pleasant company
I believe that my energy supplier is involved in the region
In my opinion, my energy supplier is respectable and trustworthy
I believe that my energy supplier is economically sound

Cronbach’s a and factor loadings

g 5 5:62
a 5 0:94

0.89
0.88
0.88
0.85
0.81
0.80
0.79

(CFA)
0.68

(Average variance extracted)

0.77
0.77
0.76
0.69
0.60
0.58
0.57

415


A study of private energy customers in Germany

Journal of Services Marketing

Gianfranco Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Volume 20 · Number 6 · 2006 · 412 – 420

Table II Eigenvalue, reliability, factor loadings and indicator reliabilities for the single-factor solution (customer satisfaction)

Factor: customer satisfaction

1I would recommend my current energy supplier to friends and acquaintances
2If I had the choice, I would again decide in favor of my current energy supplier
3In my view, my current energy supplier is customer-oriented
4On the whole, I am satisﬁed with my current energy supplier
5If I had the option, if I moved to another area I would remain with my current supplier
6I am satisﬁed with the price and performance ratio of my current energy supplier
7The contacts at my current energy supplier are friendly
8Ioncehadaproblemoranegativeexperience withmycurrentenergysupplier

Note: The item in italics was not considered in the calculation of Cronbach’s a

Figure 1 Model results

Eigenvalue (g) and Cronbach’s a

Indicator reliabilities

and factor loadings

g 5 5:24
a 5 0:92

(CFA)
0.55

(Average variance extracted)

0.90
0.90
0.87
0.87
0.84
0.80
0.70
20.51

0.74
0.70
0.61
0.55
0.52
0.46
0.44
0.35

moderating effect of demographic and psychographic factors
on the relationship between customer satisfaction and
retention. They found that age, income, and variety-seeking
were the most important moderator variables.

In contrast, the postulated impact of customer satisfaction
on customer switching intention was conﬁrmed. This result is
an indication that with reference to core services, power
supply companies must ensure high quality in order to satisfy
and retain their customers.

Corporate reputation seems to be linked to customer
satisfaction. However, it can also be a reciprocal relationship,
which is not
surprising: “Reputation and customer
satisfaction have been seen as interlinked” (Davies et al.,
2002, p. 151; see also Anderson and Fornell, 1994).

Implications

Implications for marketing practitioners
Since the liberalization of the power markets, marketing in the
utility industry has gained signiﬁcance for the management of
power supply companies. In particular the threat of customer
defection requires power supply companies to examine the
marketing instruments and measures required to inhibit
customer willingness to switch power suppliers.

The present study shows that customer satisfaction has a
signiﬁcant negative inﬂuence on switching tendency in the
energy market, while a signiﬁcant inﬂuence for corporate
reputation could not be conﬁrmed. The impact of corporate
reputation on switching tendency is fully mediated by

416


A study of private energy customers in Germany

Journal of Services Marketing

Gianfranco Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Volume 20 · Number 6 · 2006 · 412 – 420

indicating that corporate reputation
customer satisfaction,
appears to inhibit switching tendency indirectly via customer
satisfaction. For the marketing strategies of energy suppliers,
knowledge about
these relationships could be a helpful
supplement to existing customer-related information.

for

Because customer satisfaction apparently represents the
central starting point
the management of customer
willingness to switch suppliers, power supply companies need
to focus their marketing interest more strongly on increasing
and monitoring customer satisfaction. By concentrating on
customer closeness and on customer satisfaction, customers
can be lastingly sensitized against the competitions’ attempts
to contract them away.

It can be deduced in particular from the results of this study
that it is also necessary for power supply companies to
regularly measure customer satisfaction in the sense of an
early warning system in order to be able to take suitable steps
against a drop in customer satisfaction. What incites customer
satisfaction needs to be identiﬁed and analyzed. A reliable
analysis of customer
satisfaction is often the primary
prerequisite for
identifying the defection tendency of
customers and segments. Only when companies have
sufﬁcient knowledge about customer satisfaction will they be
able to identify dissatisﬁed customers and take appropriate
measures to raise their commitment level. Supplemented by
data on customer value, this information can help to identify
which customers are worthy of long-term commitment.

With regard to the management of corporate reputation it
can be stated that this also has an inﬂuence on customer
defection behavior,
therefore
recommended that power supply companies keep building
and managing positive reputations.

if only indirectly.

It

is

Implications for marketing research
Even though the postulated impact of corporate reputation on
customer switching intention was lower than anticipated, this
construct also provides numerous links for further research.
So far,
there has been limited research on corporate
reputation in the German marketing literature (Walsh and
Wiedmann, 2004). Frequently cited US and UK concepts
view corporate reputation as a six-dimensional (Fombrun
et al., 2000) or seven-dimensional construct (Davies et al.,
2002). What
is a comprehensive
conceptualization of corporate reputation in view of possible
determinants
non-monetary)
consequences. Walsh and Wiedmann (2004) constructed a
conceptual model of antecedents and consequences of
corporate reputation, which yet has to be tested against
empirical data.

is called for, however,

(monetary

and

and

Moreover, however, there are additional variables relevant
for switching behavior which have not yet been examined
within the context of power supply companies and which
could be the object of future theoretical research. While the
present study has clearly demonstrated the critical importance
of customer satisfaction in inhibiting customer defection in
the service sector, future research is required into the other
potential variables
that may impact upon customers’
willingness to engage in switching behavior. Hofmeyr and
Rice (2000), for example, contend that satisfaction correlates
only weakly with consumer behavior and that satisfaction
represents only one of four relevant dimensions in measuring
commitment – the remaining three dimensions comprising

417

perception of
choice, and degree of ambivalence.

the alternatives,

the importance of brand

In our study the impact of corporate reputation on
switching intention was mediated by customer satisfaction.
Future research could investigate if
this effect can be
conﬁrmed for other
is
conceivable that corporate reputations are more relevant
(and hence a stronger direct impact on switching intention)
for highly individualized and interactive services or more
“tangible” services such as hairdressing or restaurants.

service areas. For example,

it

Finally, a limitation of our study needs to be noted to assist
the reader in assessing the validity and transferability of the
results. The present study uses only one company’s customers
as its sample and hence, it can only address one company’s
customers, which reduces generalizability across the spectrum
of German utility companies. In addition, we did not have any
information beyond the selected customers’ names and
addresses. This meant we could not investigate whether
various classes of customers differed in terms their evaluation
of
the company’s reputation, satisfaction, and switching
intentions. This limitation provides an avenue for future
research. For example, it is likely that, ceteris paribus, long-
time customers have lower switching intentions than new
customers due to customer inertia, risk aversion, or a lack of
market transparency. The service context used, although
intentional to investigate the discussed relationships, does not
allow to test
impacts of corporate
reputation and customer satisfaction. The advantage of
choosing one service area was that it allowed us to detect
context-speciﬁc reputation and satisfaction effects. Future
research may wish to explore the impact of customer-based
corporate reputation using cross-sectional data.

for cross-sectional

References

Akerlof, G.A. (1970), “The market for ‘lemons’: quality
uncertainty and the marketing mechanisms”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, pp. 488-500.

Anderson, E.W. and Fornell, C. (1994), “A customer
satisfaction research prospectus”, in Rust, R. and Oliver,
R. (Eds), Service Quality: New Direction in Theory and
Practice, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 241-68.

Anderson, E.W., Fornell, C. and Lehmann, D.R. (1994),
“Customer satisfaction, market share, and proﬁtability:
ﬁndings from Sweden”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58,
pp. 53-66.

Bagozzi, R.P. and Yi, Y. (1988), “On the evaluation of
the Academy of

structural equation models”, Journal of
Marketing Science, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 74-94.

Biong, H. (1993), “Satisfaction and loyalty to suppliers within
the grocery trade”, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 27
No. 7, pp. 21-38.

Bitner, M.J. (1990), “Evaluating service encounters: the effect
of physical surroundings and employee responses”, Journal
of Marketing, Vol. 54 No. 2, pp. 69-82.

Caruana, A., Ramasashan, B. and Krentler, K.A. (2004),
“Corporate reputation, customer satisfaction, & customer
loyalty: what is the relationship?”, in Spotts, H.E. (Ed.),
Proceedings: Developments
in Marketing Science, Vol. 27,
Academy of Marketing Science, Coral Gables, FL, p. S. 301.
(1987), “Effects of
retention, and

relationship marketing on satisfaction,

Crosby, L.A. and Stephens, N.


A study of private energy customers in Germany

Journal of Services Marketing

Gianfranco Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Volume 20 · Number 6 · 2006 · 412 – 420

prices in the life insurance industry”, Journal of Marketing
Research, Vol. 24, November, pp. 404-11.

Davies, G., Chun, R., Da Silva, R.V. and Roper, S. (2002),
Corporate Reputation and Competitiveness, Routledge,
London.

Doney, P.M. and Cannon, J.P. (1997), “An examination of
the nature of trust in buyer-seller relationships”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 61 No. 2, pp. 35-51.

Drolet, A.L. and Morrison, D.G. (2001), “Do we really need
multiple-item measures in service research?”, Journal of
Service Research, Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 196-204.

Dube, L. and Maute, M. (1996), “The antecedents of brand
switching, brand loyalty and verbal responses to service
failure”, Advances in Services Marketing and Management,
Vol. 5, pp. 127-51.

Fombrun, C.J., Gardberg, N.A. and Sever, J.W. (2000), “The
reputation quotient: a multi-stakeholder measure of
corporate reputation”, The Journal of Brand Management,
Vol. 7 No. 4, pp. 241-55.

Fornell, C. and Larcker, D.G. (1981), “Evaluating structural
equation models with unobservable
and
measurement error”, Journal of Marketing Research,
Vol. 18, pp. 39-50.

variables

Fornell, C., Johnson, M.D., Anderson, E.W., Cha, J. and
Bryant, B.E. (1996), “The American customer satisfaction
index: nature, purpose and ﬁndings”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 60 No. 4, pp. 7-18.

Fullerton, G. (2003), “When does commitment

lead to
loyalty?”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 5 No. 4,
pp. 333-44.

Ganesan, S. (1994), “Determinants of long-term orientation
in buyer-seller relationships”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58,
April, pp. 1-19.

Groenland, E.A.G. (2002), “Qualitative research to validate
the RQ-dimensions”, Corporate Reputation Review, Vol. 4
No. 4, pp. 309-15.

Harrison-Walker, L.J. (2001), “The measurement of word-of-
mouth communication and an investigation of service
quality
potential
antecedents”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 4 No. 1,
pp. 60-75.

commitment

customer

and

as

Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K.P. and Gremler, D.D.
(2002), “Understanding relationship marketing outcomes:
an integration of
relational beneﬁts and relationship
quality”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 5, February,
pp. 230-47.

Hofmeyr, J. and Rice, B. (2000), Commitment-led Marketing:
The Key to Brand Proﬁts is in the Customer’s Mind, Wiley,
New York, NY.

Homburg, C.

and Giering, A.

“Personal
characteristics as moderators of the relationship between
customer satisfaction and loyalty – an empirical analysis”,
Psychology & Marketing, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 43-66.

(2001),

Kundenmonitor Deutschland

Hulland, J., Yiu, H.C. and Shunyin, L. (1996), “Use of causal
models in marketing research: a review”, International
Journal of Research in Marketing, Vol. 13 No. 2, pp. 181-97.
(2001), Qualita¨ t
Kundenorientierung/Branchenanalysen/
www.

und
Stromversorgungsunternehmen,
servicebarometer.de/kundenmonitor2001/index.html
(accessed 29 June 2002).

available

2001

at:

Lantos, G.P. (1983), “The inﬂuence of inherent risk and
information acquisition on consumer
risk reduction
strategies”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 358-81.

Lemon, K.N., White, T.B. and Winer, R.S.

(2002),
management:
“Dynamic
incorporating future considerations
into the service
retention decision”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 66, January,
pp. 1-14.

relationship

customer

available

Imageproﬁle,

manager magazin (2002),

at:
www.manager-magazin.de/unternehmen/imageproﬁle/0,
2828,178348,00.html
Mittal, V., Ross, W.

(accessed 2 February 2002).
Jr and Baldasare, P.

(1998),
“The asymmetric impact of negative and positive
attribute-level performance on overall satisfaction and
repurchase intentions”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 62
No. 1, pp. 33-47.

Mooradian, T. and Oliver, J. (1997), “‘I Can’t get no
satisfaction’: the impact of personality and emotion on
postpurchase processes”, Psychology & Marketing, Vol. 14
No. 4, pp. 379-93.

Nunnally,

J.C.

(1978), Psychometric Theory, 2nd ed.,

McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.

Oliva, T.A., Oliver, R.L. and MacMillan,

I.C. (1992),
“A catastrophe model for developing service satisfaction
strategies”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 56, July, pp. 83-95.

Reichheld, F.F.

(1993), “Loyalty-based management”,
Harvard Business Review, Vol. 71, March-April, pp. 64-73.
Roberts, P.W. and Dowling, G.R. (2002), “Reputation and
sustained superior ﬁnancial performance”, Strategic
Management Journal, Vol. 23, December, pp. 1077-93.

Rose, C. and Thomsen, S. (2004), “The impact of corporate
reputation on performance: some Danish evidence”,
European Management Journal, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 201-10.
Rowlands, I.H., Parker, P. and Scott, D. (2004), “Consumer
behaviour in restructured electricity markets”, Journal of
Consumer Behaviour, Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 272-83.

Selnes, F. and Gronhaug, K. (1997), “When does it pay off to
exceed customers’ expectations? The importance of
differentiating should- and could-expectations”, working
paper of the Norwegian School of Management, Oslo.

Spiegel, B. (1958), Werbepsychologische Untersuchungsmethoden:
Experimentelle Forschungs- und Pru¨ fverfahren, Duncker und
Humbolt, Berlin.

Stephens, N. and Gwinner, K.P. (1998), “Why don’t some
people complain? A cognitive-emotive process model of
consumer complaint behavior”, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, Vol. 26 No. 3, pp. 172-89.

Swan,

J.E. and Oliver, R.L.

(1989), “Postpurchase
communications by consumers”, Journal of Retailing,
Vol. 65 No. 4, pp. 516-33.

Verhoef, P.C. (2003), “Understanding the effect of customer
relationship management efforts on customer retention and
customer share development”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 67,
October, pp. 30-45.

Walsh, G. and Wiedmann, K.-P. (2004), “A conceptualization
of corporate reputation in Germany: an evaluation and
extension of the RQ”, Corporate Reputation Review, Vol. 6
No. 4, pp. 304-12.

Zinnbauer, M.

(2001), “Cross-Selling-Potenziale bei
Energieversorgungsunternehmen durch Bundling [Cross-

418


A study of private energy customers in Germany

Journal of Services Marketing

Gianfranco Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Volume 20 · Number 6 · 2006 · 412 – 420

Selling Potentials of Energy-supply Companies through
Bundling]”, Zeitschrift fu¨r Energiewirtschaft, Vol. 25 No. 4,
pp. 243-52.

Further reading

Bloemer, J. and Kasper, H.D. (1993), “Brand loyalty and
brand satisfaction: the case of buying audio cassettes anew
in The Netherlands”, Proceedings of
the 22nd EMAC
Conference, Barcelona, No. 1, pp. 183-200.

Clerfeuille, F. and Poubanne, Y. (2003), “Differences in the
contributions of elements of
service to satisfaction,
commitment and consumers’ share of purchase: a study
from the tetraclass model”, Journal of Targeting, Measurement
and Analysis for Marketing, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 66-81.

Homburg, C., Giering, A. and Hentschel, F. (1999), “Der
Zusammenhang zwischen Kundenzufriedenheit und
Kundenbindung (The relationship between customer
satisfaction and retention)”, Die Betriebswirtschaft, Vol. 59
No. 2, pp. 174-95.

Pritchard, M.P., Havitz, M.E. and Howard, D.R. (1999),
“Analyzing the commitment-loyalty link in service
contexts”, Journal of Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 27
No. 3, pp. 333-48.

Warrington, P. and Shim, S.

(2000), “An empirical
investigation of
relationship between product
involvement and brand commitment”, Psychology and
Marketing, Vol. 17 No. 9, pp. 761-82.

the

About the authors

Gianfranco Walsh is a senior lecturer in marketing at the
Strathclyde Business School in Glasgow. He received his PhD
from and earned his habilitation at
the University of
Hannover. His research focuses on cross-cultural and online
consumer behavior, services and movie marketing. His work
has been published, among others, in Academy of Marketing
Science Review, Corporate Reputation Review,
International
Journal of Electronic Commerce, Journal of Consumer Affairs,
Journal of Consumer Marketing, Journal of Interactive Marketing,
Journal of Database Marketing, and the Journal of Marketing
Communications. Gianfranco Walsh is the corresponding
author and can be contacted at: g.walsh@strath.ac.uk

Keith Dinnie is a lecturer in marketing at the Strathclyde
Business School in Glasgow in Glasgow. His research interests
include branding and brand management in general and
speciﬁcally the emerging ﬁeld of nation branding, as well as
the related area of country-of-origin.

Klaus-Peter Wiedmann is Professor of Marketing in the
Department of Marketing II at the University of Hannover,
Germany. His research interests include marketing strategy
and electronic marketing. He is also an experienced marketing
consultant for utilities and pharmaceutical companies.

Executive summary

This summary has been provided to allow managers and executives
a rapid appreciation of the content of this article. Those with a
particular interest in the topic covered may then read the article in
toto to take advantage of the more comprehensive description of the
research undertaken and its results to get the full beneﬁt of the
material present.

419

If the company which supplies your gas or electricity has a ﬁne
reputation, and is an organization you trust, do you happily
stick with it? Or do you immediately switch to another
supplier once you realise you could be saving a bundle of
money on your household bills?

Customer satisfaction is an achievement companies invest
heavily in, but no matter how satisﬁed you are with a service,
no matter how long a trouble-free relationship has lasted, how
do you resist the temptation of switching to someone else if
the only difference between the two is that one charges you
less?

It is not as if you have to have a face-to-face encounter with
someone who has been supplying you with a service. If you
have been having your car repaired at a local garage for years,
you might carry on out of a sense of loyalty even if the prices
are higher than elsewhere. Not so with switching energy
supplies. In the UK, for instance, web-based organizations
such as SimplySwitch.com or uSwitch.com can present you
with up-to-date price comparisons and direct you to the
supplier who can do the best deal.

Customers in the UK, where energy prices have risen more
than 40 per cent in two years, have now become so price-
conscious that in March 2006 alone about 900,000 domestic
customers switched. And they were right to do so, says Alistair
Buchanan, Chief Executive of Ofgem, the Ofﬁce of Gas and
Electricity Markets, which regulates those markets in Great
Britain. He says: “Customers who have never switched
supplier can save up to £110, so across Britain there are
unclaimed savings of around £1 billion”.

In their study of the importance of customer satisfaction
and corporate reputation on customer defection, Gianfranco
Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann studied the
German energy market which, like the UK’s and those of
other European Union countries offers customers huge
choice. Germany has one of the most strongly liberalized
markets in the EU and, according to some projections, of 900
municipal utilities in the pre-competitive environment, only a
few will survive. Traditionally, German households tend to
buy all their energy and energy-related services (e.g. technical
maintenance) from one local or regional energy supplier.
Switching would therefore involve taking the household’s
entire business elsewhere, a prospect which challenges
supplies to focus their marketing activities on customer
management aimed at minimizing defection. No easy task
when you are dealing with intangible services. No easy task,
either, when many companies’ and marketers’ unshakeable
conviction is that trusted brands and a positive corporate
reputation, coupled with an excellent product, will play a
signiﬁcant role in encouraging customers to stay loyal. That
may work well if you are selling crockery or cars, wardrobes or
wind-turbines, but power suppliers’ customers are unlikely to
feel that Company A’s electricity or gas is superior or inferior
to Company B’s. You turn the same electricity switch whoever
provides the current.

Threat of customer defection, however, does require power
supply companies to examine the marketing instruments and
measures required to inhibit customer willingness to switch
power suppliers.

While the study of consumers in the German market
concluded that customer satisfaction has a signiﬁcant negative
inﬂuence on the tendency to switch suppliers, a signiﬁcant


A study of private energy customers in Germany

Journal of Services Marketing

Gianfranco Walsh, Keith Dinnie and Klaus-Peter Wiedmann

Volume 20 · Number 6 · 2006 · 412 – 420

inﬂuence for corporate reputation could not be conﬁrmed –
one possible factor being that such relatively-new companies
have had little opportunity to develop a strong reputation.
Even if the inﬂuence corporate reputation brings to bear on
decisions to switch suppliers is only indirect, that is reason
enough to recommend that power supply companies keep
building and managing positive reputations.

Walsh et al. say:
The impact of corporate reputation on switching tendency is fully mediated
by customer satisfaction, indicating that corporate reputation appears to
inhibit switching tendency indirectly via customer satisfaction. For the
marketing strategies of energy suppliers, knowledge about these relationships
could be a helpful supplement to existing customer-related information.

Because customer satisfaction apparently represents the
central starting point
the management of customer
willingness to switch suppliers, power supply companies need
to focus their marketing interest more strongly on increasing
and monitoring customer satisfaction. By concentrating on
customer closeness and on customer satisfaction, customers

for

can be lastingly sensitised against the competitions’ attempts
to contract them.

IT is also necessary for power supply companies to regularly
measure customer satisfaction in the sense of an early warning
system in order to be able to take suitable steps against a drop
in customer satisfaction. What incites customer satisfaction
needs to be identiﬁed and analysed.

Walsh et al. say:
A reliable analysis of customer satisfaction is often the primary prerequisite
for identifying the defection tendency of customers and segments. Only
when companies have sufﬁcient knowledge about customer satisfaction will
they be able to identify dissatisﬁed customers and take appropriate measures
to raise their commitment level. Supplemented by data on customer value,
this information can help to identify which customers are worthy of long-
term commitment.

(A pre´cis of the article “How do corporate reputation and customer
satisfaction impact customer defection? A study of private energy
customers in Germany”. Supplied by Marketing Consultants for
Emerald.)

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

420

