Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 690 – 697

Does the employee–customer satisfaction link hold for all employee groups?

Florian v. Wangenheim a,⁎, Heiner Evanschitzky b,1, Maren Wunderlich c,2

a TUM Business, Technical University Munich, Arcisstr. 21, 80333 Munich, Germany

b Marketing Center Muenster (MCM), University of Muenster, Am Stadtgraben 13-15, 48143 Muenster, Germany

c Premiere Fernsehen GmbH & Co. KG, Medienallee 4, 85774 Unterfoehring, Germany

Received 1 April 2006; received in revised form 1 February 2007; accepted 1 February 2007

Abstract

Increasingly, retailers nowadays have to focus on service marketing strategies and tactics to differentiate themselves from their competitors.
Delivering high levels of service quality becomes crucial for long-term success. Since customers' perception of service quality depends very much
on the interaction between the customer and the employee, this study analyzes the link between employee and customer satisfaction in more detail.
Moreover, based on three different theories that prior research has used, it investigates whether or not the level of customer contact is a
determinant of the existence or the intensity of the employee–customer satisfaction link. Analysis of dyadic data from 53,645 customers and 1659
employees across 99 outlets of a large German Do-It-Yourself (DIY)-retailer shows that employee job satisfaction affects customer satisfaction
even for employee groups that are not in direct interaction with customers, although effects seem to be slightly stronger for high interaction
groups. Implications for research and management are discussed.
© 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Customer Satisfaction; Employee job satisfaction; Satisfaction mirror; Customer contact

1. Introduction

A substantial body of

research confirms the positive
association between employee and customer satisfaction (e.g.,
Bernhardt et al., 2000; Harter et al., 2002; Koys, 2001; Ryan et al.,
1996; Tornow and Wiley, 1991). A common characteristic of all
previous research is that present available dyadic studies have
mainly focused on service employees who are in direct and
intense customer contact, such as salespeople (Homburg and
Stock, 2004, 2005), financial service consultants (Ryan et al.,
1996), or service personnel from a restaurant chain (Koys, 2001).
Likewise, managerial practice frequently acknowledges the

⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 89 289 28401.

E-mail addresses: Florian.Wangenheim@wi.tum.de (F. Wangenheim),

evanschitzky@ifhm.de (H. Evanschitzky), maren_wunderlich@web.de
(M. Wunderlich).

1 Tel.: +49 251 8322036; fax: +49 251 8322032.
2 Tel.: +49 899958 7265.

0148-2963/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.02.019

importance of this group for achieving customer satisfaction by
using customer satisfaction scores as indicators of employee
performance, as well as a basis for employee bonus payments.
Due to the implicit limitation of both research and managerial
practice the link has never been researched for employee groups
that are not or very rarely in direct contact with customers.
Typically, firms evaluate and compensate such employees
according to standard productivity and efficiency measures. In
retail settings, for example, employees working in the storeroom
and as cashiers are normally evaluated based on “hard” data, such
as the number of items stored or the number of items processed
per work day. However, organization theories (e.g., Schneider and
Goldstein, 1995) suggest that all employee groups contribute to
the organizational climate, which in turn affects employee
satisfaction, customer orientation and customer satisfaction.
Hence, the research questions underlying the present study are
as follows: Can the employee–customer satisfaction link be
confirmed for diverse employee groups? In particular, is the link
present for groups with little or no customer interaction, and if so,
is the link stronger for employee groups with more intensive and
qualitatively higher-level customer contact?


F. Wangenheim et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 690–697

691

An answer to these questions is important for both research-
ers and practitioners. For service marketing theory, the question
whether the impact of employee job satisfaction on customer
satisfaction is restricted to direct
interaction settings is an
interesting question, and an integration of related theories seems
important given the plethora of potential explanations. From a
managerial perspective, understanding whether employee job
satisfaction is an important marketing goal in areas or for
employee groups that have no or only limited customer
interaction. Further, if such a link existed for groups with little
or no interaction, customer satisfaction should also be added to
their list of performance indicators.

2. Theoretical background

It is generally acknowledged that customer satisfaction and
employee job satisfaction are positively correlated. A compre-
hensive meta-analysis of 7939 business units in 36 companies
conducted by Harter et al. (2002: 273, Table 2 for details) found
support for such a positive link between employee job satisfaction
and customer satisfaction. However, as Homburg and Stock
(2004) point out, although both employee and customer
satisfaction are important constructs that have received consid-
erable attention in both marketing and human resources literature,
studies using data from employees and customers that allow
analysis of the dyadic link between the two constructs are still
rare. Among those using dyadic data, Tornow and Wiley (1991),
and Bernhardt et al. (2000) report a strong correlation between
employee attitudes such as satisfaction and customer satisfaction.
Ryan et al. (1996), and Koys (2001) both confirm this positive
correlation for longitudinal data in an automobile finance and a
restaurant chain setting, respectively. Homburg and Stock (2004,
2005) investigate mediating and moderating factors of the link
between employee job satisfaction and customer satisfaction and
show that, especially, personality factors play a role in deter-
mining the strength of the relationship. In sum, convincing evi-
dence for a statistically significant relationship between customer
satisfaction and employee job satisfaction exists. (The only study
reporting a non-significant relationship between customer satis-
faction and employee job satisfaction is Loveman (1998). The
author explains this finding by a potentially sub-optimal measure
of employee loyalty and recognizes the need for further research
that investigates this link in the SPC.)

At the same time, however, the theoretical mechanism sus-
pected to underlie the relationship between employee job satis-
faction and customer satisfaction is far from clear. Below, these
theories are briefly reviewed and their implications for the
central research question are discussed.

2.1. Attraction-selection-model

The ASA model is based on the assumption that, over time,
people within an organization become more similar in their
dispositions and, consequently, more homogenous in attitudes
(Schneider and Goldstein, 1995). This is because the individuals in
a group or organization share certain experiences: an intolerable
supervisor and poor working conditions, or a very respectful

supervisor and positive working conditions. Further, members of
the same organizational unit are affected by the same situational
influences, and thus their attitudes should converge (Ryan et al.,
1996). Organizational behavior research supports this homogeneity
hypothesis (Schneider and Goldstein, 1995). Therefore, organiza-
tional units will develop a homogenous affective tone (Ryan et al.,
1996).

According to Schneider and Bowen (1995), the development
of a positive and satisfactory organizational climate enables
employees to be better aware of and responsive to organizational
and customer goals, while negative organizational climates hinder
high-level customer service and satisfaction. Thus, job satisfac-
tion should be related to customer satisfaction due to the homo-
geneity of the working climate within a group of employees.
Positive working climates increase employee job satisfaction, and
thus customer satisfaction, while negative climates will ultimately
decrease both groups' satisfaction.

Empirical studies have lent support to this assumption of the
ASA model. Both Ryan et al. (1996) and Schneider, White, and
Paul (1998) base their hypotheses on the ASA model. They find
empirical support for a positive relationship between work
climate and service quality perceptions. Koys (2001), building
on the ASA, shows a positive relationship between employee
satisfaction and customer satisfaction.

2.2. Balance theory

Based on the assumption that a system of triadic relation-
ships between two persons and an object can be either balanced
or unbalanced, balance theory predicts a tendency toward a
balanced state over time, i.e., attitude consistency of the two
interrelated individuals. Thus, a relationship system is called
balanced if the two persons have the same attitude toward an
object. In an unbalanced state the two individuals differ in their
attitudes toward the object.

According to balance theory the unbalanced situation results
in cognitive tension leading to activities to balance the state.
Thus, the individual experiences psychological tension, a state
of cognitive dissonance, and therefore tries to resolve the
situation by, e.g., changing his/her attitude (Brehm and Cohen,
1962; Festinger, 1957).

Research on attitude change suggests that stronger attitudes
are more stable and hence less likely to change than weaker
attitudes (e.g., Fishbein and Ajzen, 1972). Attributes that
predict attitude stability are knowledge and importance (see
Erber et al., 1995; Krosnick et al., 1993; Petty and Cacioppo,
1986 for comprehensive reviews). Against this background,
imbalance in the relationship between employee and customer
leads the employee to influence the customer, since the
employee's attitude is stronger—specifically, more stable and
resistant (Krosnick and Petty, 1995). The employee has more
knowledge about
the services and products offered by the
retailer and attaches great personal relevance to his job. The
customer, on the other hand, is usually less knowledgeable
about the products and only engages in short-term transactions
(e.g., buying something) with the retailer. Therefore, unsatisfied
customers can be assumed to adapt their negative attitudes to the


692

F. Wangenheim et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 690–697

positive attitudes of the employee with whom they are in contact;
in more general terms, employee job satisfaction positively
influences customer satisfaction.

2.3. Emotional contagion

Emotional contagion refers to the transference of emotion
between interacting individuals. Rooted in the field of social
psychology, the theory (Hatfield et al., 1994) suggests that the
emotions displayed by an individual produce a corresponding
change in the emotional state of the observer. Up to now, a
substantial body of research on interpersonal interaction provides
support for the “tendency to automatically mimic and synchronize
facial expressions, vocalization, postures and movements with
those of another person and, consequently, to converge emotion-
ally” (Hatfield et al., 1994: 5) (e.g., Chartrand and Bargh, 1999;
Gump and Kulik, 1997; Hess and Blairy, 2001; Hsee et al., 1990).
The concept of emotional contagion has been used in marketing
research to explain the link between employee job satisfaction and
customer satisfaction (Homburg and Stock, 2004; Pugh, 2001;
Verbeke, 1997). According to this theory, customers catch certain
emotional states of customer-contact employees which are
associated with the employee's job satisfaction. Drawing on
Rafaeli and Sutton (1989) and on qualitative research results
(Sutton, 1991; van Maanen and Kunda, 1989) inner feelings on the
job are expected to be important predictors of the employee's
displayed emotions. Typically, these emotions cannot be con-
sciously controlled by the employee. As an example (provided by
Homburg and Stock, 2004), the level of experienced job stress is
negatively correlated to the employee's job satisfaction. Thus, a
highly dissatisfied employee will (unconsciously) exhibit a high
level of emotional tension expressed through facial expressions,
vocalization, and other observable behaviors. That tension will be
felt by the customer and consequently will affect the customer's
satisfaction via the process of emotional contagion (Wild et al.,
2001). This will create cognitive tension for the customer as well,
which in turn reduces the customer's satisfaction-level.

Turning to empirical evidence, a study by Pugh (2001) shows
that emotions displayed by retail banking employees were
positively related to customer affect and customer evaluations of
the quality of services received. Similar results, supporting the
assumption that employee job satisfaction plays an important
role in driving customer satisfaction, were found by Homburg
and Stock (2004) in a business-to-business context.

In line with emotional contagion theory and based on
empirical findings, employee job satisfaction is expected to
influence customer satisfaction via the employees' display of
emotion that produce corresponding changes in the customers'
affective state.

2.4. Synthesis

i.e., whether the level and quality of customer interaction should
matter for the relationship between employee and customer
satisfaction, the three theories would suggest different hypothe-
ses. Both the work on emotional contagion and balance theory
would require employees and customers to be in direct contact
with each other. For the receiver to take on the emotion of the
sender, the two must be in personal contact with each other —
hence, the relationship would only hold for customer-contact
employees (Pugh, 2001). Also, for balance theory, the balance
must be maintained through a conscious system. In other words,
customers that adapt their satisfaction levels to the satisfaction
levels of employees must know about the employees' satisfaction
levels. If this is not the case – i.e., for non-customer-contact
personnel – no reason for the existence of a positive relationship
between employee and customer satisfaction exists.

On the other hand, following the argumentation of the ASA
model, a positive relationship between employee and customer
satisfaction could also be expected for employees who are not in
direct interaction with the service providers' customers. This is
because the attitudes of employees within a unit are expected to be
homogenous, and only the “climate for service” (Schneider et al.,
1998), influenced by all employees, is important in delivering
service quality. This climate is equally likely to be created and
perceived by employees irrespective of whether or not they are in
direct contact with customers. Increased employee job satisfaction
has been shown to increase organizational citizenship behavior
(Organ and Ryan, 1995). This,
in turn increases customer
satisfaction, because altruistic, conscientious employees would
support internal and external customers and make suggestions to
improve quality and customer satisfaction, regardless of their
position in the firm or their level or quality of customer interaction
(Ryan, 2001). Hence, this theoretical approach would favor the
existence of an equally strong relationship between employee and
customer satisfaction for both employees who are in direct
customer contact and for those who are not.

Given prior empirical evidence supporting that all of the
cited theories have some relevance in the present case, a
statistically significant relationship between employee and
customer satisfaction can be expected for all groups of
employees, but because of balancing processes and social
contagion, will be strongest for employees who are in direct
customer contact. Hence, the hypothesis results:

H1. The positive relationship between employee job satisfac-
tion and customer satisfaction will be greatest for employees
with high customer contact levels, followed by employees with
low customer contact levels, and lowest for employees that do
not have customer contact at all.

3. Empirical study

3.1. Dataset and sample

As shown above, at least three potential explanations for why
the employee–customer satisfaction link should hold exist.
However, this study focuses on the employee–customer link for
various employee groups, for which the level and quality of
customer interactions differ. With regard to the research question,

Data for the present study were obtained from employees and
customers of a large European retail chain in the Do-it-Yourself
(DIY) market. Since in typical retail settings customers have
contact with multiple employees, employees and customers can


F. Wangenheim et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 690–697

693

be matched on the outlet level. After conducting a first study in
2001, in which items were pre-tested and measurement in-
struments were refined, customers and employees in 99 outlets
were surveyed, resulting in 53,645 customer and 1659 em-
ployee questionnaires, in 2003.

Surveyed employees came from three groups that clearly
differ in their degree and quality of customer interaction:
storeroom workers (no customer interaction), cashiers (limited,
short and widely standardized interaction with customers), and
services and sales employees (high degree and quality of
interaction). Each outlet has between 39 and 61 employees
(average = 50 employees). Per outlet, an average of 542
customers and 19 employees were interviewed. For the three
employee groups, 194 interviews for storeroom workers, 299

interviews for cashiers, and 1202 interviews for services and
sales employees were conducted. Although obtaining direct
measures of contact
level and time in Germany is legally
forbidden, interviews with personnel managers from the retailer
confirmed that services and sales employees were hired,
monitored, assessed and received bonus payments based on
customer interaction skills and customer orientation metrics
(among other criteria), while the other two groups were hired,
monitored and assessed using standard efficiency criteria.

3.2. Measurement of constructs

The constructs of central relevance to this study are overall
employee job satisfaction and overall customer satisfaction.

Table 1
Factor loadings and measurement model statistics from confirmatory factor analysis of study constructs a

Construct

Indicator

λ

T-value

aυe

hυs

Employee measures
Employee job satisfaction

Team organization

Superiors

Organizational climate

Overall, how satisfied are you as […] employee?
Would you again work for […]?
I like my job at […].

The working atmosphere in our outlet is very good.
I feel like being a team member in my outlet.
My colleagues support me in helping my customers.

My superiors are “living examples” of our company's goals.
My superior is open-minded towards me.
My superior always helps me in case of difficulties.
I can count on my superior's word.
My superior values my work performance

The flow of work in our outlet is very good.
All employees in our outlet have the competence to make decisions to react flexibly to customer wants.
I am provided all materials and equipment necessary to do my job.
All imperfections in our operations are resolved swiftly.
Our outlet encourages making suggestions for improvements.

Customer measures
Customer satisfaction

Service quality

Assortment quality

Price satisfaction

Overall, how satisfied are you with […]?
Would you recommend […] to your friends?

How satisfied are you with the ease of finding service employees?
How satisfied are you with the quality of services actively offered by the employees?
How satisfied are you with the professional assistance?
How satisfied are you with the friendliness of employees?

How satisfied are you with the quality of products offered?
How satisfied are you with the choices provided in the assortment?
How satisfied are you with clarity of arrangements of the assortment?
How satisfied are you with the ease of finding products?

.84
.81
.88

.83
.85
.79

.83
.89
.90
.83
.83

.80
.75
.71
.80
.77

.97
.96

.97
.98
.97
.89

.93
.94
.99
.95

38.1
33.7
39.1

36.0
37.5
34.2

39.5
44.1
45.0
39.8
39.9

35.0
32.5
29.5
34.6
32.9

28.3
27.4

68.7
70.3
68.3
49.2

48.9
49.5
55.3
50.5

.66

.61

.68

.51

.78

.51

.61

.51

.72

.60

.91

.60

.91

.48

.92

.48

How satisfied are you with the prices level of the products?
How satisfied are you with sales?
How satisfied are you with the price/value ratio?

.94
.94
.99

49.8
50.0
55.1

2

= 877.2 ( p b .001), NFI = .95, NNFI = .95, CFI = .95, RMSEA = .046 (95% CI:.044− .048)

Model fit statistics: χ(412)
All variables range from 1 to 5, where “1” represents the strongest possible (e.g., “very satisfied”, “totally agree” or “very likely”) and “5” the weakest possible (e.g.,
“very dissatisfied”, “totally disagree” or “very unlikely”).
a The estimates provided in the table are as follows: λ = factor loading; aυe = average variance extracted using Fornell and Larker's formula, hυs = highest variance
shared computed as highest squared interfactor correlation.


694

F. Wangenheim et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 690–697

Table 2
Correlation matrix of study constructs

Team organization Superiors Organizational climate Customer satisfaction Service quality Assortment quality Price satisfaction

Employee job satisfaction .68⁎⁎
Team organization
Superiors
Organizational climate
Customer satisfaction
Service quality
Assortment quality
(⁎⁎ = statistically significant at .01 level).

.62⁎⁎
.67⁎⁎

.70⁎⁎
.72⁎⁎
.72⁎⁎

.19⁎⁎
.17⁎⁎
.12⁎⁎
.22⁎⁎

.25⁎⁎
.27⁎⁎
.18⁎⁎
.28⁎⁎
.78⁎⁎

.24⁎⁎
.21⁎⁎
.16⁎⁎
.27⁎⁎
.65⁎⁎
.69⁎⁎

.23⁎⁎
.23⁎⁎
.17⁎⁎
.28⁎⁎
.69⁎⁎
.67⁎⁎
.70⁎⁎

Also, “team climate”, “work organization”, and “quality of
superiors” as determinants of employee job satisfaction and
“service quality”, “price satisfaction” and “quality of assort-
ment” as determinants of customer satisfaction were included in
the study. These constructs were added for two reasons: first, for
being able be to make managerially relevant statements about
how employee job satisfaction can be improved within the three
groups; second,
to control for the effect of attribute-level
satisfaction on overall satisfaction when estimating the effect of
employee on customer satisfaction. This ensures that the effect
of employee satisfaction on customer satisfaction is adequately
captured, i.e., that shared variance between employee satisfac-
tion and attribute-level customer satisfaction is controlled for.
The scales for employee job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction are based on multiple items adapted from the
literature (Netemeyer et al., 1997; Rich, 1997; Westbrook,
1981). The resulting construct for employee job satisfaction
consists of three items, and the final instrument for overall
customer satisfaction consists of two items.

Based on the results from the qualitative and exploratory pre-
tests, the final set of items for measuring latent constructs in the
2003-study are displayed in Table 1. Table 1 also shows that
discriminant validity between the constructs is given, since
none of the squared correlation coefficients between any of the
constructs exceeds the average variance extracted for a
construct (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). Further, Table 2 shows
the intercorrelations between the latent constructs.

4. Data analysis and results

Individual pairing of an employee and individual customers
is not feasible for both, legal reasons and the fact that customers
typically interact with more than one employee (and some

employees do not interact with customers at all). However,
employee and customer data can be matched on the outlet level.
In general, two ways of handling such nested models are
discussed (van Duijn et al., 1999): Data disaggregation or data
aggregation. Disaggregating data would mean using the
customer-level as the level of analysis; aggregating would
imply averaging over the lowest level, here the outlet-level.
Since the goal of this study is to estimate the influence of
employee job satisfaction on customer satisfaction and not to
explain variation of customer satisfaction within a particular
outlet, customer data was aggregated to the employee-level. By
so doing, overestimation of the effects of employee satisfaction
on customer satisfaction is avoided since the variation in cus-
tomer satisfaction ratings cannot be explained by the satisfaction
rating of one individual employee. This procedure is in line with
suggestions for multi-level models (e.g., van Duijn et al., 1999).
Hence, all customer responses were averaged on the outlet
level, as has been done in other studies (e.g., Deshpandé et al.,
1993; Homburg and Stock, 2004) and then disaggregated to the
employee level. Thus, the unit of analysis is the individual
employee (i.e., n = 1659).

LISREL 8.54 was used for conducting the analysis. In the
first step, customer satisfaction is regressed on employee job
satisfaction while at the same time controlling for the above-
mentioned effects of team climate, quality of work organization,
and quality of superiors on employee job satisfaction, as well as
service quality, assortment quality, and price satisfaction on
customer satisfaction. The resulting model, displayed in Fig. 1,
performs respectably well on the central fit criteria discussed in the
literature (e.g., Hu and Bentler, 1995). Specifically, the value of
χ2 / df equals 876.68/404= 2.17, CFI = .95, NFI = .95, NNFI= .95,
RMESEA = .047 (with 95%-confidence interval ranging from.045
to.049). As one would expect, perceived service quality, quality of

Fig. 1. Results for model of employee and customer satisfaction (T-values in parentheses).


F. Wangenheim et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 690–697

695

assortment, and price satisfaction exhibit statistically significant
effects on customer satisfaction, but employee job satisfaction is
also a statistically significant factor in explaining customer
satisfaction γ= .27(t= 11.11, p b .01).

For testing H1, multiple group analysis on the structural
equation model described above was conducted. In a first model,
the path from employee to customer satisfaction is restricted to be
the same across all three employee groups (restricted model).
Next, a test whether this restricted model performs better in
comparison to a model in which the path is allowed to vary across
the three groups (unrestricted model) is performed. All other
model paths were restricted to be equal across the three groups for
both models, resulting in the unrestricted model having two
degrees of freedom less (i.e., the two more parameters to be
estimated). The null hypothesis of equal parameters for all three
groups is rejected when the difference in chi-square between the
restricted and the unrestricted value is above the critical threshold
for a 95%-confidence interval at 2 degrees of freedom, which is
5.99. The resulting parameter estimates for the unrestricted model
are γ = .29(t = 6.45, p b .01) for service and sales employees,
γ = .25(t = 3.99, p b .01) for cashiers and γ = .20(t = 2.82, p b .01)
for storeroom workers. Hence,
is strongest for
employees who are in direct contact with customers, and weakest
for employees who do not have contact at all with customers.
However, the chi-square difference between the restricted and the
unrestricted model
relaxing the
assumption of equal parameters for all employee groups does
not significantly improve model fit. In combination with the fact
that the effect is statistically significant for all three groups, this
suggests that only very weak differences in the employee–
customer satisfaction link exist across various customer contact
groups. Hence, the hypothesis receives some light support (that
the link is strongest for employees who are in direct customer
contact), but since the test fails to reveal statistical significance,
the hypothesis cannot be clearly confirmed. However, a
statistically significant relationship exists even for customers
who are not in direct customer contact.

is 3.45, suggesting that

the effect

5. Discussion

The present paper examines the relationship between
employee and job satisfaction at various levels of customer
contact intensity. The results show that the link is statistically
significant for all types of employees, regardless of their degree
of interaction with customers. The results have implications for
research and management.

5.1. Implications for research

Earlier research has demonstrated that employee job satisfaction
affects customer satisfaction, but has only investigated customer
contact personnel. The present study shows that service customers'
quality perceptions and customer satisfaction also depend on the
satisfaction of employees that customers never see or see for only a
very short time — such as storeroom workers and cashiers.

It seems clear that the theoretical explanations based on
balance theory and the social contagion framework – which are

the explanations that have been favored in the marketing
literature so far – are not sufficient for explaining the employee–
customer satisfaction dyad. Rather, the results obtained in the
present study support the assumption put forward by the ASA
framework. The ASA proposes the existence of a certain
“service climate” for which non- and low-contact employees are
as much responsible as contact employees. This climate is
present throughout an organizational unit (in the case of a
retailer, in an outlet) and is also perceived by the customer.

Of course, a supporter of the balance theory framework may
argue that the three employee groups, by working together, also
affect each other in their employee job satisfaction levels, and
thus explain the small difference across groups. To test this, the
average satisfaction score for each employee group was
computed on an outlet level, resulting in 91 satisfaction scores
for customer contact personnel, cashiers, and storeroom work-
ers. Partial correlation analysis to test whether cashiers' (or
storeroom workers') work satisfaction is still related to customer
satisfaction when the effect of customer contact personnel on
customer satisfaction is controlled for reveals coefficients of.172
( p b .05) for cashiers and.162 ( p b .05) for storeroom workers,
which confirms the results that employee job satisfaction is
related to customer satisfaction for all researched groups.

5.2. Implications for management

the importance of

Clearly, the results of the present study suggest that service
providers must not neglect
their non-
customer-contact employees. Typically, standard efficiency
measures such as error quota or number of tasks processed
within a given time frame are used to assess the quality of such
employee groups. The results suggest that customer satisfaction
is also an outcome of the quality of the work of this group, and
employee job satisfaction is an important driver of it. Branch
and area managers must take this into account and should
integrate employee job satisfaction of all groups into their
performance tracking systems.

Likewise, retailers should include customer satisfaction as an
evaluation criterion for non-customer contact employee groups
as well. In general,
that focusing on
operational outcomes in monitoring and assessing performance
of such groups is not enough. Rather, what is needed is a
balance of operational and customer orientation measures.

the results point out

To enhance the managerial usefulness of the present study,
multi-group analysis was also performed on the drivers of
employee job satisfaction. The results reveal interesting and
managerially relevant differences:

• For all groups, team climate is the strongest factor driving
overall employee job satisfaction; team climate has a stronger
effect for storeroom workers than for the other groups

• Quality of work organization and supervision is also statis-
tically significant for all three groups, but again more impor-
tant for storeroom workers

• The effect of supervision is not significant for storeroom
workers, but for both cashiers and service and support staff a
statistically significant effect is present.


696

F. Wangenheim et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 690–697

In sum, all three factors except supervision are clearly impor-
tant for both groups, but retail managers can make adjustments
related to the groups to better fine-tune central aspects of their
employees' work environment.

6. Limitations and future research

This study adds to a stream of research that shows that the
relationship between employee job satisfaction and customer
satisfaction is much more complex than initially assumed. Pre-
vious studies have demonstrated that the personal characteristics of
customer contact employees and of customers as well as the
intensity of customer integration and the innovativeness of the
product moderate the employee–customer satisfaction link.
However, investigating the impact of such personnel character-
istics on the connection between employee and customer attitudes
is still inconclusive and needs further investigation. This study has
focused on the question of whether or not the level of customer
contact affects the presence and strength of the employee–
customer satisfaction link. By looking at different groups of
employees with no or limited customer contact, or substantial
customer contact, the study makes a contribution toward an
explanation as to why previous research has found a wide range of
relationship strengths.

The results of this study need to be viewed in the light of its
limitations. At first, this paper only analyzes one franchise
system in one industry. This precluded comparative analyses for
examining the effects of differences in organizational culture
and industry type. On the other hand, the restriction to one
franchise system ensures that the employee–customer satisfac-
tion link is not distorted by industry or product category
specifics. Therefore, this study could be replicated within other
services (e.g., banking, insurance, hospitals) to further examine
the hypothesized relationships. The mixed results of employee
job satisfaction drivers for the different customer contact groups
raise interesting questions for further research: Can these
differences be generalized for different services and industry
types? What kind of leadership style and training programs will
be beneficial or detrimental to employee job satisfaction at
different customer contact levels? While the analysis of job
satisfaction drivers gives managers initial guidance for
managing the various employee groups, a more detailed look
could be taken at how the employee–customer satisfaction link
can be optimally managed for all groups.

References

Bernhardt KL, Donthu N, Kennett PA. A longitudinal analysis of satisfaction

and profitability. J Bus Res 2000;47(2):161–71.

Brehm JW, Cohen AR. Explorations in cognitive dissonance. New York: Wiley;

1962.

strength: antecedents and consequences. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates; 1995.

Festinger L. A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford; 1957.
Fishbein M, Ajzen I. Attitudes and opinions. Annu Rev Psychol 1972;23:487–544.
Fornell C, Larcker DF. Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable

variables and measurement error. J Mark Res 1981;18(1):39–50.

Gump BB, Kulik JA. Stress, affiliation and emotional contagion. J Pers Soc

Psychol 1997;72(February):305–19.

Harter JK, Schmidt FL, Hayes TL. Business-unit-level relationship between
employee satisfaction, employee engagement, and business outcomes: a
meta-analysis. J Appl Psychol 2002;87(2):268–79.

Hatfield E, Cacioppo JT, Rapson RL. Emotional contagion. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press; 1994.

Hess U, Blairy S. Facial mimicry and emotional contagion to dynamic emotional
facial expressions and their influence on decoding accuracy. Int J Psychophysiol
2001;40:129–41.

Homburg C, Stock R. The link between salespeople's job satisfaction and
customer satisfaction in a business-to-business context: a dyadic analysis.
J Acad Mark Sci 2004;32(Spring):144–58.

Homburg C, Stock R. Exploring the conditions under which salesperson work
satisfaction can lead to customer satisfaction. Psychol Mark 2005;22
(5):393–420.

Hsee CK, Hatfield E, Carlson J, Chemtob C. The effect of power on

susceptibility to emotional contagion. Cogn Emot 1990;4:327–40.

Hu L-T, Bentler PM. Evaluating model fit. In: Hoyle RH, editor. Structural
issues, and applications. London: Sage

equation modeling: concepts,
Publications; 1995.

Koys DJ. The effects of employee satisfaction, organizational citizenship behavior,
and turnover on organizational effectiveness: a unit-level, longitudinal study.
Pers Psychol 2001;54(1):101–14.

Krosnick JA, Petty RE. Attitude strength: an overview. In: Petty RE, Krosnick JA,
editors. Attitude strength: antecedents and consequences. Mahwah: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates; 1995.

Krosnick JA, Boninger DS, Chuang YC, Berent MK, Carnot CG. Attitude
strength: one construct or many related constructs. J Pers Soc Psychol
1993;65(6):1132–51.

Loveman GW. Employee satisfaction, customer loyalty, and financial perfor-
mance. an empirical examination of the service profit chain in retail banking.
J Serv Res 1998;1(1):18–31.

Netemeyer RG, Boles JS, McKee DO, McMurrian R. An investigation into the
antecedents of organizational citizenship behavior in an personal selling
context. J Mark 1997;61(3):85–98.

Organ DW, Ryan K. A meta-analytic review of attitudinal and dispositional predictors

of organizational citizenship behaviour. Pers Psychol 1995;49:775–802.

Petty RE, Cacioppo JT. Attitudes and persuasion: classic and contemporary

approaches. Dubuque: William C. Brown; 1986.

Pugh SD. Service with a smile: emotional contagion in the service encounter.

Acad Manage J 2001;44(5):1018–27.

Rafaeli A, Sutton RI. The expression of emotion in organizational life. In:
Cummings LL, Staws BM, editors. Research in organizational behavior.
Greenwich,CT: JAI Press; 1989.

Rich GA. The sales manager as a role model: effects on trust, job satisfaction,

and performance of salespeople. J Acad Mark Sc 1997;25(4):319–28.

Ryan JJ. Moral reasoning as a determinant of organizational citizenship behavior:
a study in the public accounting profession. J Bus Ethics 2001;33:233–44.
Ryan AM, Schmit MJ, Johnson R. Attitude and effectiveness: examination at an

organizational level. Pers Psychol 1996;49(4):853–83.

Schneider, B, Bowen, DE Winning the Service Game. Boston: Harvard Business

School Press; 1995.

Schneider B, Goldstein HW. The ASA framework: an update. Pers Psychol

1995;48(4):747–73.

Chartrand T, Bargh J. The chameleon effect: the perception-behavior link and

social interaction. J Pers Soc Psychol 1999;76:893–910 [June].

Deshpandé R, Farley JU, Frederick E, Webster J. Corporate culture customer
orientation, and innovativeness in japanese firms: a quadrad analysis. J Mark
1993;57(1):23–37.

Erber MW, Hodges SD, Wilson TD. Attitude strength, attitude stability, and the
effects of analyzing reasons. In: Petty RE, Krosnick JA, editors. Attitude

Schneider B, White SS, Paul MC. Linking service climate and customer perceptions
of service quality: test of a causal model. J Appl Psychol 1998;83(2):150–63.
Sutton RI. Maintaining norms about expressed emotions: the case of bill

collectors. Adm Sci Q 1991;36(2):245–68.

Tornow WW, Wiley JW. Service quality and management practices: a look at
employee attitudes, customer satisfaction, and bottom-line consequences.
Hum Resour Plann 1991;14(2):105–15.


F. Wangenheim et al. / Journal of Business Research 60 (2007) 690–697

697

van Duijn MAJ, Busschbach JTv, Snijders TAB. Multilevel analysis of personal

networks as dependent variable. Soc Netw 1999;21:187–209.

van Maanen J, Kunda G. Real feelings: the relationship between delays and

evaluations of service. J Mark 1989;58(2):56–69.

Verbeke W. Individual differences in emotional contagion of salespersons: its

effect on performance and burnout. Psychol Mark 1997;14(6):617–36.

Westbrook RA. Sources of consumer satisfaction with retail outlets. J Retail

1981;57(3):68–85.

Wild B, Erb M, Bartels M. Are emotions contagious? Evoked emotions while
viewing emotionally expressive faces: quality, quantity, time course and gender
differences. Psychiatry Res 2001;102:109–24.

