 
 
Authentically leading groups: The mediating role of collective psychological capital and
trust
Author(s): FRED O. WALUMBWA, FRED LUTHANS, JAMES B. AVEY and  ADEGOKE OKE
Source: Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 32, No. 1 (JANUARY 2011), pp. 4-24
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/41415652
Accessed: 02-08-2017 19:01 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of
Organizational Behavior

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Journal of Organizational Behavior
 J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)
 Published online 1 September 2009 in Wiley Online Library
 (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.10Q2/job.653

 Authentically leading groups:
 The mediating role of collective
 psychological capital and trust

 FRED O. WALUMBWA1*, FRED LUTHANS2,
 JAMES B. AVEY3 AND ADEGOKE ОКЕ1
 1 Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, U.S.A.
 2University of Nebraska - Lincoln, Nebraska, U.S.A.
 3Central Washington University, Ellensburg, Washington, U.S.A.

 Summary Although there have been recent theoretical advances in what is increasingly being recognized
 as authentic leadership, research testing possible mediating processes and the impact on group-
 level outcomes has not received attention. To help address this need, this study examined at the
 group level of analysis the role that collective psychological capital and trust may play in
 the relationship between authentic leadership and work groups' desired outcomes. Utilizing
 146 intact groups from a large financial institution, the results indicated a significant
 relationship between both their collective psychological capital and trust with their group-
 level performance and citizenship behavior. These two variables were also found to mediate
 the relationship between authentic leadership and the desired group outcomes, even when
 controlling for transformational leadership. Implications for future research and practice
 conclude the paper. Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

 Introduction

 Authentic leadership has recently been comprehensively defined as "a pattern of leader behavior that
 draws upon and promotes both positive psychological capacities and a positive ethical climate, to foster
 greater self-awareness, an internalized moral perspective, balanced processing of information, and
 relational transparency on the part of leaders working with followers, fostering positive self-
 development" (Walumbwa, Avolio, Gardner, Wernsing, & Peterson, 2008, p. 94). Over the past several
 years, it has received growing attention in the leadership literature (Avolio, Gardner, Walumbwa,
 Luthans, & May, 2004; Gardner, Avolio, Luthans, May, & Walumbwa, 2005; Ilies, Morgeson, &
 Nahrgang, 2005; Luthans & Avolio, 2003). Although authentic leadership has had considerable
 intuitive (e.g., George, 2003) and theoretical support (e.g., Yammarino, Dionne, Schriesheim, &
 Dansereau, 2008), to date, little empirical research has been conducted in order to better understand the
 mechanisms by which authentic leaders exert their influence on effective behaviors. As Yammarino

 * Correspondence to: Fred O. Walumbwa, W.P. Carey School of Business, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-
 4006, U.S.A. E-mail: Fred.Walumbwa@asu.edu

 Received 7 November 2008
 Revised 22 June 2009
 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Accepted 30 June 2009

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 5

 et al. (2008, p. 13) observes, "there is a need in AL (authentic leadership) to articulate theoretically and
 test empirically processes and process variables and measures."

 The major objective of this study was to extend authentic leadership research to the group level of
 analysis by investigating the mechanisms through which authentic leadership may be related to a
 group's job performance and organizational citizenship behavior (OCB) - discretionary behaviors that
 are not required of any one individual in-role but are necessary to facilitate effective group functioning
 (Organ, Podsakoff, & MacKenzie, 2006). Specifically, we consider two constructs that have been
 proposed to tie authentic leadership to effective performance (Avolio et al., 2004; Gardner et al., 2005;
 Ilies et al., 2005): Group-level or collective psychological capital (see Luthans, Avolio, Avey, &
 Norman, 2007; Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 2007) and group-level trust (e.g., Dirks & Ferrin, 2001).
 The aim is to contribute to the understanding of underlying processes of authentic leadership which
 may affect desired group outcomes. Furthermore, by incorporating collective psychological capital (for
 the first time) and trust in the study framework, we respond to recent calls for integration of authentic
 leadership, psychological capital, and trust literatures (e.g., Gardner et al., 2005; Ilies et al., 2005).
 These calls have contended that psychological capital and trust are fundamental to linking authentic
 leader behavior to follower behaviors, yet to date empirical evidence does not exist.

 Although the primary focus of our study is on authentic leadership, we include in our analyses

 transformational leadership as a control in order to further contribute to construct validation.
 Controlling for the effect of a well established leadership theory (e.g., transformational) helps to
 determine whether the specific authentic leadership construct contributes added value to leadership
 research and practice.

 Theoretical Foundation

 According to a social information processing perspective (SIP; Salancik & Pfeffer, 1978), one
 important source of information for effective group members' behaviors come from the immediate
 work environment (including leadership). This information provides cues that group members use to
 construct and interpret events, and in turn guide their behavior. The key characteristics of authentic
 leaders are that they exhibit a pattern of openness and clarity in their behavior toward others by sharing
 the information needed to make decisions, accept others' inputs, and provide constructive feedback to
 their followers (Avolio et al., 2004; Gardner et al., 2005). As a result, followers tend to be more
 efficacious, hopeful, optimistic, and resilient (i.e., have higher psychological capital, Luthans, Avolio,
 et al., 2007; Luthans, Youssef, et al., 2007), and are more trusting, consequently facilitating high levels
 of effective behaviors.

 Such a perspective is further supported by social exchange theory (SET; Blau, 1964), which suggests
 that people define themselves in terms of whom they interact with and how they interact with them.
 Thus, drawing on SET and SIP, we contend that when individuals are in a "positive" social exchange
 relationship where leaders and followers openly share information and provide constructive feedback,
 followers often go beyond their formal duties to help others because of their sense of obligation and
 reciprocation. We next expand on these proposed theoretical linkages in more detail below.

 Authentic leadership

 Authentic leaders display four types of behaviors: Balanced processing, internalized moral perspective,
 relational transparency, and self-awareness (Walumbwa et al., 2008). Balanced processing refers to a

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 6 F. O. WALUMBWA ETAL.

 leader behavior that is less susceptible to denials, distortions, and exaggerations. Internalized moral
 perspective refers to leader behaviors that are guided by internal moral standards as opposed to those
 behaviors based on external pressure from peers and other organizational demands. Relational
 transparency refers to leader behaviors that are aimed at promoting trust through disclosures that
 include openly sharing information and expressions of the leader's true thoughts and feelings. Finally,
 self-awareness refers to the extent leaders appear to understand their strengths, motives, and
 weaknesses and how others view their leadership.

 These behaviors have typically been studied as separate constructs. However, there is evidence to

 suggest that these four dimensions share some conceptual similarities, and that each component
 focuses on one aspect of authenticity (Kernis & Goldman, 2005). In support, Gardner et al. (2005)
 argued that all the four authentic leadership dimensions are self-regulatory processes that are governed
 in part through the leader's internal standards and personal evaluations of their behavior and thus share
 some commonality.

 In addition to conceptual interaction, the same adjectives are commonly used in the leadership

 literature to describe the four dimensions. For example, adjectives such as honesty, integrity, fairness,
 strengths and weaknesses, sharing, true thoughts, openness, and truthfulness have often been used to
 describe these dimensions (see Gardner et al., 2005; Ilies et al., 2005; Kernis & Goldman, 2005;
 Luthans & Avolio, 2003). Beyond conceptual support, recent empirical research also suggests that
 these four individual constructs can be brought together to form a core common factor in explaining
 what comprises authentic leadership (e.g., Kernis & Goldman, 2005; Walumbwa et al., 2008). In the
 present study, we treat authentic leadership as a latent variable with its indicators represented by
 balanced processing, internalized moral perspective, relational transparency, and self-awareness.

 Collective psychological capital

 Luthans, Youssef, et al. (2007, p. 3) defined psychological capital as one's "positive psychological
 state of development that is characterized by (1) having confidence (self efficacy) to take on and put in
 the necessary effort to succeed at challenging tasks; (2) making a positive expectation (optimism) about
 succeeding now and in the future; (3) persevering toward goals and, when necessary, redirecting paths
 to goals (hope) in order to succeed; and (4) when beset by problems and adversity, sustaining and
 bouncing back and even beyond (resilience) to attain success." This definition is from an individual
 perspective. However, as Bandura (1997) transitioned personal efficacy to "collective efficacy" by
 noting in his definition the "group's shared belief in its conjoint capabilities" (p. 477) we would also
 define "collective psychological capital" as the "group's shared psychological state of development
 that is characterized by. . . (the four attributes indicated above for individual-level psychological
 capital)."

 The theoretical foundation for collective psychological capital can be drawn from Bandura's (2006,

 2008) recent work on an agentic perspective of human behavior and positive psychology (i.e., people
 are contributors or producers of their life circumstances, not just products of them). Accordingly, we
 propose that employees' psychological capital can be drawn upon for their motivation and, as indicated
 in the above definition, their proactive striving for success. Similar to Bandura's notion of collective
 efficacy, we would posit that collective psychological capital is "the product of the interactive and
 coordinative dynamics of its members; interactive dynamics create an emergent property that is
 more than the sum of the individual's attributes" (Bandura, 1997, pp. 477^78). Very relevant to the
 proposed theoretical relationships tested in this study, Bandura (1997) specifically notes that one of
 the most important factors that contributes to these interactive, synergistic effects of the group or
 collective is "how well it is led" (p. 478). In other words, the work group's collective psychological

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 7

 capital is not only a product of interactive/coordinative dynamics and leadership but also a producer of
 desired behaviors and performance outcomes.

 The four psychological resources (as opposed to trait-like, fixed personality dimensions) identified

 as making up collective psychological capital have been researched independently from each other. In
 particular, the four identified factors of psychological capital of efficacy, optimism, hope, and resilience
 each have considerable theory and research in positive psychology (e.g., see Snyder & Lopez, 2002).
 Stajkovic (2006) has also provided conceptual evidence linking these same four constructs. In his
 review, he concluded that there is evidence of points of overlap among them and "that the four
 constructs share a common confidence core that exists at a higher level of abstraction" (p. 1212).

 More specifically, the four psychological capital resources have been determined to meet the
 inclusion criteria of theory, research and valid measurement, being state-like and open to development,
 and having performance impact. They have also been empirically demonstrated to form a higher-order,
 core construct referred to as psychological capital by Luthans, Avolio, et al. (2007). Consistent with the
 theoretical arguments first advanced by Luthans and colleagues (Luthans, 2002; Luthans, Avey, Avolio,
 Norman, & Combs, 2006; Luthans & Youssef, 2004; Luthans, Youssef, et al., 2007) and later by
 Stajkovic (2006), along with the growing empirical evidence (e.g., see Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007;
 Luthans, Norman, Avolio, & Avey, 2008), in this study we treat the four dimensions as indicators of a
 higher order psychological capital factor.

 This psychological capital is relevant to the present research because, unlike other recognized core

 constructs such as self-evaluation that is more "trait-like" (Judge & Bono, 2001), psychological capital
 has been empirically demonstrated to be "state-like" (Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007) and open to
 development (Luthans, Avey, & Patera, 2008). In particular, Luthans, Avolio, et al. (2007) found that
 psychological capital empirically demonstrated its "state-like" nature from test-retest reliabilities of
 .52, which was substantially lower than recognized trait-like core self-evaluations (.87) and the Big 5
 personality dimension of conscientiousness (.76), but yet higher than the recognized state of positive
 emotion (.46). In other words, along a continuum, state-like psychological capital is positioned
 between very transient states such as emotions or pleasures and "trait-like" core self-evaluations or
 personality dimensions, and then the end-point would be "hard- wired" traits such as intelligence or
 talents (e.g., see Luthans & Youssef, 2007, for detailed discussion of this state-trait continuum and the
 state-like nature of psychological capital). Moreover, Luthans, Avey, and Patera (2008) in a true
 experiment with a psychological capital training intervention found that psychological capital was
 developed in the randomly assigned experimental group and remained the same in the comparison
 group that received group dynamics (not psychological capital) training.

 Previous conceptual work has emphasized the role of authentic leaders in creating such

 psychological capital in themselves and their followers (e.g., Avolio & Luthans, 2006; Luthans &
 Avolio, 2003). Despite these suggestions, to date "there has been no real attempt to fully integrate these
 related notions" of authentic leadership and psychological capital (Yammarino et al., 2008, p. 2). We
 do such integration in this study and at the group level of analysis.

 Authentic leadership and collective psychological capital

 There are a number of mechanisms that could affect the interactive effects of group members'
 psychological capital and its four components (e.g., see Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007). However, based
 on the discussion above concerning Bandura' s (2006, 2008) agentic perspective and the role that
 leadership may play in collective interactions, we propose that authentic leadership is related to (and
 may therefore impact) collective psychological capital. For example, authentic leaders could analyze
 all relevant information received from outside the group as well as from group members themselves and

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 8 F. O. WALUMBWA ETAL.

 then openly share that information with the whole group. Authentic leaders could also solicit views
 from individual group members and then utilize their ideas to strengthen the whole group (Gardner
 et al., 2005). Kirkman and Rosen (1999) argued that when leaders utilize members' ideas, members
 become more confident in their abilities. In other words, leaders sharing information provides group
 members with opportunities to develop collective intuition, expand their knowledge, learn from each
 other, and acquire new skills. This in turn raises group members' individual and in turn collective
 efficacy (Jones & George, 1998), a key component of collective psychological capital (Luthans,
 Youssef, et al., 2007). In addition to efficacy, each of the other psychological resource components of
 hope, optimism, and resilience that make up psychological capital may also contribute to the
 relationship between authentic leadership and collective psychological capital.

 Hope refers to "a cognitive set that is based on a reciprocally derived sense of successful: (a) Agency

 (goal-directed determination) and (b) pathways (planning of ways to meet goals)" (Snyder et al., 1991,
 p. 570). Central to this definition of hope is the idea that there is a strategic planning process for goals
 (i.e., goal-directed nature of thinking), which is the basis for a problem-solving solution. Authentic
 leaders are depicted as having the ability to remain realistically hopeful (i.e., agentic thinking), even
 when they encounter extremely difficult situations, and they are also future-oriented in their pathways
 thinking and action (Luthans & Avolio, 2003). We propose that such leaders are more likely to stick
 closer to objective information in building group members' hope. Thus, over time, these authentic
 leaders are viewed as a more credible source of input and feedback to their group members when a
 significant challenge or problem arises. They also are likely to achieve this through their genuine
 character, their focus on employee involvement, strength development, and participation (Hies et al.,
 2005). Thus, these authentic leadership characteristics and actions all seem fundamental to nurturing
 collective hope and in turn psychological capital.

 Optimism refers to the mood or attitude associated with an interpretation about the social or material

 future - one which the evaluator regards as socially desirable (Tiger, 1979). Because optimism can be
 acquired through modeling (Peterson, 2000), one way authentic leaders can influence group members'
 optimism is by increasing their awareness and understanding about the importance of group goals and
 success. By doing so, authentic leaders model desired members' behavior. In this case, the desired
 behavior is one that exudes realistic optimism among group members. Authentic leaders are more
 likely to exhibit enhanced active and adaptive coping skills and are less likely to adopt avoidant coping
 styles when faced with challenges or setbacks (Luthans & Avolio, 2003). When leaders use active,
 adaptive, and positive approaches toward problem solving, they are more likely to motivate and
 challenge group members to do the same (Peterson, 2000), resulting in high levels of collective
 optimism and thus also enhanced collective psychological capital.

 Finally, authentic leaders should be able to enhance followers' resiliency by moving positive goals to

 the forefront of their awareness (Masten & Reed, 2002). Such a genuine focus over time should build
 credit for leaders who are able to tap into their reserves of psychological resources (Masten & Reed,
 2002) in order to sustain group members through periods of adversity and challenge. Such
 developmental strategies are likely to contribute to authentic leaders' ability to influence group
 members' resiliency and thus their collective psychological capital. Moreover, because of their
 heightened self-awareness, authentic leaders understand what they are capable of accomplishing
 (Gardner et al., 2005). They are more likely to be role models of resiliency for their group members.
 This perspective is supported by social learning theory (e.g., Bandura, 1977) which suggests that
 groups may emulate the values and behaviors of influential role models. Thus, on the basis of theory
 and prior research, we test the following hypothesis:

 Hypothesis 1 : Authentic leadership is positively related to collective psychological capital.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz, Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Authentic leadership and group trust

 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 9

 Conceptually, it has been proposed that leader behaviors that encourage group members' involvement
 and participation in the decision making process and promote sharing of information are also likely to
 enhance group members' trust (Dirks & Ferrin, 2001). In particular, highly authentic leaders value
 realistic and truthful relationships with followers (Gardner et al., 2005; Ilies et al., 2005). They solicit
 views about important work-related matters and openly share information fairly and transparently.
 Empirically it has been found that the leader's level of transparency and psychological capital affects
 the followers' perceived trust in the leader (Norman, Avolio, & Luthans, in press). Authentic leaders
 also act in accordance with fundamental and deeply rooted values and beliefs, rather than responding to
 external pressures or narrow and transitory interests (Gardner et al., 2005).

 When leaders interact with members with openness and truthfulness, this should promote

 unconditional trust from members (Ilies et al., 2005). Moreover, by setting a personal high moral
 standard with integrity and involving members in the decision making process, authentic leaders should
 be able to build a deep sense of trust in group members. This trust sustains a more transparent process of
 dealing with difficult problems in part because of the shared values. Prior research suggests that when
 followers identify with their immediate supervisors' values, they become more trusting to the leader
 (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Moorman, & Fetter, 1990).

 Similarly, the higher levels of transparency and disclosures that characterize authentic leaders should
 also promote the development of value-congruence between the leader and group members. Having
 such similar values between the leader and group members encourages mutual attraction (Byrne,
 1971). This attraction often evolves into psychological trust because people seek to link their self-
 concepts to entities they find attractive. Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman (1995) suggested that when
 followers trust their leaders to have requisite ability, benevolence, and integrity, they will be more
 comfortable engaging in more trusting relationships, including sharing sensitive information. Thus,
 when group members are willing to share information, which is central to authentic leadership
 (Gardner et al., 2005), we suggest that group trust is likely to be enhanced because of the shared values
 and repeated behavioral interactions (Ilies et al., 2005). Thus, we test the following hypothesis:

 Hypothesis 2: Authentic leadership is positively related to group trust.

 Collective psychological capital, group citizenship behavior and
 group performance

 There is growing empirical research evidence linking psychological capital to several desired outcomes
 (Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007; Luthans, Norman, et al., 2008). However, to date, the research examining
 these relationships has been focused at the individual-level of analysis. The only exception was a recent
 study utilizing student groups which found collective optimism was an important predictor of group
 cohesion, cooperation, coordination, conflict, and satisfaction when groups were newly formed (e.g.,
 West, Patera, & Carsten, 2009). However, not only did this study depend on student groups, but it was
 also limited to collective efficacy, optimism, and resiliency and treated these three factors as separate
 entities, not as a higher-order representation of psychological capital. Thus, the present study is the first
 to test overall psychological capital at the real (intact) work group level of analysis.

 Again, taking an agentic perspective (Bandura, 2006, 2008), there may be multiple ways in which

 collective psychological capital produces outcomes such as group citizenship behavior and group
 performance (Luthans, Youssef, et al., 2007; Stajkovic, 2006). For example, Bandura (1997) has

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 10 F. O. WALUMBWA ET AL.

 indicated that collective efficacy beliefs play an important role in group motivation because members
 have to rely, at least to some extent, on others to accomplish their tasks. When faced with obstacles,
 groups with higher levels of collective efficacy are more likely to persist in trying to solve such
 problems (Bandura, 1997). This development of shared mental persistence and commitment to goals, in
 turn, enhances the performance competencies of the group as a whole as well as group prosocial,
 helping (i.e., citizenship) behavior. Some researchers have also argued that efficacious groups are more
 likely to be confident about their tasks, engage in their work to its completion, and set out on a path they
 believe will lead to effective performance (West et al., 2009). These propositions have been supported
 by several empirical and meta-analytic studies that report positive relationships between collective
 efficacy and performance (e.g., Gully, Incalcaterra, Joshi, & Beaubien, 2002; Sparrowe, Soetjipto, &
 Kraimer, 2006).

 Besides the positive impact of collective efficacy, optimistic groups are also likely to exhibit more

 active and adaptive coping skills and are less likely to adopt avoidant coping styles when faced with
 problems (Brissette, Scheier, & Carver, 2002). This is because optimism involves cognitive, emotional,
 and motivational components, which we suggest would likely help group members to be more
 persistent and successful (Peterson, 2000). Research has indicated that optimists build stronger
 relationships with others, at least partially because of their belief that others provide them with needed
 support (Srivastava, McGonigal, Richards, Butler, & Gross, 2006). Optimism has also been found to be
 related to performance among insurance sales agents (Seligman, 1998) and those undergoing
 significant change and cultural transformation in China (Luthans, Avey, Clapp-Smith, et al., 2008;
 Luthans, Avolio, Walumbwa, & Li, 2005).

 Hope not only involves the pathways that include identifying goals and sub-goals but also involves
 alternative ways to reach those goals (Snyder et al., 1991). Groups high in hope would most likely
 utilize contingency planning when they face challenges and obstacles to achieving goals or sub-goals
 and proactively identify multiple pathways to attain the targeted goal (Snyder, 1994). Such groups will
 have not only the will to succeed (i.e., the ability and motivation to identify and clarify), but also
 proactively identify and pursue the way to success (Snyder, 1994), thus enhancing group citizenship
 behavior and performance.

 Finally, given their ability to adapt to adverse events and evidence that has shown a positive

 relationship between resilience and life satisfaction (Seligman, 2002), resilient groups should be more
 open to adapting and bouncing back from adverse situations or challenges to enhance their
 performance. Groups demonstrating resilience should also be more willing to help other members so
 that they can maintain their positivity, continue to perform well, and pursue roles or aspects of their
 work that are more satisfying to them (Maddi, 1987). Taken together, we expect the higher-order
 psychological capital factor at the group level to be instrumental in promoting both group citizenship
 behavior and performance. We test the following hypothesis:

 Hypothesis 3: Collective psychological capital is positively related to (a) group citizenship behavior
 and (b) group performance.

 Relationship between group trust and group citizenship behavior and performance

 Trust has been widely recognized as being critical to effective group processes and group behaviors
 (Dirks, 1999; Dirks & Ferrin, 2001, 2002; Kirkman, Rosen, Tesluk, Gibson, & McPherson, 2002).
 Although the group engagement model (Tyler & Blader, 2000) suggests that leadership plays a central
 role in facilitating citizenship behaviors, the model also suggests that discretionary behaviors such as

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 11

 helping behaviors are best understood as a form of reciprocity for valued resources. One such valued
 resource is trust, which is considered as a key antecedent to members' standing and perceptions of
 respect in a group (Sparrowe et al., 2006). Thus, it seems quite likely that authentic leaders will promote
 group citizenship behavior at least in part by building trusting relationships among group members.
 Organ et al. (2006, p. 93) alluded to this when they noted that "it is unclear whether the effects of
 leadership behavior on OCB are direct or indirect."

 Theory and research is clearer in supporting the notion that group trust may contribute to desired
 group outcomes such as citizenship behaviors and job performance. Meta-analysis also found that trust
 in leadership was associated with a variety of important organizational outcomes, including OCB
 (Dirks & Ferrin, 2002). Groups that have more trusting relationships should also be willing to work
 hard to maintain both their relative standing and group identity, as well as improve their performance,
 even in the face of challenges and diversity (Dirks & Ferrin, 2001, 2002). Jones and George (1998)
 argued that trust is likely to influence group performance because trust enhances free exchange of
 knowledge and information sharing, which is likely to help group members to accomplish ongoing
 tasks. Research also suggests that the repeated interactions that members receive as a result of trusting
 relationships is likely to facilitate learning more about other members' areas of expertise (Lewis, 1999),
 which in turn seems likely to enhance group performance. Further supporting the notion that group trust
 may contribute to group performance, Dirks (1999) found a significant relationship between trust and
 group work performance. In keeping with this literature, we expect group trust to relate to group
 citizenship behavior and performance and test the following:

 Hypothesis 4 : Group trust is positively related to (a) group citizenship behavior and (b) group
 performance.

 Authentic leadership , group citizenship behavior, and performance

 So far we have hypothesized that authentic leadership is positively related to both collective
 psychological capital and group trust, which in turn, are both positively related to group citizenship
 behaviors and performance. Thus, Hypotheses 1-4 assume that authentic leadership has an indirect
 effect on both group citizenship behavior and performance through collective psychological capital and
 group trust. Below, we provide theory-driven rationale for these expected relationships in deriving the
 final study hypothesis.

 Authentic leadership and group citizenship behavior
 According to the group engagement model (e.g., Tyler & Blader, 2000), leaders play a central role in
 facilitating team helping behavior because of their unique position as dispensers of rewards related to
 OCBs (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Paine, & Bachrach, 2000). We suggest that when authentic leaders
 demonstrate their openness in terms of information sharing, are transparent, and accept other members'
 views (Avolio et al., 2004; Gardner et al., 2005; Luthans & Avolio, 2003), this should create a positive
 environment where group members understand the importance of helping others for the benefit of
 attaining group goals (Tyler & Blader, 2000). Moreover, Isenberg (1988) argued that when group
 members share information, they are able to understand even small cues and fill in the blanks. There
 also is beginning empirical support for a positive relationship between leadership and group-level
 citizenship behaviors (e.g., Sparrowe et al., 2006), and in particular, between authentic leadership and
 citizenship behaviors at the individual-level of analysis (e.g., Walumbwa, Wang, Wang, Schaubroeck,

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 12 F. O. WALUMBWA ETAL.

 & Avolio, in press). Thus, based on both theory and prior research, we expect a positive relationship
 between authentic leadership and group citizenship behaviors.

 Authentic leadership and group performance
 Authentic leaders would seem to have an especially positive influence on group performance because
 they provide support for members' self-determination (Ilies et al., 2005), which also has been linked to
 performance (Deci & Ryan, 2000). As already mentioned, such leaders do not try to coerce members,
 but rather use their values, beliefs, and behaviors to model the development of others to make the best
 choices (Luthans & Avolio, 2003). In addition, by authentic leaders promoting transparency and
 balanced processing of information among team members, we expect more rapid and accurate transfer
 of information among group members. This should result in trusting relationships which should
 facilitate more effective group performance. Research has indicated that when group members have
 access to information, they are more likely to utilize cognitive resources available within a team and
 attend to their tasks without interruptions (Argote, 1999). This should result in team effectiveness.
 Thus, we hypothesize the following:

 Hypothesis 5: Collective psychological capital and group trust mediate the relationship between
 authentic leadership and group outcomes of citizenship behavior and performance.

 Methods

 Sample and procedures

 The sample consisted of 146 intact (existing) work groups (526 employees and their immediate
 supervisors) of a large bank located in the Southwest United States. As a result of widespread and
 difficult economic conditions in recent times, managers and supervisors in banking institutions are
 being severely challenged. They are expected not only to demonstrate high ethical and moral standards
 but also to develop positive and trusting relationships with group members. Bank leaders at the
 operational levels are expected to enhance their shared psychological states in order to make an
 important contribution to the work context and their group's desired behaviors and performance
 outcomes. In other words, especially at this time of a turbulent economic environment, the use of a
 banking sample to study the impact of authentic leadership on group-level outcomes, and more
 importantly, the process by which this effect is realized, seems very relevant. Data for this study was
 collected in the spring of 2008 when the U.S. banking industry was feeling the pressures of troubled
 economic times that a bit later erupted in the national spotlight.

 The average age of the participants was about 31 years (SD = 13.49) and 61 per cent were female; 38

 per cent white, 33 per cent Hispanic, and 29 per cent other. Over 98 per cent of employees had at least a
 high school education or higher and they had been with the bank on average for a year or longer.
 Respondents performed administrative/professional and clerical duties (e.g., tellers, loans, retail
 banking, customer service, etc.). The average age of the supervisors was 32 years; 55 per cent were
 female; and 48 per cent were white, 27 per cent Hispanic, and 25 per cent other.

 To gather data for the study, an e-mail was first sent to all bank employees through the HR
 department asking them to participate in a research study on leadership and motivation conducted by
 the university. The first part of the confidential survey on their leader's style and demographics was
 collected at Time 1 and their levels of psychological capital and trust about 3 weeks later at Time 2.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 This time separation was done to help minimize common source bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, &
 Podsakoff, 2003).

 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 13

 Time 1
 Employees received a survey packet containing a cover letter from the researchers and endorsed by the
 bank senior management requesting their participation. The cover letter explained the purpose of the
 study, provided assurances of confidentiality, informed participants that only aggregated data would be
 reported to the organization, indicated they would be receiving another short survey in approximately 3
 weeks, and stressed the importance of responding to both surveys. To ensure further confidentiality, we
 set up a central secure collection box for survey drop-off in each facility, and we also provided the
 respondents with the option of mailing the surveys directly to the university researchers using a prepaid
 return envelope. Participants were given a week to complete the survey distributed on-site.

 In the first data collection, participants were asked to rate their leader's style (authentic and
 transformational) and provide demographic information including age, sex, and tenure. Participants
 were also asked to identify their work units and to provide their names so that we could match data at
 Time 2. All employees at each work unit represented an intact work group because this is how the
 overall bank culture treated them. These groups operated day-to-day according to the generally
 accepted criteria of what constitutes an intact group in the group dynamics literature (i.e., collective
 work projects, mutual accountability, a specific purpose and shared goals, and real work, see
 Katzenback & Smith, 1993). A total of 824 surveys were distributed in Time 1 and 598 completed
 surveys were returned (a response rate of 73 per cent).

 Time 2
 Approximately 3 weeks later, participants who completed the Time 1 surveys were given a second
 survey that assessed collective psychological capital and group trust. A total of 526 out of 598 (88 per
 cent, representing 3-7 from each group) completed surveys were returned at Time 2. Thus, a total of
 526 employees had completed data on all the variables at Time 1 and 2, and they represented 146 intact
 groups. We compared data for those who returned surveys at Time 1 and those who did not respond at
 Time 2. No significant differences between these respondents in terms of age, gender, and tenure were
 detected.

 Leader data collection
 After all data were collected from participants, the immediate supervisors (N= 146) of each group
 were then asked to rate their respective groups in terms of citizenship behavior and performance. All
 the leaders that were identified completed their ratings (100 per cent response rate). The leaders were
 also assured of the confidentiality of their ratings.

 Measures

 Authentic leadership
 This study used the recently developed and validated Authentic Leadership Questionnaire (ALQ)
 (Walumbwa et al., 2008). 1 Walumbwa et al. (2008) provided initial research evidence of both
 convergent and discriminant validity with respect to closely related transformational and ethical
 leadership. This research also found that the core factor of authentic leadership was a significant

 lřThe Authentic Leadership Questionnaire (ALQ) is copyright 2007 by Bruce Avolio, William Gardner, and Fred Walumbwa. The
 instrument is available for research purposes at http://www.mindgarden.com/products/alq.htm

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 14 F. O. WALUMBWA ET AL.

 positive predictor of self-reported OCB, and supervisor-rated job performance controlling for
 organization climate.

 In this study, participants rated the authentic characteristics of their supervisors (a = .83). The

 response anchors ranged from 1 (not at all) to 5 (frequently, if not always). Sample items include: The
 supervisor "... listens carefully to different points of view before coming to conclusions" (balanced
 processing); "... makes difficult decisions based on high standards of ethical conduct" (internalized
 moral perspective); "... seeks feedback to improve interactions with others" (awareness); and "...
 encourages everyone to speak their mind" (transparency).

 Collective psychological capital
 We assessed collective psychological capital (a = .79) using eight items from a recently validated
 Psychological Capital Questionnaire (PCQ; Luthans, Avolio, et al., 2007).2 Each of the four resource
 components of psychological capital were represented by two items from the PCQ that were originally
 adapted from published hope (Snyder, Sympson, Ybasco, Borders, Babyak, & Higgins, 1996),
 resilience (Wagnild & Young, 1993), optimism (Scheier & Carver, 1985), and efficacy (Parker, 1998)
 scales. The research team assessed and unanimously agreed on the eight items as meeting the criterion
 of relevancy for collective psychological capital and used Chan's (1998) referent shift model to edit the
 items for group level of analysis. Sample items include: Members of this group "... confidently
 contribute to discussions about the group's strategy" (efficacy); ". . . think of many ways to reach work
 goals" (hope); "... are optimistic about what will happen to them in the future as it pertains to work"
 (optimism); and "... usually take stressful things at work in stride" (resilience). Group members rated
 their own psychological capital with a response format ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
 agree).

 Group trust
 We measured group trust (a = .75) with a 3-item instrument used by Campion, Medsker, and Higgs
 (1993). The items which were anchored on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 5 (very much) asked participants to
 respond on the extent to which they trusted their group members, once again using Chan's (1998)
 referent shift model to edit the items for group level of analysis. The three items are, "How much do
 members of your group trust each other?"; "how comfortable do members of your group feel
 delegating to other group members?"; and "are your group members truthful and honest?"

 Group citizenship behavior
 To measure citizenship behavior (a = .85), we used the 8-item scale developed by Lee and Allen (2002)
 directed at the group. However, we used the term "group" rather than organization to reflect more of
 the group focus of this study. Sample items include: Members of this group "... offer ideas to improve
 the functioning of the group" and "... take action to protect the group from potential problems." Each
 supervisor provided a rating of his or her group on a 5-point response scale (1 = strongly disagree to
 5 = strongly agree).

 Group performance
 We used a 12-item modified performance measure (a = .88), including group direction, initiative, and
 innovation used by Bono and Judge (2003). Each leader provided a rating of his or her departmental
 group on a 5-point response scale (1 = needs improvement to 5 = excellent). Sample items include:

 2The Psychological Capital Questionnaire (PCQ) is copyright 2007 by Fred Luthans, Bruce Avolio, and James Avey. The
 instrument is available for research purposes at http://mindgarden.com/products/psycap.htm

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 This group "... redesigns job tasks for greater effectiveness and efficiency" (direction), "... takes
 initiative and do whatever is necessary" (initiative), and "... comes up with new ideas" (innovation).

 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 15

 Control variable
 We measured transformational leadership ( a = .92) using 20 items from the Multifactor Leadership
 Questionnaire (MLQ) (Bass & Avolio, 2004).3 A sample item includes: "The supervisor emphasizes
 the importance of having a collective sense of mission."

 Results

 Measurement and validity issues

 We conducted several analyses to examine the measurement properties of authentic leadership and
 psychological capital since they are relatively new constructs. First, to verify that authentic leadership
 was distinct from transformational leadership and psychological capital from trust, we conducted a
 confirmatory factor analysis on authentic leadership and transformational leadership (and
 psychological capital and trust) instruments, with each item allowed to only load on its appropriate
 factor. These analyses were conducted at the group level of analysis using items as indicators.

 The results indicated that the two factor models fit the data well (authentic and transformational
 leadership: x2 = 121 1.57, df = 576, p < .01, CFI = .97, RMSEA = .04; psychological capital and trust:
 X2 = 77.04, df = 37, p < .01, CFI = .97, RMSEA = .05), with the standardized factor loadings ranging
 from .73 to .96. By comparison, we also fitted a model with both authentic leadership and
 transformational leadership (and psychological capital and trust) items loading together on one single
 factor. The results revealed that the one factor models provided much poorer fit to the data (authentic
 and transformational leadership combined: x2 = 1304.31, df = 511, p < .01, CFI = .92, RMSEA = .09;
 psychological capital and trust combined: x2 = 156.53, df =38 , p< .01, CFI = .89, RMSEA = .10),
 and both the x2-difference were significant at the .01 level (a detailed result of these analyses can be
 provided by the first author on request). These results provided evidence that authentic leadership was
 distinct from transformational leadership and psychological capital was also distinct from trust.

 Aggregating issues

 To assess the appropriateness of aggregating individual scores of authentic and transformational
 leadership, psychological capital and trust to the group level, we examined both between-group
 differences and within-group agreement. To do this, we used two intraclass correlations (ICCs) for
 assessing agreement among group members. The ICC1 indicates the level of agreement among ratings
 from members of the same group. ICC2, on the other hand, suggests whether groups can be
 differentiated on the variables under investigation. For authentic leadership, the ICC1 and ICC2 were
 .24 and .87, respectively. For psychological capital, the ICC1 and ICC2 were .14 and .72, respectively.
 For trust, the ICC1 and ICC2 were .19 and .80, respectively. For transformational leadership, the ICC1
 and ICC2 were .28 and .81, respectively. The F-value for ANOVA tests was all significant (p < .01).

 3The Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire, Form 5X is copyrighted in 1995 by Bernard Bass and Bruce Avolio.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 16 F. O. WALUMBWA ETAL

 In addition, we calculated rwg (James, Demaree, & Wolf, 1984). The rwg average value was .90 for
 authentic leadership ranging from .71 to .97; ,73 for psychological capital ranging from .60 to .81; .83
 for trust ranging from .63 to .94; and .85 for transformational leadership ranging from .75 to .95, all
 meeting the recommended value of .70 or above cutoff (James, 1988). These results indicate that it was
 appropriate to analyze our data at the group level.

 Hypothesis tests

 Descriptive statistics for all study variables are shown in Table 1. Because we collected data from a
 number of bank branches, we examined whether there were significant differences between the
 branches in terms of the variables studied using ANOVA tests and found no significant differences.
 Based on these results, we concluded that the effects observed in the present study are attributable to
 perceptions of employees and not necessarily due to followers' demographics or the nature of the bank
 branches (i.e., context).

 In testing our hypotheses, we relied on the most recent work by Kenny, Kashy, and Bolger (1998).

 According to this work, establishing the role of any mediator (taking group trust as an example) in the
 authentic leadership - group performance relationship involves meeting four conditions: (1) Authentic
 leadership is related to group trust, (2) trust is related to performance, (3) authentic leadership is related
 to performance, and (4) the strength of the relationship between authentic leadership and performance
 is reduced when trust is added to the model as a mediator. However, it should be noted that the third
 requirement does not have to be met, especially if the relationship between the independent and
 dependent variable is distal (see Kenny et al., 1998, p. 260). Thus, a core evidence of a variable M as a
 mediator of the X- > Y relationship is that both the X- >M effect and M->Y effect are significant
 simultaneously.

 We utilized the structural equation modeling (SEM) approach to test the hypotheses and verify the
 indirect effect of authentic leadership on group citizenship behavior and performance. We used SEM
 because it provides the best balance of Type I error rates and statistical power (MacKinnon, Lockwood,
 Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002), especially when testing complete mediation. Total, direct, and
 indirect effects of authentic leadership are shown in Table 2.

 Hypotheses 1-2: Effect of authentic leadership on collective psychological capital and
 group trust
 We controlled for transformational leadership in all our hypotheses testing. This control variable was
 significant in all of the models. Hypotheses 1 and 2 predicted that authentic leadership is positively

 Table 1. Descriptive statistics and correlations

 Variables Mean SD 1 2 3 4 5 6

 1. Authentic leadership 3.01 .73 (.83)
 2. Transformational leadership 3.35 .64 .49** (.85)
 3. Group trust 3.14 .88 .22** .34** (.75)
 4. Collective psychological capital 3.17 .68 .31** .39** .14* (.79)
 5. Group citizenship behavior 3.25 .59 .27** .32** .25** .42** (.85)
 6. Group job performance 3.44 .72 .35** .24** .46** .39** .51** (.88)

 Note : The correlations and internal reliabilities (Cronbach's as) are based on N= 146 groups. Scale reliabilities appear on the
 diagonal in parentheses.
 *p < .05 (two-tailed test); **p < .01 (two-tailed test).

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz . Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 17

 Table 2. Direct, indirect, and total effects of authentic leadership

 Variables Effect

 Authentic leadership effects Total Direct Indirect

 Group trust .27** .27** -
 Collective psychological capital .37** .37** -
 Group citizenship behavior .37** - .24**
 Group performance .44** - .29**

 Note : Dashes indicate data are not applicable.
 **p < .01 (two-tailed tests).

 Figure 1. Structural equation modeling results

 related to group members' psychological capital and trust, respectively. Before estimating our
 structural model, we first examined a measurement model at the group level to assess the relationships
 between latent variables and the manifest variables that served as their indicators. To maintain
 favorable indicator-to-sample-size ratio, we used parcels. We randomly created three parcels of items
 for performance and two parcels of items for the trust and citizenship behavior. We treated the four
 dimensions of authentic leadership as described by Walumbwa et al. (2008) and the four components of
 psychological capital as identified by Luthans, Avolio, et al. (2007) as their indicators. This
 measurement model demonstrated a good fit to the data (x2 = 295.46, df = 128, p < .01, CFI = .97;
 RMSEA = .05). Figure 1 presents the standardized path coefficients (x2 = 302.38, df = 141, p < .01;
 CFI = .97; RMSEA = .05). Results indicate significant positive links from authentic leadership to
 collective psychological capital ( ß = .37, p < .01) and group trust (ß = .27, p < .01). Thus, Hypotheses
 1 and 2 are supported.

 Hypotheses 3-4: Effect of collective psychological capital and group trust
 Hypothesis 3 predicted that collective psychological capital would be positively related to both
 citizenship behavior (OCB) and performance. Hypothesis 4 predicted that group trust would be
 positively related to both OCB and performance. As shown in Figure 1, collective psychological capital
 is significantly related to both OCB ( ß = .40, p < .01) and performance (ß = .19, p < .01). Similarly,
 results shown in Figure 1 indicate that group trust is significantly related to both OCB (ß = .30, p < .01)
 and performance (ß = .48, p < .01). Thus, Hypotheses 3 and 4 are supported.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 7. Organic Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 18 F. O. WALUMBWA ET AL.

 Hypothesis 5: Collective psychological capital and group trust as mediators
 Hypothesis 5 predicted that the effect of authentic leadership on group OCB and performance would be
 mediated by collective psychological capital and group trust. Following the SEM approach, we tested a
 model linking authentic leadership to the mediators and the mediators to group OCB and performance.
 We compared the fit of our hypothesized model shown in Figure 1 (complete mediation) against three
 alternate partially mediated nested models. In the first alternative model, we added a direct path from
 authentic leadership to group citizenship behavior. The fit of this model was almost identical to that of
 Figure 1 (x2 = 299.87, df=140, p <.01; CFI = .97; RMSEA = .05), with the difference in fit
 nonsignificant (Дх2[1] = 2.51, n.s.). The second alternative model added a direct path from authentic
 leadership to group performance. The fit of this alternative model was also identical to that of Figure 1
 (X2 - 298.61, df = 140, p < .01; CFT = .97; RMSEA = .05), with the difference in fit nonsignificant
 (Дх2[1] = 3.77, n.s.). Finally, the third alternative model added two direct paths from authentic
 leadership to group citizenship behavior and performance. The fit of this alternative model was
 identical to that of Figure 1 (x2 = 296.78, df = 139, p<. 01; CFT = .97; RMSEA = .05), with the
 difference in fit nonsignificant (Дх2[2] = 5.60, n.s.). Figure 1 therefore displays a more parsimonious
 model that achieves the same fit model. Hypothesis 5 was therefore supported - the effect of authentic
 leadership on group OCB and performance was mediated by collective psychological capital and group
 trust.

 Discussion

 Although recent work has stressed the importance of leadership in follower motivation, the leadership
 literature, in general, has paid relatively limited attention to the underlying psychological mechanisms
 through which leaders motivate followers to achieve desired outcomes (Kark & Van Dijk, 2007). This is
 even more the case at the group level of analysis. Indeed, as observed in the introductory comments and
 specific to authentic leadership, although a number of theorists have suggested that authentic leaders
 may produce important desired outcomes at the group level (e.g., Avolio & Walumbwa, 2006; Gardner
 et al., 2005), the processes underlying this approach have not yet been tested (Yammarino et al., 2008).
 In this study, we analyzed a theory-driven model of the effect of authentic leadership on desired group
 outcomes that is mediated by the group members' collective psychological capital and trust.

 Overall, this study found that both group-level psychological capital and trust were not only related
 to a work group's citizenship behavior and performance but also mediated the relationship between
 authentic leadership and these two desired group outcomes. These findings provide empirical support
 for integrating authentic leadership with group-level psychological capital, trust, and desired outcomes
 (citizenship behavior and performance). In other words, this study suggests that authentic leadership
 may enhance group members' psychological capital and trust levels, which in turn affect their
 citizenship behaviors and performance.

 Noteworthy is that results from this study extend research on authentic leadership by specifically

 providing evidence at the group level. The implication is that authentic leadership is related to
 cognitions and behaviors not only at the individual level but also at the group level. Thus, the results of
 this study suggest a broader potential impact on followers and highlight the potential value of authentic
 leadership in organizations.

 Finally, this study contributes to the better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of authentic

 leadership. In particular, this study extends recently emerging research findings by demonstrating the

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. / Organiz, Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 generalizability of the positive impact of both authentic leadership and psychological capital on desired
 outcomes at the heretofore untested group level of analysis.

 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 19

 Practical implications

 There are several practical implications from this study's findings. For example, to enhance group
 members' psychological capital and trust, the results suggest that an effective leader needs to
 concentrate on authentic-related dimensions such as sharing information, involving group members in
 the decision-making processes, and in general be ethical, open, and truthful in their dealings with group
 members. Although such advice has been given through the years, this study contributes to an evidence-
 based management (EBM) approach (see Rousseau, 2006). In other words, those drawing from EBM
 would follow the guideline of exhibiting authentic leadership in facilitating and enhancing trusting
 relationships and psychological capital in their groups, and this in turn should increase the probability
 of obtaining desirable citizenship behaviors and improved performance.

 Finally, the study findings indicate the potential of developing group psychological capital and trust.

 Specifically, the study findings suggest that leaders exhibiting authentic characteristics and behaviors
 may be instrumental in developing trusting relationships and psychological capital in groups. Thus,
 training programs aimed at enhancing psychological capital (e.g., see Luthans et al., 2006; Luthans,
 Avey, & Patera, 2008 for specific guidelines and results of developing psychological capital) may be
 even further advanced by incorporating authentic leadership behaviors. Practically, the leadership
 behaviors can be operationalized in training programs through the use of role plays and simulations that
 involve ambiguous situations. Role models may be shadowed and may also serve as mentors to develop
 future leaders in organizations. Our findings also suggest that leadership training programs that are
 focused on successfully leading groups may benefit from incorporating dimensions that enhance
 psychological capital and trust that may in turn lead to improved group citizenship behaviors and
 performance.

 Limitations and future research

 Before concluding, the study limitations and needed future research should be noted.
 Methodologically, several steps were taken to address the potential limitation of common method
 bias. First, we tested our model using confirmatory factor analysis, which allowed us to reduce
 measurement error by having multiple indicators per latent variable and testing alternative models.
 Second, each wave of data collection was separated in time and our model was tested with responses
 from two different research participants - group members and their immediate supervisors, allowing
 us to reduce common-method bias (Podsakoff et al., 2003). Finally, we also addressed the potential
 limitation of common source bias by averaging individual ratings to the group level of analysis. Bono
 and Judge (2003) have argued that a benefit to this approach is that individual differences in follower
 reactions or biases in reporting are treated as error. Specific to authentic leadership, aggregating
 individual scores to the group level also help alleviate potential concerns that authentic leadership may
 be a subordinate-specific (or relationship-specific) perception similar to the concept of leader-member
 exchange (LMX). Nonetheless, future research should strive to measure leadership variables and
 mediators (e.g., psychological capital and trust) from different sources to rule out potential common-
 method bias.

 Even though the potential limitations were addressed methodologically, there are still unanswered

 questions that need to be addressed in future research. First, although we assessed important group

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 20 F. O. WALUMBWA ET AL.

 outcomes, we encourage future research to expand the nomological network of authentic leadership by
 including antecedents and additional mediators. For example, on the antecedent side it would be
 interesting to examine the relative influences of personality traits (e.g., conscientiousness,
 agreeableness, neuroticism, or locus of control), which may prove useful in explaining the emergence
 of authentic leadership. On the mediator side, constructs such as group cohesion or goal orientation
 may provide richer theoretical understanding of authentic leadership. On the outcome side, outcome
 variables such as group engagement, well being, and withdrawal behaviors may also provide greater
 insights. We should also note that the measure of psychological capital included eight items with only
 two items for each component which is less than the traditional three items or more per subscale that are
 recommended to help facilitate reliability. Future research should also strive to compare multiple
 measures of psychological capital to determine appropriate psychometric validity. Further theory
 development may also be gained by analyzing psychological capital as an antecedent to authentic
 leadership (e.g., see Luthans and Avolio, 2003) rather than just an outcome or a mediator.

 Future research may also investigate how some other leadership theories might be connected to

 authentic leadership. For example, is relational transparency connected to leadership behaviors such as
 consideration? Can initiating structure affect perceptions of leader authenticity? Answers to these
 questions may enhance our understanding of the complex relationships between authentic leadership
 and desired outcomes and further demonstrate that authentic leadership is a distinct leadership
 construct.

 Future research also needs to explore boundary conditions for authentic leadership that are beneficial
 to group effectiveness (e.g., justice climate, psychological safety, and various individual and
 organizational cultural dimensions and across borders). Finally, although our findings are encouraging,
 they are based on a single large U.S. bank. Thus, it is important to extend the generalizability of our
 findings to other kinds of different organizational contexts, such as teams in health care organizations
 and academic institutions, where issues of balanced processing, ethics, honesty, self-awareness, trust,
 and transparency ethics are also likely to be important drivers of performance. However, it should be
 noted that Walumbwa et al. (2008) examined the construct across samples in China, Kenya, and the
 United States and found support for the hypothesized relationships.

 In conclusion, this study provides evidence that not only does authentic leadership have a

 relationship with group level psychological capital and trust, but through these positive constructs, it is
 also related to desired group-level outcomes of citizenship behavior and performance. Our study is one
 of very few studies that consider authentic leadership effects at the group level. The strong support for
 the hypotheses tested suggests that authentic leadership may matter in work groups in terms of
 members' cognitions, behaviors, and performance. Further, the unique role of authentic leadership is
 evident over the well known and researched transformational leadership. We hope the supportive
 results reported in this study will stimulate additional research in these important areas of authentic
 leadership, psychological capital, and trust to help meet the unprecedented challenges facing
 organizations now and in the future.

 Acknowledgements

 An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2008 Southern Management Association Meeting
 in St. Pete Beach, Florida and was a recipient of both the Best Overall Conference Paper Award and the
 Organizational Behavior track Best Paper Award. We thank John Schaubroeck for helpful comments on
 an earlier draft of this paper and the JOB Associate Editor Terry Beehr and three anonymous reviewers.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Author biographies

 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 21

 Fred O. Walumbwa is an Associate Professor of Management in the Arizona State University's W. P.
 Carey School of Business. He is also a Senior Research Scientist with the Gallup Organization,
 Washington, DC. Dr Walumbwa' s research interests include leadership development and measure-
 ment, business ethics, and multilevel issues in research.
 Fred Luthans is a University and George Holmes Distinguished Professor of Management at the
 University of Nebraska. The former President of the Academy of Management, he is currently editor of
 three journals and author of several books and numerous research articles. His latest book (co authored
 with Carolyn Youssef and Bruce Avolio) is Psychological Capital published by Oxford University
 Press. His research in recent years has been focused on the theory-building, measurement and
 performance impact of this positive approach.
 James B. Avey is an Assistant Professor of Management at Central Washington University's College of
 Business and attained his Ph.D. from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Dr Avey 's research interests
 include positive psychological capital, psychological ownership, and ethical leadership.
 Adegoke Оке is an Assistant Professor of Supply Chain Management in the Arizona State
 University's W. P. Carey School of Business. He is also a U.K. Advanced Institute of Management
 (AIM) Scholar and a Frank Batten Scholar of the College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, U.S.A.
 Dr Oke's current research interests include leadership issues and management of innovation and risks
 in supply chains and horizontal networks. He obtained his practical experience at Shell as a project
 manager prior to a career in academia.

 References

 Argote, L. (1999). Organizational learning: Creating , retaining, and transferring knowledge. Norwall, MA:

 Kluwer Academic Publishers.

 Avolio, В. J., Gardner, W. L., Walumbwa, F. O., Luthans, F., & May, D. R. (2004). Unlocking the mask: A look at
 the process by which authentic leaders impact follower attitudes and behaviors. Leadership Quarterly , 75, 801-
 823.

 Avolio, В. J., & Luthans, F. (2006). The high impact leader: Moments matter for accelerating authentic leadership

 development. New York: McGraw-Hill.

 Avolio, В. J., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2006). Authentic leadership: Moving HR leaders to a higher level. Research in

 Personnel and Human Resource Management , 25, 273-304.

 Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
 Bandura, A. (1997). Self -efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
 Bandura, A. (2006). Toward a psychology of human agency. Perspectives on Psychological Science , 7, 164-180.
 Bandura, A. (2008). An agentic perspective on positive psychology. In S. J. Lopez (Ed.), Positive psychology:

 Exploring the best in people (Vol. 1, pp. 167-196). Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing.

 Bass, B. M., & Avolio, В. J. (2004). Multif actor leadership questionnaire: Manual leader form, rater, and scoring

 key for MLQ (Form 5x-Short). Redwood City, CA: Mind Garden.

 Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Academic Press.
 Bono, J. E., & Judge, T. A. (2003). Self-concordance at work: Toward understanding the motivational effects of

 transformational leaders. Academy of Management Journal , 46 , 554-57 1 .

 Brissette, I., Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (2002). The role of optimism in social network development, coping,

 and psychological adjustment during life transition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 82 , 102-1 11.

 Byrne, D. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32 , 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 22 F. O. WALUMBWA ETAL.

 Campion, M. A., Medsker, G., & Higgs, С. (1993). Relations between work group characteristics and effective-

 ness: Implications for designing effective work groups. Personnel Psychology , 46 , 823-850.

 Chan, D. (1998). Functional relations among constructs in the same content domain at different levels of analysis:

 A typology of compositional models. Journal of Applied Psychology , 83 , 234-246.

 Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). "What" and "why" of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination

 of behavior. Psychological Inquiry , 77, 227-268.

 Dirks, К. T. (1999). The effects of interpersonal trust on work group performance. Journal of Applied Psychology ,

 84, 445-455.

 Dirks, К. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2001). The role of trust in organizational settings. Organization Science , 72, 450-467.
 Dirks, К. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2002). Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic findings and implications for research and

 practice. Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 , 611-628.

 Gardner, W. L., Avolio, В. J., Luthans, F., May, D. R., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2005). "Can you see the real me?" A

 self-based model of authentic leader and follower development. Leadership Quarterly , 76, 343-372.

 George, B. (2003). Authentic leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
 Gully, S. M., Incalcaterra, A., Joshi, A., & Beaubien, J. M. (2002). A meta-analysis of team efficacy, potency, and

 performance: Interdependence and level of analysis as moderators of observed relationships. Journal of Applied
 Psychology , 87 , 819-832.

 Ilies, R., Morgeson, F. R, & Nahrgang, J. D. (2005). Authentic leadership and eudaemonic well-being: Under-

 standing leader-follower outcomes. Leadership Quarterly , 76, 373-394.

 Isenberg, D. (1988). How senior managers think. In D. Bell, H. Raiffa, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Decision making:

 Descriptive, normative , and prescriptive interactions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

 James, L. R. (1988). Organizational climate: Another look at a potentially important construct. In S. G. Cole, &

 R. G. Demaree (Eds.), Applications of interactionist psychology : Essays in honor of Saul B. Sells (pp. 253-282).
 Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

 James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolf, G. (1984). Estimating within-group inter-rater reliability with and without

 response bias. Journal of Applied Psychology , 69, 85-98.

 Jones, G. R., & George, J. M. (1998). The experience and evolution of trust: Implications for cooperation and

 teamwork. Academy of Management Review , 23, 531-546.

 Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2001). Relationship of core self evaluation traits - self esteem, generalized self-
 efficacy, locus of control, and emotional stability - with job satisfaction and performance: A meta analysis.
 Journal of Applied Psychology , 86 , 80-92.

 Kark, R., & Van Dijk, D. (2007). Motivation to lead, motivation to follow: The role of the self regulatory focus in

 leadership processes. Academy of Management Review , 52, 500-528.

 Katzenback, J. R., & Smith, D. K. (1993). The wisdom of teams. New York: Harper.
 Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Bolger, N. (1998). Data analysis in social psychology. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G.

 Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th ed., pp. 233-265). Boston: McGraw-Hill.

 Kernis, M. H., & Goldman, B. M. (2005). From thought and experience to behavior and interpersonal relationships:

 A multicomponent conceptualization of authenticity. In A. Tesser, J. V. Wood, & D. Stapel (Eds.), On building ,
 defending and regulating the self: A psychological perspective (pp. 31-52). New York: Psychology Press.

 Kirkman, B. L., & Rosen, B. (1999). Beyond self-management: Antecedents and consequences of team

 empowerment. Academy of Management Journal , 42 , 58-74.

 Kirkman, B. L., Rosen, В., Tesluk, P. E., Gibson, С. В., & McPherson, S. O. (2002). Five challenges to virtual team

 success. Academy of Management Executive , 76, 67-79.

 Lee, K., & Allen, N. J. (2002). Organizational citizenship behavior and workplace deviance: The role of affect and

 cognitions. Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 , 131-142.

 Lewis, K. (1999). The impact of interpersonal relationships and knowledge exchange on group performance: A
 field study of consulting project teams. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , University of Maryland, College
 Park.

 Luthans, F. (2002). The need for and meaning of positive organizational behavior. Journal of Organizational

 Behaviors , 23 , 695-706.

 Luthans, F., Avey, J. В., Avolio, В. J., Norman, S., & Combs, G. (2006). Psychological capital development:

 Toward a micro-intervention. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 27, 387-393.

 Luthans, F., Avey, J. В., Clapp-Smith, R., & Li, W. (2008). More evidence on the value of Chinese workers'
 psychological capital: A potentially unlimited competitive resource? The International Journal of Human
 Resource Management , 79, 818-827.

 Luthans, F., Avey, J. В., & Patera, J. L. (2008). Experimental analysis of a web-based intervention to develop

 positive psychological capital. Academy of Management Learning and Education , 7, 209-221.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 AUTHENTICALLY LEADING GROUPS 23

 Luthans, F., & Avolio, В. J. (2003). Authentic leadership development. In K. S. Cameron, J. E. Dutton, & R. E.

 Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational scholarship (pp. 241-258). San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

 Luthans, F., Avolio, В., Avey, J., & Norman, S. (2007). Psychological capital: Measurement and relationship with

 performance and satisfaction. Personnel Psychology , 60, 541-572.

 Luthans, F., Avolio, В. J., Walumbwa, F. О., & Li, W. (2005). The psychological capital of Chinese workers:

 Exploring the relationship with performance. Management and Organization Review , 1, 249-271.

 Luthans, F., Norman, S. M., Avolio, В. J., & Avey, J. B. (2008). The mediating role of psychological capital in the
 supportive organizational climate-employee performance relationship. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 29,
 219-238.

 Luthans, F., & Youssef, С. M. (2004). Human, social, and now positive psychological capital management.

 Organizational Dynamics , 33 , 143-160.

 Luthans, F., & Youssef, С. M. (2007). Emerging positive organizational behavior. Journal of Management, 33 ,

 321-349.

 Luthans, F., Youssef, С. M., & Avolio, В. J. (2007). Psychological capital. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
 MacKinnon, D. P., Lockwood, С. M., Hoffman, J. M., West, S. G., & Sheets, V. (2002). A comparison of methods

 to test mediation and other intervening variables effects. Psychological Methods , 7, 83-104.

 Maddi, S. R. (1987). Hardiness training at Illinois Bell Telephone. In J. P. Opatz (Ed.), Health promotion

 evaluation (pp. 101-105). Stevens Point, WI: National Wellness Institute.

 Masten, A. S., & Reed, M. G. J. (2002). Resilience in development. In C. R. Snyder, & S. J. Lopez (Eds.),

 Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 74-88). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

 Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, D. F. (1995). An integrative view of organizational trust. Academy of

 Management Review , 20, 709-734.

 Norman, S. M., Avolio, В. J., & Luthans, F. (in press). The impact of positivity and transparency on trust in leaders

 and their perceived effectiveness. Leadership Quarterly.

 Organ, D. W., Podsakoff, P. M., & MacKenzie, S. B. (2006). Organizational citizenship behavior: Its nature,

 antecedents , and consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

 Parker, S. (1998). Enhancing role-breath self efficacy: The roles of job enrichment and other organizational

 interventions. Journal of Applied Psychology , 83, 835-852.

 Peterson, C. (2000). The future of optimism. American Psychologist , 55, 44-55.
 Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. В., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method biases in behavioral
 research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology , 88 ,
 879-903.

 Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. В., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R. (1990). Transformational leader behaviors and
 their effects of followers' trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Leadership
 Quarterly , 1, 107-142.

 Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. В., Paine, J. В., & Bachrach, D. G. (2000). Organizational citizenship behavior: A
 critical review of the theoretical and empirical literature and suggestions for future research. Journal of
 Management , 26, 513-563.

 Rousseau, D. M. (2006). Is there such a thing as 'evidence-based management'. Academy of Management Review,

 31, 256-269.

 Salancik, G. R., & Pfeffer, J. R. (1978). An examination of need-satisfaction models of job attitudes. Admin-

 istrative Science Quarterly, 23, 224-252.

 Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1985). Optimism, coping, and health: Assessment and implications of generalized

 outcome expectancies. Health Psychology, 4, 219-247.

 Seligman, M. (1998). Learned optimism. New York: Pocket Books.
 Seligman, M. (2002). Authentic happiness. New York: Free Press.
 Snyder, C. R. (1994). The psychology of hope. New York: The Free Press.
 Snyder, C. R., Harris, C., Anderson, J. R., Holleran, S. A., Irving, L. M., Sigmon, S. T., et al. (1991). The will and

 the ways: Development and validation of an individual differences measure of hope. Journal of Personality and
 Social Psychology, 60, 570-585.

 Snyder, C. R. & Lopez S. (Eds.). (2002). Handbook of positive psychology. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
 Snyder, C. R., Sympson, S., Ybasco, F., Borders, T., Babyak, M., & Higgins, R. (1996). Development and

 validation of the state hope scale. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 321-335.

 Sparrowe, R. T., Soetjipto, B. W., & Kraimer, M. L. (2006). Do leaders' influence tactics relate to members'
 helping behavior? It depends on the quality of the relationship. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 1194-
 1208.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 24 F. O. WALUMBWA ET AL.

 Srivastava, S., McGonigal, К. M., Richards, J. M., Butler, E. A., & Gross, J. J. (2006). Optimism in close
 relationships: How seeing things in a positive light makes them so. Journal of Personality and Social
 Psychology , 91, 143-153.

 Stajkovic, A. D. (2006). Development of a core confidence - higher order construct. Journal of Applied

 Psychology , 91, 1208-1224.

 Tiger, L. (1979). Optimism : The biology of hope. New York: Simon & Schuster.
 Tyler, R. T., & Blader, S. L. (2000). Cooperation in groups: Procedural justice, social identity ; and behavioral

 identity. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.

 Wagnild, G. M., & Young, H. M. (1993). Development and psychometric evaluation of the resiliency scale. Journal

 of Nursing Management, 1 , 165-178.

 Walumbwa, F. O., Avolio, В. J., Gardner, W. L., Wernsing, T. S., & Peterson, S. J. (2008). Authentic leadership:

 Development and validation of a theory-based measure. Journal of Management, 34, 89-126.

 Walumbwa, F. O., Wang, P., Wang, H., Schaubroeck, J., & Avolio, В. J. (in press). Psychological processes linking

 authentic leadership to follower behaviors. Leadership Quarterly.

 West, B. J., Patera, J. L., & Carsten, M. К. (2009). Team level positivity: Investigating positive psychological

 capacities and team level outcomes. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 249-267.

 Yammarino, F. J., Dionne, S. D., Schriesheim, С. A., & Dansereau, F. (2008). Authentic leadership and positive

 organizational behavior: A meso, multi-level perspective. Leadership Quarterly , 19, 693-707.

 Copyright © 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J. Organiz. Behav. 32, 4-24 (2011)

 DOI: 10.1002/job

This content downloaded from 131.193.251.47 on Wed, 02 Aug 2017 19:01:39 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

