Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Int. J. Production Economics

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijpe

Green operations and the moderating role of environmental management
capability of suppliers on manufacturing ﬁrm performance

Christina W.Y. Wong a, Kee-hung Lai b,n, Kuo-Chung Shang c, Chin-Shan Lu d, T.K.P. Leung e
a Business Division, Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
b Department of Logistics and Maritime Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
c Department of Transportation Science, National Taiwan Ocean University, No. 2, Beining Rd., Keelung City, Taiwan, ROC
d Department of Transportation and Communication Management Science, National Cheng Kung University, 1 University Road, Tainan City, Taiwan, ROC
e Department of Marketing and Management, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 13 August 2010
Accepted 30 August 2011
Available online 7 September 2011

Keywords:
Green operations
Environmental management
Product stewardship
Process stewardship
Empirical

The increased pollution arising from different stages of producing, distributing, and disposing of
electronics products highlights the importance of green operations (GO) in terms of process and
product stewardship to mitigate environmental damages and satisfy the escalating social expectation
for environmentally friendly operations in the electronics industry. Drawing on the natural-resource-
based view, the purpose of this paper is to examine the boundary spanning role of GO and investigate
the inﬂuence of environmental management capability (EMC) of suppliers on ﬁrm performance and
pollution reduction. The ﬁndings from a survey of 122 manufacturing ﬁrms indicate that the success of
GO is contingent on the EMC of suppliers. In addition, we found that process stewardship has a positive
inﬂuence on performance outcomes and that the EMC of suppliers moderates the relationship between
process stewardship and ﬁnancial performance. These ﬁndings indicate that manufacturers should
emphasize the EMC of suppliers in their GO to reap ﬁnancial as well as environmental beneﬁts.

& 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

According to a study conducted by the Ofﬁce of Solid Waste
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in 2008, only 18% of the
end-of-life electronics products, ranging from computers to home
appliances, were collected for recycling while 82% of them were
disposed to landﬁlls. There are hazards caused by electronics
wastes ranging from polluting the environment and damaging the
health of workers, to losing production capability (Economy and
Lieberthal, 2007) due to the release of toxic substances including
lead, mercury, cadmium, beryllium arsenic, barium, chromium,
and various ﬂame-retardant chemicals. The importance of a pro-
environmental reputation for enterprises to compete internation-
ally has been widely acknowledged (Cole et al., 2006). These
electronics wastes highlight the lack of direction by electronics
manufacturers on environmental protection in the globalization
of their production and marketing activities to gain ﬁnancial
beneﬁts.

Nowadays, environmental consequences are considered stra-
tegically essential for business operations with the aim to reduce
costs and develop quality products (Atasu et al., 2008; Kleindorfer

n Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: tcchris@polyu.edu.hk (C.W.Y. Wong),

lgtmlai@polyu.edu.hk (K.-h. Lai), gordon@mail.ntou.edu.tw (K.-C. Shang),
lucs@mail.ncku.edu.tw (C.-S. Lu), msthomas@polyu.edu.hk (T.K.P. Leung).

0925-5273/$ - see front matter & 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2011.08.031

et al., 2005). The scope of green operations (GO) spans from
product development to management of the entire product life
cycle involving such environmental practices as eco-design, clean
production, recycling, and reuse with a focus on minimizing the
expenses associated with manufacturing, distribution, use, and
disposal of products (Lai and Wong, 2012; Guide and Van
Wassenhove, 2001; Kleiner, 1991). According to the environmen-
tal management literature, GO is concerned with both product-
and process-oriented environmental practices (Ferguson and
Toktay, 2006; Gilley et al., 2000; Rogers and Tibben-Lembke,
2001) to reduce the damage of products and supply chain
processes on natural resources (Dechant and Altman, 1994;
Porter and van der Linde, 1995a, 1995b).

In product management, GO ensures quality and environmen-
tal conformance, preventing negative corporate reputation by
environmentally negligent products.
In process management,
GO emphasizes closed-loop operations involving practices like
recuperation and recycling with the objective to reduce waste,
capture residual value of products (Ferguson and Toktay, 2006;
Rogers and Tibben-Lembke, 2001), and deploy environmental
technology and cleaner transportation in the downstream supply
chain for pollution prevention. These two distinct components of
GO are helpful for ﬁrms to comply with environmental regula-
tions, reducing the risk of legal fees, liability costs, and ﬁnes (Hunt
and Auster, 1990). By embracing GO, ﬁrms will reap ﬁnancial
gains by capturing the residual values of their products and


284

C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

promote product innovation through analysis of the returned
products for possible design improvement (Rogers and Tibben-
Lembke, 2001).

Past research on GO is conﬁned to identifying the antecedents
(e.g., institutional pressures, regulations, and customer requirements),
their inﬂuences on the implementation (Lai et al., 2011; Zhu et al.,
2011), and the business and environmental values of implementing
GO (King, 2007; Min and Galle, 2001; Rothenberg et al., 2001; Zhu
et al., 2007). There is a general belief on organizational capability for
successful environmental practices and sustainable operations
(Bowen et al., 2001; Christmann, 2000; Handﬁeld et al., 1997;
Russo and Fouts, 1997; Sarkis et al., 2011), without which the
performance outcomes of GO can be compromised (Kovacs, 2008;
Porter and van der Linde, 1995a). The literature has acknowledged
the value of GO and the internal capability of ﬁrms for its success
(Corbett and Klassen, 2006; Dechant and Altman, 1994; Handﬁeld
et al., 1997; Lai et al., 2010), but the complementary role of upstream
suppliers to enhance performance remains under-explored (Pagell
et al., 2007; Vachon and Klassen, 2007). A recent study by Lee and
Klassen (2008) highlighted the importance of environmental manage-
ment capabilities (EMC) of suppliers, which reﬂect the ability of
suppliers to improve their performance on environmental issues.
Nevertheless, how such capability inﬂuences the GO of buying ﬁrms
was not considered. While the negligent behaviors of suppliers can
devastate the GO of their downstream partners (Preuss, 2001), a
systematic investigation on supplier role in GO is timely and an
important environmental management topic.

Drawing on the natural-resource-based view (NRBV) of a ﬁrm,
this study examines the boundary spanning role of GO and
investigates the inﬂuence of EMC of suppliers on manufacturing
ﬁrm performance and pollution reduction with empirical data
collected from electronics manufacturers in Taiwan. A structural
equation model and multi-group analysis were used to test these
practice–performance relationships. By doing so, this study makes
two major contributions to the literature. First, we address the
increasing public concern on the electronics wastes causing air, soil,
and water pollution by examining the performance implications of
GO in terms of product- and process-oriented environmental
practices in lessening the environmental damages. Furthermore,
we evaluate the EMC of suppliers and determine how it can facilitate
the product- and process-related practices of GO in contributing to
environmental and ﬁnancial performance. This study advances
theoretical and practical knowledge on evaluating GO and EMC, as
well as the environmental practices that form these two organiza-
tional capabilities essential for performance gains. The study results
will provide managerial insights and useful reference for electronics
manufacturers to embark on GO and leverage the EMC of suppliers
to succeed. Second, we examine the supplier role in support of their
downstream partners for environmental protection, where the EMC
of the former is not adequately addressed in prior studies. There is
evidence that suppliers are instrumental in complementing the
environmental management practices of their downstream partners
by offering environmentally friendly inputs and facilitating pollution
prevention processes (Corbett and Klassen, 2006). This supplier role
sheds light on the importance of EMC in suppliers as external
complementary assets for successful implementation of GO, parti-
cularly in the electronics industry characterized with highly inter-
related and complex manufacturing operations(Yeung et al., 2005).

2. Theoretical development

2.1. Natural-resource-based view

Many studies have sought to deﬁne resources, capabilities,
and/or competencies based on the resource-based view (Barney,

endowment,

equipment, ﬁnancial

1991; Marino, 1996; Wernerfeit, 1994), however, a review of the
literature suggests concepts such as resources, capabilities, com-
petencies, and core competencies are not clearly identiﬁed.
Barney (1991) and Marino (1996) attributed a wide range of
meanings to resources, including physical resources (e.g. raw
materials,
etc.), human
resources (e.g. training, experience, skills, etc.), and organizational
resources (e.g. ﬁrm image, process, routines, etc.). Some resources
are tangible and physical including plant and equipment, while
others are intangible such as a brand name. While some scholars
suggest capabilities are part of resource, others hold opposite
views and have therefore sought
to differentiate between
resources and capabilities (Amit an Schoemaker, 1993; Grant,
1996; Lu, 2007). Capabilities use resources and should thus be
viewed as independent of resources (Amit and Schoemaker,
1993). Hart (1995) proposed the NRBV, suggesting that busi-
nesses are constrained by and dependent on the conditions and
resources of their natural environment to prosper and ﬂourish.
NRBV is an adaptation of the resource-based view of the ﬁrm,
which entails that organizational resources and capabilities that
are valuable, rare, and inimitable determine the competitive
position of ﬁrms with environmental management considerations
(Barney, 1991). A ﬁrm can achieve superior performance if it has
the capability to exploit as well as preserve natural resources in
its operating environment. Such capability is either casually
ambiguous or socially complex. The casually ambiguous capability
is a skill-based resource of ﬁrms, suggesting that ﬁrms can gain
experience and learn skills through repeated practices (Hart, 1995)
or develop complementary assets (e.g., technological knowledge)
with their environmental management practices for better perfor-
mance gains (Milgrom et al., 1991). A ﬁrm skilled at experience
learning and leveraging complementary assets commands an advan-
tageous position in competition due to the barrier of imitation and
better use of organizational resources (Das and Teng, 2000). On the
other hand, the socially complex capability of ﬁrms aimed at
preserving their natural resources is developed where partner ﬁrms
are engaged in coordinated organizational actions to excel. Such
capability allows ﬁrms to access the resources of their partners. The
inherent complexity in the inter-organizational coordination and
collaboration are difﬁcult to imitate. The NRBV is useful
for
explaining the performance outcomes of GO of ﬁrms, and in
particular the EMC of suppliers as a complementary asset to perform
inter-organizational coordinated actions in the process.

2.2. The role of EMC of suppliers

Environmental management capability (EMC) of suppliers is
concerned with their ability to perform business activities in an
environmentally friendly manner while attaining ﬁnancial gains
(Klassen and Vachon, 2003). EMC of suppliers is generally viewed
as their ability to respond to the environmental concerns of their
operations as well as the environmental requirements of their
buying ﬁrms (Lu et al., 2007). Such capability of suppliers is often
characterized with their adoption of an environmental manage-
ment system standard (e.g.,
ISO 14000), evaluation of their
upstream suppliers’ environmental performance, and develop-
ment of an environmental policy to mitigate negative environ-
mental impacts in their operations (Corbett and Kirsch, 2001;
Klassen and Vachon, 2003). EMC of suppliers is valuable to
electronic manufacturers as the success of electronics manufac-
turers relies heavily on their supply network to develop compli-
cated electronics products, provide value-added services,
implement complex business processes, and meet higher custo-
mer expectations (Fawcett and Clinton, 1996; Gunasekaran et al.,
2008; Koufteros et al., 2007a, 2007b; Yang et al., 2008, 2009).


C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

285

EMC of suppliers is important to the implementation of GO
because 87% of customers would accuse ﬁrms of environmental
negligence when their suppliers are environmentally irresponsible,
e.g., use harmful chemicals, refuse product recycling (Cotton
Incorporated, 2008). Those suppliers convicted of having applied
polluting chemicals, carcinogenic substances, and carbon emission
processes in different production and distribution activities can
damage the reputation of their downstream partners and incur
ﬁnancial loss for the latter due to product recalls, legal fees, claims
handling, and so forth (Economy and Lieberthal, 2007). There are
popular practices including factory audit and sourcing from ISO
14000 certiﬁed suppliers to ensure supplier quality and their inputs
(King et al., 2005; Lai and Cheng, 2009). On top of these, electronics
manufacturers should pay attention to suppliers’ EMC on imple-
menting GO, which gives rise to polluting material sources, carbon
footprints in distribution, inventory wastes and obsolesces due to
delayed replenishment, and so forth (Lamming and Hampson, 1996).

2.3. Sustainable green operations

As an innovative environmental management approach, GO
serves to ensure the quality and environmental compliance of
electronics manufacturers’ inputs (e.g., electronics components
and metals) and outputs (e.g., ﬁnished products, carbon emission,
waste) (Zhu et al., 2008). GO emphasizes product- and process-
oriented environmental practices to balance and improve ﬁnan-
cial performance as well as pollution reduction. Product-oriented
environmental practice of GO, also referred to as product steward-
ship, is concerned with reducing environmental burden with less
use of hazardous and nonrenewable materials in products devel-
opment, considering the environmental
in product
design, packaging, and material used (Snir, 2001). Speciﬁcally, it
promotes recycling and reuse of product components with
eco-design, and using recyclable parts and packaging (Lamming
and Hampson, 1996; Reinhardt, 1998). Product stewardship of
electronics manufacturers considers the environmental impact of
products and their packaging from raw materials acquisition to
end-of-life product disposal (Dechant and Altman, 1994). Such
practice is geared towards reducing the environmental damage
arising from all product-related parts and components.

impact

On the other hand, process stewardship is a process-oriented
environmental management practice (Christmann, 2000; Porter and
van der Linde, 1995b).
It is concerned with reducing adverse
environmental impact in the processes ranging from production,
distribution, to end-of-life product management.
It emphasizes
waste reduction and contributes to environmental protection
through implementing such processes as recycling, reengineering
polluting processes, minimizing carbon emission, and so forth
(Jabbour, 2008). Electronics manufacturers are increasingly pressur-
ized by the community, both local and global, to control pollution
generated by their SC processes. An example to illustrate such
pressure is the criticism of Acer by the Taiwanese government for
polluting the local community in its SC processes and sourcing from
environmentally irresponsible suppliers (GoodElectronics, 2008).
Process stewardship is helpful for electronics manufacturers to
reduce waste from product disposal and prevent hazardous materi-
als entering the different logistics life cycle stages.

Although both product stewardship and process stewardship
are important components of GO, the investigation of product
stewardship (Bowen et al., 2001; Christmann, 2000; Preuss, 2001)
and process pollution prevention (Drumwright, 1994) are sepa-
rately conducted without due regard to their co-existence in the
implementation of GO (Hart, 1995). The relationships between
product stewardship, process stewardship, EMC in suppliers, and
their performance effects on electronics manufacturers for
empirical examination in this study are summarized in Fig. 1.

Environmental
management 
capability of 
suppliers

Product 
Stewardship

Process 
Stewardship

a. ROA
b. ROE
c. Net Profit 
d. EPS

Pollution
Reduction

Fig. 1. Structural relationships.

3. Hypotheses development

3.1. Product stewardship and process stewardship

Product stewardship is concerned with environmental protection
relating to products and their packaging design and development
(Fiksel, 1993). It serves to mitigate the environmental damage of
products in the logistics chain from materials and components
sourcing, production and distribution, to disposal (Porter and van
der Linde, 1995a). With an emphasis on reducing liability and costs,
product stewardship of electronics manufacturers involves eco-
design of electronics products for easy disassembly of components
for reuse or recycling, design of packaging to reduce materials
consumption and facilitate the recycling of packaging, and adoption
of reusable containers for transportation (Gonzalez-Benito and
Gonzalez-Benito, 2005). According to the NRBV, electronics manu-
facturers embracing these product-related environmental practices
to a large extent and utilizing them intensively in their GO stand a
higher chance for preserving the natural resources in their environ-
ment. Design for reuse or recycling and application of reusable
containers for transportation are useful for process stewardship,
allowing electronics manufacturers to disassemble component parts
for capturing residual values of returned products, reusing contain-
ers that have returned products collected from the market, and
reducing consumption of new inputs by utilizing reusable parts
captured from returned products. From this, the following hypoth-
esis is formulated:

Hypothesis 1. The implementation of product stewardship by an
electronics manufacturer is positively associated with its process
stewardship.

3.2. Product stewardship and pollution reduction

In addition to eco-design, product stewardship involves the
selection and evaluation of alternative materials and components in
product and packaging development. These practices emphasize the
use of renewable, nonhazardous, and/or recyclable materials in
product manufacturing (Drumwright, 1994). Such GO of electronics
manufacturers ensures that pollution is controlled throughout the life
cycle of their products from production and use, to disposal (Dechant
and Altman, 1994). This effort is helpful for preventing the use of
hazardous materials in electronics products, and subsequently
reducing hazardous waste and lowering the chance of environmen-
tally related accidents (e.g., water contamination). Also, eco-design
focuses on environmentally friendly production techniques as well


286

C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

as resource and energy conservation in production and use of
products (van Hamel and Cramer, 2002). While product stewardship
stresses environmental management for the entire product life
cycle, it requires cross-functional participation, from procurement
and production through to distribution and marketing, in determin-
ing the environmental consequences of their products (Carter et al.,
2000). Such GO of electronics manufacturers can be a valuable
resource that is difﬁcult for their rival counterparts to imitate. Based
on the NRBV, through product stewardship, electronics manufac-
turers are more capable in pollution reduction and the control of
accidental polluting/hazardous substance releases. Therefore, this
leads to our second hypothesis:

Hypothesis 2. The implementation of product stewardship by an
electronics manufacturer is positively associated with its pollution
reduction.

3.3. Product stewardship and ﬁnancial performance

The environmental consequences of electronics products in
production and distribution can be controlled through preventive
measures on inputs (e.g., materials and components) and outputs
(e.g., waste formation) through product and packaging eco-design,
use of low-impact materials and components, and an energy-
efﬁcient product distribution method (van Hamel and Cramer,
2002). Electronics manufacturers can beneﬁt from GO on environ-
mental reputation through news and feature stories, where the
improved image is a helpful attraction for environmentally con-
scious customers (Schuler and Cording, 2006) where Hewlett-
Packard and Dell Inc. are successful cases to illustrate. Examples of
these environmentally friendly corporate actions include global
recycling of their electronics products and a convenient and envir-
onmentally sound return and recycling service for their products.
These practices have earned them positive publicity and customers’
compliments. Another beneﬁt relates to the reduced risk of using
polluting materials in product development, where legal penalty
and bad public image in the case of regulation violation can be
avoided (Buttel, 2000). In addition, eco-design and parts recycling
can account for a cost saving of more than 30% (Hindo and Arndt,
2006). Thus, our third hypothesis is formulated as follows:

Hypothesis 3. The implementation of product stewardship by an
electronics manufacturer is positively associated with its ﬁnancial
performance.

3.4. Process stewardship and pollution reduction

Process stewardship prevents inefﬁcient use of materials and
resources along a logistics chain through imposing control on the
transportation method, production, carbon emission, and dispo-
sal. Such control is a useful mechanism to reduce wastes and
preserve the environment through managing the life cycle of
product ﬂows from purchasing, storing and shipping, to asset
recovery activities. This initiative requires electronics manufac-
turers to implement recycling processes and develop a returned
product collection infrastructure to collect, sort, and disassemble
the returned products with the objective to capture reusable parts
for new product manufacturing. Under the globalization of
production, electronics manufacturers manage inherently com-
plex SC activities that involve a multitude of partners located in
different geographical regions. In addition, electronics products
tend to be short-lived in a market where ﬂexibility in product
development is essential to prevent their inputs and market value
becoming obsolete (Wong et al., forthcoming). Proactive pollution
prevention in the electronics logistics chain can erect barriers and
ﬁrst-mover advantages that are difﬁcult for competitors to

imitate due to the participation requirements by different part-
ners such as suppliers, customers, and logistics service providers
for these practices to be successfully implemented (Porter and
van der Linde, 1995a). As such, electronics manufacturers who
demonstrated environmental efforts in eliminating waste and
resources in their SC processes command a better position to
achieve environmental performance. Thus, we hypothesized that:

Hypothesis 4. The implementation of process stewardship by an
electronics manufacturer is positively associated with its pollution
reduction.

3.5. Process stewardship and ﬁnancial performance

Process stewardship through utilization of

transportation
capacity, reduction of carbon emission, employment of cleaner
transportation, and so forth, can beneﬁt enterprises by lowering
operations costs while lessening their environmental damage.
Such cost savings can be attributable to the use of recycling
components and less fuel consumption. With the reduction of
carbon emission in its operations, Catalyst Semiconductor Inc.,
saved $13 million by reducing consumption of fossil fuel by 46%
between 2002 and 2005. Nevertheless, process stewardship is
complex to implement which requires cross-functional involve-
ment to execute such environmental practices as collection of
used and returned electronics products from the market, recy-
cling, and capturing residual values of products before their
ultimate disposal (Rogers and Tibben-Lembke, 2001). To replicate
successful process stewardship is not easy;
it requires the
collective efforts of different functions in a SC to excel(Zhu
et al., 2011). Due to the ﬁnancial value of process stewardship
through cost reduction and revenue generation, we argue that:

Hypothesis 5. The implementation of process stewardship by an
electronics manufacturer is positively associated with its ﬁnancial
performance.

3.6. Pollution reduction and ﬁnancial performance

GO prevents air and water pollution, which in turn reduces risk
of production capacity loss due to poor health of workers (Economy
and Lieberthal, 2007). Both the product- and process-related envir-
onmental protection components of GO are valuable for mitigating
the risk of
lawsuit and ﬁne. The use of reusable parts and
components extracted from returned products represents cost
saving opportunities for ﬁrms instead of buying new ones. Further-
more, the information embedded in the returned products allows
electronics manufacturers to better understand the customer usage
patterns and generate ideas for product improvement and new
product development. While there is increasing public concern on
electronics waste caused by the disposal of televisions, computers,
and other electronic devices (The Associated Press, 2008), reduced
pollution can improve revenue through appeals to environmentally
conscious customers who prefer electronic products with obliga-
tions to reduce their negative impact to the environment (Klassen
and McLaughlin, 1996). Accordingly, we hypothesized that:

Hypothesis 6. Pollution reduction of an electronics manufacturer is
positively associated with its ﬁnancial performance.

3.7. Moderating role of environmental management capability of
supplier

As a complementary asset for implementing GO, the EMC in
upstream suppliers is essential
for deploying environmental
technologies (Klassen and Vachon, 2003), evaluating upper-tier
supplier environmental performance (Min and Galle, 2001),


C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

287

minimizing waste in business processes (Michaelis, 1995), and
partnering with environmentally responsible upper-tier suppliers
and service providers (Seuring, 2004). These attributes are instru-
mental for electronics manufacturers to ensure that their pro-
cured items are friendly to the environment. For enterprises
operating under a highly competitive and regulated industry
(Tan and Litschert, 1994), sourcing from those suppliers with
EMC can provide beneﬁt from an environmentally friendly image
and cost reduction relating to inspections, factory audits, and
materials testing. Moreover, the EMC in upstream manufacturers
is valuable for promoting environmental awareness and stan-
dards across the supply chain from their procurement through to
transportation activities (Russo and Fouts, 1997). By doing so, the
EMC in upstream suppliers can complement the implementation
of GO by electronics manufacturers through conformance with
environmental requirements (e.g., use of ecological materials)
speciﬁed by the latter in their supply of materials and compo-
nents as well as in the SC processes. The EMC in suppliers can be
leveraged by electronics manufacturers to complement their
organizational efforts to implement GO towards the goal of
achieving both ﬁnancial performance and pollution reduction.
Based on this complementary perspective of NRBV, we hypothe-
sized that:

Hypothesis 7. The positive association of
the implementation
of product
stewardship by an electronics manufacturer with
(a) pollution reduction, and (b) ﬁnancial performance is strengthened
when the environmental management capability of its upstream
suppliers is high.

Hypothesis 8. The positive association of
the implementation
stewardship by an electronics manufacturer with
of process
(a) pollution reduction, and (b) ﬁnancial performance is strengthened
when the environmental management capability of its upstream
suppliers is high.

4. Research methodology

4.1. Sample and data collection

To examine the business values of the two dimensions of GO,
namely product stewardship and process stewardship, and the
inﬂuence of suppliers’ EMC on their performance outcomes, we
drew a sample of electronics manufacturers in Taiwan to test the
stated hypotheses. The electronics industry is appropriate for this
study due to a number of reasons. First, different from other
manufacturing sectors (e.g., automobiles), electronics manufac-
turers enjoy comparatively less tariff protection in international
trade and operate in extremely competitive markets (Yeung et al.,
2005). In addition to the downward price pressures and severe
competition, there are environmental laws governing electronics
wastes that urge electronics manufacturers to overcome these
ﬁnancial and regulatory challenges for their operations to succeed
(Christmann, 2004). Second, according to the Ministry of Finance
in Taiwan, the electronics industry contributed a trade value of
US$113.7 billion, accounting for 23% of foreign trade volume
(Ministry of Finance, 2009). Electronics products are therefore
regarded by Taiwan as being of strategic importance to their
industrial development. In addition to its domestic economic
contribution, the Taiwanese electronics industry plays a signiﬁ-
cant role in the international business arena. The manufacturers
pioneer in the international information technology development
with a leading role in research and development for information
technology production, and has risen from 6th to 2nd in the overall
ranking of the information technology competitiveness index in
2008 (The Economist Intelligent Unit, 2008). Furthermore, electronics

manufacturers in Taiwan are keen on GO in their product develop-
ment and SC processes due to governmental sponsorship and
economic pressure from international competition. The Taiwanese
government is aware of the importance of environmentally respon-
sible products to compete in the global market. In the face of
environmental degradation due to rapid industrial growth, Taiwan
has started various industrial environmental improvement programs,
e.g.,
Industrial Waste Minimization and Green Design Network
programs, since the 1980s (Leung, 2004).

We drew the sample of electronics manufacturers from the
database of the Taiwan Stock Exchange Corporation (TWSE)
market and the Gre Tai Securities Market (GTSM) in Taiwan.
These electronics manufacturers produce different technological
merchandise ranging from semiconductors, optoelectronics, com-
puters and peripheral equipment, to electronics components.
Survey packages including a questionnaire, a cover letter explain-
ing the purpose of the study and the use of data, and a stamp-
attached envelop were initially mailed to executives (e.g., pre-
sidents, vice-presidents, managers of relevant departments, and
so forth) in a total of 677 sampled electronics manufacturers. The
initial mailing elicited 74 usable responses. A follow-up mailing of
survey packages was sent 2 weeks after the initial mailing. An
additional 48 usable responses were returned. A total of 122
usable responses were received, representing a response rate of
18%, which was comparable with prior studies of a similar nature
(e.g., Christmann, 2000; Grewal et al., 2009).

4.2. Key informant and non-response bias

In order to obtain accurate assessments by respondents and
ensure that they represent and reﬂect the views of their ﬁrms, we
asked them to indicate their length of service, knowledge on GO,
and experience in managing their own ﬁrm’s and the supplier’s
EMC. More than 51% of the respondents had been working in the
current ﬁrm for 8 years or longer. In all, 42% of the respondents
were vice-presidents or presidents, 44% were managers and 12%
were supervisors in such departments as environment and safety
as well as manufacturing, and 2% were in other positions. This
distribution of organizational ranks indicated that the respon-
dents were knowledgeable organizational informants. In addition,
an interview with suppliers of ASUS and Acer computer compa-
nies indicated that manufacturers characterized with more efforts
in GO are also more knowledgeable about what their suppliers
have done in the same area. The degree of interaction between
manufacturers and their suppliers could inﬂuence how the former
perceive the capabilities of the latter. Bearing this mind, this study
speciﬁcally focuses on the assessment of suppliers’ EMC from
electronics manufacturers’ perspective. While 63.9% of the respon-
dent ﬁrms possess 500 or less number of employees, the key
informants in these executive positions are likely to be involved in
and have knowledge about GO and its related aspects in the
companies. The annual revenue of 27% of respondent ﬁrms is less
than NT$1.1 billion (US$1¼NT$33 approximately), while 36% of
respondent ﬁrms have annual revenue between NT$1.1 billion and
NT$4.0 billion, and 37% have annual revenue over NT$4.0 billion.
Hence, potential method bias by using the key informant approach
does not seem to be a major issue in this study.

Tests were conducted to verify if non-response bias is a
problem in this study. Following Armstrong and Overton (1977)
and Lambert and Harrington (1990), the second wave of respon-
dents’ returns is assumed to be most similar to those of
non-respondents. A t-test analysis showed that there were no
signiﬁcant differences (at po0.05) as regards to all variables
analyzed. Although the results did not rule out the possibility of
non-response bias, they suggest that non-response bias was not a
concern in this study.


288

C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

Table 1
Common method bias analysis.

PD

PS

EMC

PR

PS

EMC

PR

Type of ownership
(marker variable)

0.82
0.81
0.52
0.52
0.62
0.63
 0.04

0.58
0.57
0.71
0.71
0.04

0.53
0.54
 0.01

0.17

PD¼product stewardship, PS¼process stewardship, PR¼pollution reduction,
EMC¼environmental management capability of suppliers. The ﬁrst value in each
cell
is the correlation between the constructs, and the second value is the
correlation corrected for method bias.All correlations are signiﬁcant at po0.01,
except for values in italics.

the

values of

Two steps were undertaken to determine whether common
method variance posed a serious threat to this study. First,
Harmon’s one-factor test was applied to assess whether a single
latent factor would account for all the theoretical constructs. The
single-factor model yielded a w2 value of 624.69 (df¼151). We
conducted a w2 difference test against the hypothesized four-
factor model to assess the common method variance. A signiﬁcant
difference between the w2
two models
(Dw2¼295.43; Ddf¼6, po0.001) suggested that the ﬁt in the
measurement model was signiﬁcantly better than the single-
factor model, providing preliminary evidence that common
method variance was not a problem in this study. Second, we
followed the guidelines recommended by Lindell and Whitney
(2001) and Malhotra et al. (2006) to test for potential common
method variance by using the type of ownership of the ﬁrm (e.g.,
joint-venture, state-owned, privately owned, etc.) as the marker
variable. This marker variable is used for common method
variance analysis because it is theoretically unrelated to all the
dependent variables of this study (i.e., pollution reduction and
objective ﬁnancial performance measures). The correlations
between the type of ownership of the ﬁrm and the constructs in
the measurement model are insigniﬁcant. The partial correlations
between the constructs are signiﬁcant after controlling the effect
of common method bias. These results are summarized in Table 1
and provided evidence that the common method bias did not
pose a serious threat to the interpretation of the study results.

4.3. Measurement development

We conducted extensive literature review in the development of
the research instrument in the form of survey questionnaire. In
addition to adopting measurement scales from the literature, we
improved content validity of the measurement by conducting
interviews with 30 executives of electronics manufacturers, who
are in charge of the production and distribution processes, and
consultants in operations and supply chain management to ensure
the questions are relevant to their operations, well-understood, and
interpreted consistently. Based on their feedback, we reﬁned the
measurement scales and administrated the measurement items in
the form of questionnaire to another 30 executives for pilot test. We
conducted exploratory factor analysis to purify our scales. The
results led us to delete two items because their corrected item-to-
total correlation were lower than the threshold value of 0.30,
suggesting that these items are not measuring what the rest of
the items are measuring. After eliminating the items, we had a more
parsimonious scale (Henrysson, 1963) with 17 items for further
analysis. The ﬁnal measurement scales are attached in Appendix A.

4.3.1.

Independent variables

Product stewardship is conceptualized as the product-oriented
environmental practices of ﬁrms where environmental issues are
taken into account in such product-related aspects as product design,
materials used, and product packing. A four-item scale is adopted
from Gonzalez-Benito and Gonzalez-Benito, 2005 and Zhu and Sarkis
(2004). Process stewardship is concerned with the reduction of
natural resources consumption and pollution in the SC processes. A
six-item measurement scale is adopted from Gonzalez-Benito and
Gonzalez-Benito, 2005 and Aragon-Correa et al. (2008). We asked
respondents to assess their ﬁrms on these items using a seven-point
Likert scale with 1¼strongly disagree and 7¼strongly agree.

4.3.2. Moderating variable

The EMC of suppliers reﬂects their ability to manage their
environmental impacts through provision of environmentally con-
scious products, adopting cleaner production processes, integrating
environmental issues into business routines, sourcing from environ-
mentally responsible upper-tier suppliers, and communicating their
environmental policy with partners (Lee and Klassen, 2008). We
adopted the measurement scales developed by Zhu et al. (2005).
Respondents were asked to assess these attributes of EMC in their
suppliers with regard to obtainment of ISO 14000 certiﬁcate, envir-
onmental evaluations of second-tier suppliers, provision of ecological
proof of their products and environmental management guidelines,
and cooperation with manufacturers to reduce environmental impact
on a seven-point Likert-scale with 1¼strongly disagree and
7¼strongly agree.

4.3.3. Dependent variables

Performance outcomes of GO are measured in terms of
environmental and ﬁnancial performance. Pollution reduction is
operationalized as the decrease of waste and consumption of
natural resources (e.g., fossil fuel). A four-item scale from Zhu and
Sarkis (2004) and Rao and Holt (2005) was adopted, and asked
respondents to assess their pollution reduction improvement
relative to their previous year performance on a seven-point
Likert-scale with 1¼strongly disagree and 7¼strongly agree.

To complement the perceptual measurement of pollution
reduction and to evaluate more accurately the ﬁnancial perfor-
mance of responding ﬁrms (Devaraj and Kohli, 2003; Kim and
Malhotra, 2005), objective measures obtained from the Taiwan
Stock Exchange Corporation were used to assess the ﬁnancial
outcomes of GO in terms of return on asset (ROA), return on
equity (ROE), net proﬁt, and earnings per share (EPS).

Before testing the hypotheses, we evaluated the psychometric
properties of the factor structures. We began with conﬁrmatory factor
analysis (CFA) using AMOS 7.0. The measurement items load sig-
niﬁcantly (i.e., po0.001) onto their respective constructs with load-
ings ranging between 0.58 and 0.98, suggesting convergent validity of
the theoretical constructs according to the guidelines by Anderson
and Gerbing (1988) and other studies utilizing organizational-level
latent constructs (Lindell and Whitney, 2001; Novak and Eppinger,
2001). We proceeded to ﬁt CFA on all the four constructs for path
coefﬁcients of the hypothesized structural model. Table 1 summarizes
the composite reliability, Cronbach’s a, and average variance
extracted. Cronbach’s a is used to assess unidimenstionality of
constructs, and all the Cronbach’s a values were well above the
threshold value of 0.70 (Nunnally, 1984), ranging from 0.84 to 0.93.
Composite reliability for the constructs fell in the range of 0.84–0.92,
and well above the recommended value of 0.70, suggesting internal
consistency of each set of observed variables in its respective
construct (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). Discriminant validity was
assessed following the guidelines of Fornell and Larcker (1981). The
average variance extracted (AVE) estimate of each construct was


C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

289

Table 2
Measurement model.

Panel A: scale properties of the latent factors

Construct

Cronbach’s a

Composite reliability

PD
PS
PR
EMC

0.84
0.87
0.93
0.88

0.84
0.86
0.92
0.86

Panel B: CFA results of the latent factors

Average variance
extracted

Highest shared
variance

0.57
0.53
0.56
0.80

0.41
0.49
0.50
0.52

Indicator

Direction

Construct

Estimate

Standardized
estimate

S.E.

t-value

p

PD1
PD2
PD3
PD4
PD5
PS1
PS2
PS3
PS4
PS5
PR1
PR2
PR3
EMC1
EMC2
EMC3
EMC4
EMC5

’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’
’

PD
PD
PD
PD
PD
PS
PS
PS
PS
PS
PR
PR
PR
EMC
EMC
EMC
EMC
EMC

1.00
1.14
1.05
1.12
0.94
1.00
1.13
1.13
0.84
0.95
1.00
0.99
0.64
1.00
0.98
1.01
1.20
1.23

0.72
0.77
0.83
0.68
0.61
0.64
0.82
0.81
0.73
0.74
0.97
0.97
0.73
0.65
0.66
0.71
0.78
0.86

0.14
0.12
0.15
0.15

0.15
0.15
0.12
0.14

0.04
0.06

0.12
0.15
0.17
0.17

7.93
8.70
7.17
6.36

7.64
7.45
6.86
6.96

27.57
11.05

7.91
6.68
7.05
7.17

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

found to be higher than the highest variance that each construct
shared with the other constructs in the model. Such result suggests
that all our study constructs exhibited discriminant validity. In
addition, the AVE estimates of the constructs were also above the
recommended threshold value of 0.50 in the range between 0.53 and
0.80. This result suggests the variance due to measurement error is
smaller than the variance due to the construct, indicating convergent
validity of the constructs. The four-factor measurement model
exhibited a good ﬁt with the data (w2¼247.54, df¼125, IFI¼0.92,
TLI¼0.91, and CFI¼0.92). The standardized factor loads were in the
range from 0.61 to 0.97, and were statistically signiﬁcant at po0.01
level. This result provides evidence that the constructs exhibited
convergent validity (Table 2).

4.4. Hypotheses testing

After veriﬁcation of the validity and reliability of the constructs in
the form of measurement scales, we tested the hypotheses using the
maximum likelihood estimation with the sample covariance matrix
as input in AMOS 7.0. The research model provided reasonable ﬁt to
the survey data with ﬁt indices w2¼245.16, df¼122, IFI¼0.93,
TLI¼0.92, and CFI¼0.93. The results supported Hypothesis 1, which
predicts positive association of product stewardship with process
stewardship (r¼0.98, po0.05) as shown in Fig. 1. The ﬁndings also
provide support for Hypothesis 4 that implementation of process
stewardship can help reduce waste and pollution (r¼3.50, po0.05).
Moreover, the ﬁndings show that process stewardship has signiﬁcant
positive inﬂuence on ﬁnancial performance in terms of ROA (r¼8.72,
po0.05), ROE (r¼8.12, po0.05), net proﬁt (r¼7.28, po0.05), and
EPS (r¼6.81, po0.05), lending support for Hypothesis 3. Contrary to
our theorization, product stewardship has negative impact on both
pollution reduction and ﬁnancial performance at po0.05, thus
providing no support for Hypotheses 2 and 5. The ﬁndings also reveal

that pollution reduction has no impact on ﬁnancial performance,
failing to support Hypothesis 6. Fig. 2 depicts the summary of path
estimates of the structural model.

4.5. Moderating role of EMC of supplier

To determine whether suppliers with higher EMC are helpful for
ﬁrms to improve environmental and ﬁnancial performance, we
tested the moderating role of supplier EMC by conducting multi-
group analysis with AMOS 7.0. Following the guidelines suggested
by Marsh and Hocevar (1985), Byrne (2004), and Koufteros and
Marcoulides (2006) on multi-group analysis, we ﬁrst created a two-
group model by dividing the total 122 sample ﬁrms according to the
level of EMC of their suppliers into a high EMC group (n¼52) and
low EMC group (n¼70). The multi-group analysis was conducted in
three steps to test if a change in the w2 between the two groups is
statistically signiﬁcant, which indicates a moderating effect of EMC.
First, we allowed the structural parameters to vary freely across the
(df¼ 276)¼454.05,
two groups to form a baseline model (M1) with w2
IFI¼0.91, TLI¼0.90, and CFI¼0.90. We then constrained the struc-
tural parameters between the two groups to form a constrained
IFI¼0.82, TLI¼0.81, and
model
CFI¼0.82. Lastly, we compared the equality of the paths between
the two groups using the w2 difference between M1 and M2. We
found signiﬁcant differences in the w2 statistics of all the paths
(Ddf¼ 52)¼192.19, po0.05.
between the high and low EMC groups Dw2
These results of multi-group analysis provided support for the
moderating role of supplier EMC on the relationships of GO of ﬁrms
and its performance outcomes.

(df¼ 328)¼646.24,

(M2) with w2

To test the moderating effect on the performance outcomes of
product stewardship and process stewardship, we constrained the
structural paths one-by-one and compared the w2 change with the
baseline model, i.e., M1. Signiﬁcant difference was found in w2 values


290

C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

Product 
Stewardship

0.98*** 

Process 
Stewardship

a.
b.
c.
d.

-7.94* 
-7.40* 
-6.63* 
-6.23* 

-2.87* 

8.72* 
a.
8.12* 
b.
7.28* 
c.
d. 6.81* 

3.50* 

a. ROA
b. ROE
c. NetProfit 
d. EPS

1.30
a.
1.20
b.
c. 1.04
d. 0.97

Pollution
Reduction

Fig. 2. Summary of path estimates without moderating effect. **po0.01;
*po0.05; n.s., not signiﬁcant.

EMC of suppliers is high 

Product 
Stewardship

a.
b.
c.
d.

-4.75* 
-4.42* 
-3.87* 
-3.51* 

a. ROA
b. ROE
c. NetProfit 
d. EPS

2.17** 

4.45* 
a.
4.15* 
b.
3.66* 
c.
d. 3.21* 

Process 
Stewardship

1.71* 

EMC of suppliers is low 

Product 
Stewardship

a.
b.
c.
d.

-8.25
-7.92
-7.26
-7.04

-2.25* 

a.
b.
c.
d.

9.94
9.52
8.70
8.57

Pollution
Reduction

a. ROA
b. ROE
c. NetProfit 
d. EPS

Process 
Stewardship

2.80* 

Pollution
Reduction

Fig. 3. Summary of path estimates from results of multi-group analysis. **po0.01;
*po0.05; n.s., not signiﬁcant.

between the high and low supplier EMC groups for the following
(Ddf¼ 1)¼17.10,
paths: product stewardship-pollution reduction (Dw2
(Ddf¼ 1)¼4.00, po0.05),
po0.001), product stewardship-ROA (Dw2
(Ddf¼ 1)¼4.01, po0.05), product stew-
product stewardship-ROE (Dw2
(Ddf¼ 1)¼4.00, po0.05), and product steward-
ardship-net proﬁt (Dw2
(Ddf¼ 1)¼4.00, po0.05). The path estimates of the high
ship-EPS (Dw2
and low supplier EMC groups are summarized in Fig. 3. The ﬁndings
lend support for Hypothesis 7a that suggests the positive association
between the product stewardship of electronics manufacturers and
pollution reduction is strengthened when their upstream suppliers
have a high level of EMC. However, Hypothesis 7b is not supported.
Product stewardship is found to be negatively associated with the
ﬁnancial performance measures with or without the moderation of
supplier EMC.

We found signiﬁcant difference in w2 values between the high
and low supplier EMC groups for the paths on process steward-
(Ddf¼ 1)¼17.08, po0.001), process
ship-pollution reduction (Dw2
(Ddf¼ 1)¼4.10, po0.05), process steward-
stewardship-ROA (Dw2
(Ddf¼ 1)¼4.00, po0.05), process stewardship-net
ship-ROE (Dw2
(Ddf¼ 1)¼4.01, po0.05), and process stewardship-EPS
proﬁt (Dw2
(Ddf¼ 1)¼4.00, po0.05). These ﬁndings support Hypothesis 8b
(Dw2
that suggests the positive associations between process stewardship
and various ﬁnancial measures are strengthened when their

suppliers have a high level of EMC. However, the positive association
between process stewardship and pollution reduction is not
strengthened when working with high EMC suppliers, but is
relatively weaker than working with low EMC suppliers. Thus, the
multi-group analysis results failed to support Hypothesis 8a. Fig. 3
summarizes the path estimates from the multi-group analysis.

5. Discussions

Due to growing concern on electronics waste, GO is helpful for
electronics manufacturers to control pollution in their operations
processes. The research question here relates to the impact of GO
for electronics manufacturers to reap environmental and ﬁnancial
performance, and how these GO-performance linkages are inﬂu-
enced by the EMC of their suppliers. According to the NRBV,
process stewardship can reduce waste and pollution (Konar and
Cohen, 2001; Zhu et al. 2008) as reﬂected by its ﬁnancial impact
in terms of ROA, ROE, net proﬁt, and EPS.

Contrary to our hypotheses, product stewardship is found to
bring a negative impact on both the environmental and ﬁnancial
performance of electronics manufacturers. This counterintuitive
ﬁnding indicates that product stewardship is desirable but insufﬁ-
cient to lessen environmental damage, reduce costs in product
development, and improve ﬁnancial performance. New product
design, use of recyclable containers for transportation, redesign of
packing, and sourcing of ecological materials may incur costs and
irrecoverable ﬁnancial investments as well as materials use in the
early implementation stage before ﬁrms are able to reap the beneﬁts
of scale economy and waste reduction (Russo and Fouts, 1997).
Similarly, the development of environmentally friendly product and
packing may generate waste and pollution that cannot be avoided
and justiﬁed in product introduction. Such environmental practices
as using ecological materials, product design for easy disassembly,
and recyclable containers are far from being readily visible to
stimulate customer purchase, and lack the immediate bottom-line
effect desired by electronics manufacturers. Although we found no
impact of product stewardship on environmental and ﬁnancial
performance, it has a positive association with process stewardship,
which in turn improves these performance outcomes.

In addition, we found that pollution reduction has no signiﬁ-
cant impact on ﬁnancial performance. Although this ﬁnding is
inconsistent with our theorization, it can be explained that the
reduction of air emission and waste water, and so forth, cannot be
easily detected by the market. This result suggests that the gains on
ﬁnancial performance should not be conﬁned to pollution reduction.
Efforts should be spent on promoting the pollution reduction efforts
and results of electronics manufacturers to generate sales revenue
and ﬁnancial performance gains (Chan, 2000).

We found further that GO in terms of product stewardship and
process stewardship has signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on pollu-
tion reduction particularly when the EMC of suppliers is high,
suggesting the role of EMC of suppliers on the GO-performance
link is noteworthy. Working with suppliers of high EMC, process
stewardship can bring positive impact on ROA, ROE, net proﬁt,
and EPS, while such positive association is not found when the
EMC of suppliers is low. However, the negative inﬂuence of
product stewardship on these ﬁnancial performance measures
should be noted even though the EMC of suppliers is high. This
result is consistent with the model that goes without moderation
by the EMC of suppliers. By focusing only on environmentally
conscious product design and packing, electronics manufacturers
are less likely to achieve ﬁnancial gains. Regardless of the EMC of
suppliers, product stewardship lacks the attraction to stimulate
customer purchase and the resultant ﬁnancial performance.


C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

291

6. Theoretical implications

This study advances the knowledge of GO for environmental
protection by examining the performance impacts of product-
and process-oriented environmental practices. Process-oriented
environmental practices are important for both ﬁnancial perfor-
mance and pollution reduction. This ﬁnding enriches the litera-
ture on the ﬁnancial value of preventing pollution in the logistics
processes with the adoption of environmental technology, control
of carbon emission, deployment of cleaner transportation meth-
ods, and implementation of a recycling system to mitigate
environmental pollution. These process stewardship practices
can be visible to environmentally conscious customers in dispos-
ing of electronics products, such that these customers can
return their end-of-life electronics products for recycling.
In
addition, process stewardship is helpful for cost reduction by
lessening resources consumption (e.g., fuel and energy usage in
operations) and capturing residual values (e.g., reusable compo-
nents and materials) to lower the costs of purchasing materials
and components. This way is congruent with the NRBV, where
processes are less likely to be imitated due to their complexity
and lack of visibility to competitors,
thus contributing to
performance.

The negative ﬁnancial

impact of product stewardship is
counterintuitive. Although product stewardship is believed to
provide opportunities to minimize waste, and improve efﬁcient
use of resources through product design, packing, and material
uses, there are restraints for cost savings and pollution control
(Lewis and Gertsakis, 2001). For example, costs are likely to be
incurred when returning the reusable packaging to manufac-
turers. It is difﬁcult to achieve scale economy in developing eco-
friendly electronics products with environmentally friendly parts
and components in the product introduction stage (Russo and
Fouts, 1997). Moreover, the applications of ecological materials in
electronics products development may not be observable to
stimulate purchase by consumers. However, our ﬁnding reveals
that product stewardship has positive inﬂuence on process
stewardship, which has positive impact on ﬁnancial performance
and pollution reduction. This advances knowledge on the positive
association between product and process stewardship, where the
environmentally conscious design of electronics products and
packing can facilitate the process-oriented environmental prac-
tices in capturing the residual value of products through recup-
eration and recycling for performance gains.

There is also a lack of positive association between pollution
reduction with ﬁnancial performance in terms of ROA, ROE, net
proﬁt, and EPS. This can be explained by the insufﬁcient knowl-
edge of consumers on the pollution reduction and environmental
conservation efforts contributed by electronics manufacturers.
The ﬁnding implies that electronics manufacturers need to show
or even involve customers in their GO, encouraging customer
participation in the SC processes to return used products for
recycling, in order to achieve ﬁnancial performance.

Consistent with the complementary perspective of NRBV,
process stewardship has positive impact on both ﬁnancial per-
formance and pollution reduction when the EMC of suppliers is
high. Such supplier capability is reﬂected in their products,
production processes, business routines, sourcing, and commu-
nication, which are found supporting the process-oriented GO of
electronics manufacturers.

Prior research points out that little is known about the link of
product stewardship to product development in contributing to
environmental conservation (Gottberg et al., 2006). We add to the
literature by examining how supplier EMC inﬂuences the perfor-
mance impact of product stewardship. We found that product
stewardship has a positive impact on pollution reduction when

electronics manufacturers source from suppliers with a high level of
EMC. Our ﬁndings suggest the performance impact of GO is not
universal, but contingent on the EMC of suppliers. We contribute to
the NRBV by providing empirical evidence on how the EMC of
suppliers complements as an external asset for buying ﬁrms to
facilitate both product- and process-oriented environmental prac-
tices towards achieving ﬁnancial gains and pollution prevention.

7. Managerial implications

This study offers a number of insights into the GO of electronics
manufacturers. Process stewardship is valuable for ﬁrms to reduce
pollution and achieve ﬁnancial performance. Electronics manufac-
turers can beneﬁt from implementing such GO practices as collecting
and recycling returned products, using clean transportation methods,
and so forth, to mitigate environmental pollution as well as to attract
and retain environmentally conscious customers. To ensure that SC
processes are not damaging the environment, customer involvement
in environmental protection is needed for ﬁnancial performance.
Electronics manufacturers should therefore consider implementing
GO that require inputs from customers to help them realize the
electronics products they purchase are produced and distributed in
an environmentally friendly manner. The process-oriented environ-
mental practices not only are crucial for ﬁnancial gains and pollution
reduction, but also help electronics manufacturers to realize the
beneﬁts of product stewardship that was found to be insufﬁcient to
directly generate desirable performance. Related practices such as
eco-design, recycling packaging, and use of nonhazardous materials
for product development are useful enablers for process stewardship
to bring both ﬁnancial and environmental performance.

This study also sheds light on the contingency effect of supplier
EMC on the associations between GO and its performance outcomes.
Electronics manufacturers seeking performance improvement in
their implementation of product stewardship require the support
of their suppliers who possess EMC that reﬂects suppliers’ ability to
produce components or parts that are composed of environmentally
friendly materials, and distributed in an environmentally conscious
manner. Our study ﬁndings recommend managers to source from
suppliers who are ISO 14000 certiﬁed, conduct environmental
evaluation on the second-tier suppliers, reduce environmental
impact
in their manufacturing processes, provide ecological
proof of their outputs, and communicate about their environmental
management with trading partners. In particular, it is desirable
for electronics manufacturers to work with suppliers having a high
level of EMC in order to reduce pollution from their effort in
developing environmentally conscious products and packing, which
is found to be insufﬁcient to reduce pollution when EMC of suppliers
is low.

8. Limitations and directions for future research

We acknowledge that this study has a number of limitations,
which are left for future research. First, our study takes account of one
external complementary asset that is found to inﬂuence the perfor-
mance outcomes of GO of electronics manufacturers. Although EMC
of suppliers is found to be essential to facilitate the performance of
GO, there are other pertinent factors that can inﬂuence the associa-
tions between GO and its performance outcomes of electronics
manufactures. Future studies may investigate the moderating effect
of such factors as business environment conditions and government
regulations on the performance impacts of GO, particularly on the
contingency under which the implementation of product stewardship
would contribute to positive ﬁnancial performance.


292

C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

Second, this study only examines the moderating effect of EMC
of suppliers on the relationship between GO and performance. It is
also possible for the EMC of customers to assume equal importance
in GO as those contributed by suppliers. Customers may have high
EMC and are willing to pay a premium price for or even patronage a
product considered by them as environmentally friendly.
It is
worthwhile to examine the inﬂuence of EMC of customers on the
GO-performance link in future research.

Third, this research study is a cross-sectional design. A long-
itudinal study is worth pursuing as it can shed light on the casual
relationships amongst product stewardship, process stewardship,
ﬁnancial performance, and pollution reduction. Such study can
advance understanding on the changes of GO of ﬁrms to bring
performance outcomes over time.

Lastly, this study is conducted in the context of electronics
manufacturing. Although this industry is known for polluting the
environment due to the use of toxic substances in the production
of electronics products, there are other highly polluting and
resource consuming industries, such as textiles and garment
manufacturing, and shoemaking. Future studies on GO of other
industries can gain understanding and compare the GO of
different industries to explore if there are different ESO practices
that can be learnt from one another.

9. Conclusions

This study advances the knowledge of environmental manage-
ment in green operations and the supplier role to improve
performance. We adopt the NRBV to examine the performance
outcomes of GO in terms of product and process stewardship that
work with suppliers characterized with high and low levels of
EMC. We provide empirical evidence to account for the EMC of
suppliers that inﬂuence the organizational success of implement-
ing GO to achieve business as well as environmental goals. The
study ﬁndings provide evidence to show the performance impacts
of product and process stewardship with high and low variations
of the supplier EMC. We provide managerial insights into the
value of supplier EMC and the level of supplier EMC conducive to
the performance of product and process stewardship. This
research lays foundation for this line of environmental manage-
ment research with topics on other complementary capabilities of
suppliers such as information processing (Wong et al., 2009) and
supplier cooperation and commitment (Lai, 2009) affecting per-
formance outcomes of GO and how manufacturing ﬁrms may
leverage the EMC of their suppliers to compete and in other
industrial contexts such as shipping and transport logistics (Lun
et al., 2011).

Acknowledgments

We thank the guest editor, Professor Angappa Gunasekaran, and
two anonymous reviewers for their valuable and constructive com-
ments on earlier versions of our paper. This research was partially
sponsored by the National Science Council, Taiwan, ROC under NSC
95-2416-H-022-001 and the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region, China (GRF PolyU 5500/10H) and (GRF
PolyU 5455/11) awarded to Wong and Lai, respectively.

Appendix

See Table A1 for more details.

Table A1
Measurement scales.

Constructs

Measurement items

Item
codes

Product stewardship

PD1 Design of products are for easy disassembly

for reuse or recycle

PD3

PD2 Recyclable or reusable packaging of
products are used for transportation
Ecological materials are used for packaging
of our products
Packing of products are designed to reduce
consumption of materials

PD4

Process stewardship

PS1

PS2

Production processes are designed to
reduce consumption of resources in
operations
Environmental technologies are used to
preserve the environment
Control carbon emission

PS3
PS4 Use cleaner transportation methods
PS5

A recuperation and recycling system is in
place to collect products from the market

Pollution reduction

PR1
PR2
PR3

Reduction of carbon emission
Reduction of waste water
Reduction of solid wastes

Environmental

EMC1 Our suppliers are ISO 14000 certiﬁed

management capability of
supplier

EMC2 Second-tier supplier environmental

evaluations are conducted by our suppliers
EMC3 Our suppliers are able to provide ecological

proof of their products

EMC4 Speciﬁc environmental management

guidelines are provided to our upstream
suppliers

EMC5 Our suppliers cooperate with us to reduce

environmental impact in the
manufacturing processes

References

Amit, R., Schoemaker, P.J.H., 1993. Strategic assets and organizational rent.

Strategic Management Journal 14, 33–46.

Anderson, J.D., Gerbing, D.W., 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice. A review
and recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin 103 (3),
411–423.

Aragon-Correa, J.A., Hurtado-Torres, N., Sharma, S., Garcia-Morales, V.J., 2008.
Environmental strategy and performance in small ﬁrms: a resource-based
perspective. Journal of Environmental Management 86 (1), 88–103.

Armstrong, S.J., Overton, T.S., 1977. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail survey.

Journal of Marketing Research 14, 396–402.

Atasu, A., Sarvary, M., Wassenhove, L.N.V., 2008. Remanufacturing as a marketing

strategy. Management Science, 1–6. doi:10.1287/msnsc.1080.0893.

Barney, J., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of

Management 17 (1), 99–120.

Bowen, F., Cousins, P.D., Lamming, R.C., Faruk, A.C., 2001. The role of supply
management capabilities in green supply. Production and Operations Manage-
ment 10 (2), 174–189.

Buttel, F.H., 2000. Ecological modernization as social theory. Geoforum 31 (1),

57–65.

Byrne, B.M., 2004. Testing for multigroup invariance using AMOS graphics: a road
less traveled. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal 11 (2),
272–300.

Carter, C.R., Kale, R., Grimm, C.M., 2000. Environmental purchasing and ﬁrm
performance: an empirical investigation. Transportation Research Part E 23
(3), 219–228.

Chan, R.Y.K., 2000. The effectiveness of environmental advertising: the role of
claim type and the source country green image. International Journal of
Advertising 19 (3), 349–375.

Christmann, P., 2000. Effects of ‘‘best practices’’ of environmental management on
cost advantage: the role of complementary assets. Academy of Management
Journal 43 (4), 663–680.

Christmann, P., 2004. Multinational companies and the national environment:
determinants of global environmental policy standardization. Academy of
Management Journal 47 (5), 747–760.


C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

293

Cole, M.A., Elliott, R.J.R., Shimamoto, K., 2006. Globalization, ﬁrm-level character-
istics and environmental management: a study of Japan. Ecological Economics
59 (3), 312–323.

Corbett, C.J., Kirsch, D.A., 2001. International diffusion of ISO 14000 certiﬁcation.

Production and Operations Management 10 (3), 327–342.

Corbett, C.J., Klassen, R.D., 2006. Extending the horizons: environmental excellence
as key to improving operations. Manufacturing and Service Operations
Management 8 (1), 5–22.

Cotton Incorporated, 2008. Lifestyle Monitor Trend Magazines.
Das, T.K., Teng, B.S., 2000. A resource-based theory of strategic alliances. Journal of

Management 20 (1), 31–61.

Dechant, K., Altman, B., 1994. Environmental leadership: from compliance to

competitive advantage. Academy of Management Executive 8 (2), 7–20.

Devaraj, S., Kohli, R., 2003. Performance impacts of information technology: is

actual usage the missing link? Management Science 49 (3), 273–289.

Drumwright, M.E., 1994. Social responsible organizational buying: environmental
concern as a noneconomic buying criterion. Journal of Marketing 58 (2),
1–19.

Economy, E., Lieberthal, K., 2007. Scorched earth: will environmental risks in
China overwhelm its opportunities? Harvard Business Review 85 (6), 88–96.
Fawcett, S.E., Clinton, S.R., 1996. Enhancing logistics performance to improve the
competitiveness of manufacturing organizations. Production and Inventory
Management Journal 37 (1), 40–46.

Ferguson, M.E., Toktay, L.B., 2006. The effect of competition on recovery strategies.

Production and Operations Management 15 (3), 351–368.

Fiksel, J., 1993. Design for environment: the new quality imperative. Corporate

Environmental Strategy 1 (1), 49–55.

Fornell, C., Larcker, D.F., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with
unobserved variables and measurement errors. Journal of Marketing Research
18 (1), 39–50.

Gilley, K.M., Worrell, D.L., Davidson, W.N.I., El-Jelly, A., 2000. Corporate environ-
mental initiatives and anticipated ﬁrm performance: the differential effects of
process-driven versus product-driven greening initiatives. Journal of Manage-
ment 26 (6), 1199–1216.

Gonzalez-Benito, J., Gonzalez-Benito, O., 2005. Environmental proactivity and

business performance: an empirical analysis. Omega 33 (1), 1–15.

GoodElectronics, 2008. Taiwan environmental organizations urge Acer for better
supply chain management: International Network on Human Rights and
Sustainability in Electronics.

Gottberg, A., Morris, J., Pollard, S., Mark-Herbert, C., Cook, M., 2006. Producer
responsibility, waste minimisation and the WEEE Directive: case studies in
eco-design from the European lighting sector. Science of the Total Environ-
ment 359 (1), 38–56.

Grant, R.M., 1996. Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic

Management Journal 17 (Winter Special Issue), 109–122.

Grewal, R., Chandrashekaran, M., Dwyer, F.R., 2009. Navigating local environments
with global strategies: a contingency model of multinational subsidiary
performance. Marketing Science, doi10.1287/mksc.1070.0353.

Guide, V.D.R.J., Van Wassenhove, L.N., 2001. Managing product

returns
remanufacturing. Production and Operations Management 10 (2),

for
142–155.

Gunasekaran, A., Lai, K.-H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2008. Responsive supply chain: a

competitive strategy in a networked economy. Omega 36 (4), 549–564.

Handﬁeld, R.B., Walton, S.V., Seegers, L.K., Melnyk, S.A., 1997. ‘Green’ value chain
practices in the furniture industry. Journal of Operations Management 15 (3),
293–315.

Hart, S.L., 1995. A natural-resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Academy of Manage-

ment Review 20 (4), 986–1014.

Henrysson, S., 1963. Correlation of item-total correlations in item analysis.

Psychometrika 28 (2), 211–218.

Hindo, B., Arndt, M., 2006. Everything old is new again. Business Week 3999 (1),

65–70.

Hunt, C.B., Auster, E.R., 1990. Proactive environmental management: avoiding the

toxic trap. Sloan Management Review 31 (2), 7–18.

Jabbour, C.J.C., 2008. In the eye of the storm: exploring the introduction of
environmental issues in the production function in Brazillian companies,
International
Journal of Production Research. doi:10.1080/001075408024-
25401.

Kim, S.S., Malhotra, N.K., 2005. A longitudinal model of continued IS use: an
integrative view of four mechanisms underlying postadoption phenomena.
Management Science 51 (5), 741–755.

King, A., 2007. Cooperation between cooperations and environmental groups: a
transaction cost perspective. Academy of Management Review 32 (3),
889–900.

King, A.A., Lenox, M.J., Terlaak, A., 2005. Strategic use of decentralized institutions:
exploring certiﬁcation with the ISO14001 management standard. Academy of
Management Journal 48 (6), 1091–1106.

Klassen, R.D., McLaughlin, C.P., 1996. The impact of environmental management

on ﬁrm performance. Management Science 42 (8), 119–1214.

Konar, S., Cohen, M.A., 2001. Does the market value environmental performance.

The Review of Economics and Statistics 83 (2), 281–289.

Koufteros, X., Marcoulides, G.A., 2006. Product development practices and perfor-
mance: a structural equation modeling-based multi-group analysis. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Economics 103 (2), 286–307.

Koufteros, X.A., Cheng, T.C.E., Lai, K.H., 2007a. ’’Black-box’’ and ’’gray-box’’ supplier
integration in product development: antecedents, consequences and the
moderating role of ﬁrm size. Journal of Operations Management 25 (4),
847–870.

Koufteros, X.A., Nahm, A.Y., Cheng, T.C.E., Lai, K.H., 2007b. An empirical assessment
of a nomological network of organizational design constructs: from culture to
structure to pull production to performance. International Journal of Produc-
tion Economics 106 (2), 468–492.

Kovacs, G., 2008. Corporate environmental responsibility in the supply chain.

Journal of Cleaner Production 16 (15), 1571–1578.

Lai, K.H., 2009. Linking exchange governance with supplier cooperation and
commitment: a case of container terminal operations. Journal of Business
Logistics 30 (1), 243–263.

Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2009. Just-in-Time Logistics. Gower Publishing, England.
Lai, K.H., Wong, C.W.Y., 2012. Green logistics management and performance: some
empirical evidence from Chinese manufacturing exporters. Omega 40,
267–282.

Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., Tang, A.K.Y., 2010. Green retailing: factors for success.

California Management Review 52 (2), 6–31.

Lai, K.H., Lun, Y.H.V., Wong, C.W.Y., Cheng, T.C.E., 2011. Green shipping practices in
the shipping industry: conceputualization, adoption and implications.
Resources Conservation and Recycling 55 (6), 559–566.

Lambert, D.M., Harrington, T.C., 1990. Measuring nonresponse bias in customer

service mail surveys. Journal of Business Logistics 11 (2), 5–25.

Lamming, R., Hampson, J., 1996. The environment as a supply chain management

issue. British Journal of Management 7 (Special Issue), S45–S62.

Lee, S.-Y., Klassen, R.D., 2008. Drivers and enablers that foster environmental
management capability in small- and medium-sized suppliers in supply
chains. Production and Operations Management 17 (6), 573–586.

Leung, R., 2004. Facilitating DfE in enterprises: the Taiwan Green Design Network.
2004 International IEEE Conference on Asian Green Electronics (AGEC). IEEE.
Lewis, H., Gertsakis, J., 2001. Design and Environment. Greenleaf Publishing,

Shefﬁeld.

Lindell, M.K., Whitney, D.J., 2001. Accounting for common method variance in

cross-sectional designs. Journal of Applied Psychology 86 (1), 114–121.

Lu, C.S., 2007. Evaluating key resources and capabilities for liner shipping services.

Transport Reviews 27 (3), 285–310.

Lu, L.Y.Y., Wu, C.H., Kuo, T.C., 2007. Environmental principles applicable to green
supplier evaluation by using multi-objective decision analysis. International
Journal of Production Research 45 (18–19), 4317–4331.

Lun, Y.H.V., Lai, K.H., Ng, C.T.D., Wong, C.W.Y., Cheng, T.C.E., 2011. Editorial:
research in shipping and transport logistics. International Journal of Shipping
and Transport Logistics 3 (1), 1–5.

Malhotra, N.K., Kim, S.S., Patil, A., 2006. Common method variance in IS research:
a comparison of alternative approaches and a reanalysis of past research.
Management Science 52 (12), 1865–1883.

Marino, K.E., 1996. Developing consensus on ﬁrm competencies and capabilities.

Academy of Management Executive 10 (3), 40–51.

Marsh, H.W., Hocevar, D., 1985. Application of conﬁrmatory factor analysis to the
study of self-concept: ﬁrst and higher order factor models and their invariance
across groups. Psychological Bulletin 97 (3), 562–582.

Michaelis, P., 1995. Product stewardship, waste minimization and economic
Journal of Environment Planning and

efﬁciency: lessons from Germany.
Management 38 (2), 231–243.

Milgrom, P., Qian, Y., Roberts,

J., 1991. Complementarities, momentum, and
the evolution of modern manufacturing. American Economic Review 81 (2),
84–88.

Min, H., Galle, W.P., 2001. Green purchasing purchases of US ﬁrms. International

Journal of Operations and Production Management 21 (9), 1222–1238.

Ministry of Finance, R. O. C., 2009. /www.mof.gov.twS.
Novak, S., Eppinger, S.D., 2001. Sourcing by design: product complexity and the

supply chain. Management Science 47 (1), 189–204.

Nunnally, J., 1984. Psychometric Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Pagell, M., Krumwiede, D.W., Sheu, C., 2007. Efﬁcacy of environment and supplier
relationship investments—moderating effects of external environment. Inter-
national Journal of Production Economics 45 (9), 2005–2028.

Porter, M.E., van der Linde, C., 1995a. Green and competitive: ending the

stalemate. Harvard Business Review 73 (5), 120–134.

Porter, M.E., van der Linde, C., 1995b. Toward a new conception of the
environment–competitiveness relationship. Journal of Economic Perspectives
9 (4), 97–118.

Preuss, L., 2001. Is dirty chains? Purchasing and greener manufacturing. Journal of

Business Ethics 34 (34), 345–359.

Klassen, R.D., Vachon, S., 2003. Collaboration and evaluation in the supply chain:
the impact on plant-level environment investment. Production and Operations
Management 12 (3), 336–352.

Rao, P., Holt, D., 2005. Do green supply chains lead to competitiveness and
economic performance. International Journal of Operations and Production
Management 25 (4), 898–916.

Kleindorfer, P.P., Singhal, K., van Wassenhove, L.N., 2005. Sustainable operations

Reinhardt, F.L., 1998. Environmental product differentiation: implications for

management. Production and Operations Management 14 (4), 482–492.

corporate strategy. California Management Review 40 (4), 43–73.

Kleiner, A., 1991. What does it mean to be green? Harvard Business Review 69 (4),

Rogers, D., Tibben-Lembke, R., 2001. An examination of reverse logistics practices.

38–47.

Journal of Business Logistics 22 (2), 129–148.


294

C.W.Y. Wong et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 140 (2012) 283–294

Rothenberg, S., Pil, K.F., Maxwell, J., 2001. Lean, green, and the quest for superior
environmental performance. Production and Operations Management 10 (3),
228–243.

Russo, M.V., Fouts, P.A., 1997. A resource-based perspective on corporate environ-
mental performance and proﬁtability. Academy of Management Journal 40 (3),
534–559.

Sarkis, J., Zhu, Q.H., Lai, K.H., 2011. An organizational theoretic review of green
Journal of Production

International

supply chain management literature.
Economics 130 (1), 1–15.

Schuler, D.A., Cording, M., 2006. A corporate social performance—corporate
ﬁnancial performance behavioral model for consumers. Academy of Manage-
ment Review 31 (3), 540–558.

Seuring, S., 2004. Integrated chain management and supply chain management
comparative analysis and illustrative cases. Journal of Cleaner Production 12
(4), 1059–1071.

Snir, E.M., 2001. Liability as a catalyst for product stewardship. Production and

Operations Management 20 (2), 109–206.

Tan, J.J., Litschert, R.J., 1994. Environment–strategy relationship and its perfor-
mance implications: an empirical study of the Chinese electronics industry.
Strategic Management Journal 15 (1), 1994.

The Associated Press, 2008. Probe sees poor US policing of electronic exportsIn-

ternational Herald Tribune.

The Economist Intelligent Unit, 2008. How technology sectors grow: benchmark-

ing IT industry competitiveness 2008.

Vachon, S., Klassen, R.D., 2007. Supply chain management and environmental
Journal of Production

International

technologies: the role of integration.
Research 45 (2), 401–423.

van Hamel, C., Cramer, J., 2002. Barriers and stimuli for ecodesign in SMEs. Journal

of Cleaner Production 10 (5), 439–453.

Wernerfeit, B., 1994. A resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management

Journal 5 (2), 171–189.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E., 2009. Complementarities and alignment of
information systems management and supply chain management. Interna-
tional Journal of Shipping and Transport Logistics 1 (2), 156–171.

Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.H., Cheng, T.C.E. Value of information integration to supply
chain management: roles of internal and external contingencies. Journal of
Management Information Systems, forthcoming.

Yang, J., Wang, J., Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.-H., 2008. Relational stability and alliance

performance in supply chain. Omega 36 (4), 600–608.

Yang, J., Wong, C.W.Y., Lai, K.-H., Ntoko, A.N., 2009. The antecedents of dyadic
quality of performance and its effect on buyer–supplier relationship improve-
ment. International Journal of Production Economics 102 (1), 243–251.

Yeung, A.C.L., Cheng, T.C.E., Lai, K.H., 2005. An empirical model for managing
quality in the electronics industry. Production and Operations Management 14
(2), 189–204.

Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J., 2004. Relationships between operational practices and perfor-
mance among early adopters of green supply chain management practices in
Chinese manufacturing enterprises. Journal of Operations Management 22 (3),
265–289.

Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J., Cordeiro, J.J., Lai, K.-H., 2008. Firm-level correlates of emergent
green supply chain management practices in the Chinese context. Omega 36
(4), 577–591.

Zhu, Q.H., Geng, Y., Lai, K.H., 2011. Environmental supply chain cooperation and its
effect on the circular economy practice–performance relationship among
Chinese manufacturers. Journal of Industrial Ecology 15 (3), 405–419.

Zhu, Q.H., Sarkis, J., Geng, Y., 2005. Green supply chain management in China:
pressures, practices, and performance. International Journal of Operations and
Production Management 25 (5), 449–468.

Zhu, Q.H., Sarkis, J., Lai, K.-H., 2008. Green supply chain management implications

for closing the loop. Transportation Research Part E 44 (1), 1–18.

Zhu, Q.H., Sarkis, J., Lai, K.H., 2007. Initiatives and outcomes of green supply chain
management implementation by Chinese manufacturers. Journal of Environ-
mental Management 85 (1), 179–189.

Zhu, Q.H., Sarkis, J., Lai, K.H., 2011. An institutional theoretic investigation on the
links between internationalization of Chinese manufacturers and their envir-
onmental supply chain management. Resources Conservation and Recycling
55 (6), 623–630.

