THE EFFECT OF PSYCHOLOGICAL CLIMATE FOR INNOVATION ON 

SALESPEOPLE’S CREATIVITY AND TURNOVER INTENTION

Guangping Wang and Xiaoqin Ma

Psychological climate for innovation (PCI) has received little attention in sales research, although psychological climate 
as a general construct has been studied extensively in social psychology. This study examines two outcomes of PCI in the 
sales context: salespeople’s creativity and voluntary turnover intention (VTI). We conceptualize and test a partial mediating 
mechanism composed of learning orientation and job satisfaction. Data collected from a sample of business-to-business 
salespeople from multiple companies in the northeast United States provide general support for the model. Overall, PCI is 
found to enhance sales creativity and reduce VTI. It positively affects salespeople’s learning orientation and job satisfaction, 
and learning orientation further enhances job satisfaction and sales creativity. However, job satisfaction actually reduces 
creativity. While PCI positively influences creativity through learning orientation, it exerts a negative effect through job 
satisfaction. Finally, we find that PCI reduces VTI both directly and indirectly through its positive effects on learning 
orientation and job satisfaction. The results offer insights and challenges for sales managers on how to retain a learning 
and creative sales force in an innovative work environment.

Firms have grown increasingly dependent on innovation and 
creativity to compete and survive (Hamel 2006). The resource 
advantage theory of competition suggests that the ultimate 
source of competitive advantage is human resources, as orga-
nizational innovativeness essentially resides in the employees 
(Barney 1991). In order to develop a sustainable competitive 
advantage based on innovation, companies must encourage 
employees  to  try  new  ideas,  and  need  to  retain  innovative 
employees for as long as they are creative. Thus, for organiza-
tions striving for continuous innovation, it is critical to cre-
ate a climate that values, encourages, and fosters innovation; 
that is, to create a psychological climate for innovation (PCI) 
(Scott and Bruce 1994). Psychological climate has long been 
of interest in management and psychology, and researchers 
have examined psychological climate in relation to different 
job  outcome  variables,  such  as  job  satisfaction  (Schneider 
and Snyder 1975), burnout (McIntosh 1995), job involve-
ment  (Brown  and  Leigh  1996),  organizational  citizenship 
behavior (Moorman 1991), and job performance (Pritchard 
and Karasick 1973). Although organizational climate is widely 
recognized as critical for organizational effectiveness in man-
agement research and the climate for innovation is emerging 
as an area of great promise, relatively little attention has been 
paid to PCI, a climate construct that is increasingly relevant 

Guangping Wang  (Ph.D.,  Louisiana  State  University),  Associate 
Professor of Marketing, School of Graduate and Professional Studies, 
Pennsylvania State University, gww10@psu.edu. 
Xiaoqin Ma (Ph.D., Jilin University), Lecturer of Marketing, School 
of Business, Yancheng Institute of Technology, China, jasminemxq@
gmail.com.

and  crucial  in  today’s  innovation-driven  market  (Parker  et 
al. 2003).

In sales force management, research on organizational cli-
mate is scarce and sporadic. For example, Tyagi (1985) looked 
at the relationships among five climate variables (i.e., leader-
ship, job challenge and variety, job autonomy, organizational 
identification, and perceived inequality) and the attractive-
ness of extrinsic and intrinsic rewards, and found that most 
of these climate perceptions were related to the importance 
of the two types of rewards. Strutton, Pelton, and Lumpkin 
(1993) studied the effect of seven climate facets (i.e., fairness, 
cohesion, recognition, innovation, autonomy, pressure, and 
preeminence of profit motive) on the salespeople’s trust in their 
sales manager. Evans et al. (2007) investigated three climate 
variables (customer orientation, sales supportiveness, and sales 
innovativeness) as mediators between the sales control system 
and two job outcomes, and found innovativeness (a climate) 
to be positively related to job satisfaction but not to outcome 
performance. A number of other studies have examined ethical 
climate in its relationship with various job outcomes (Babin, 
Boles, and Robin 2000; Fournier et al. 2010; Jaramillo, Mulki, 
and Solomon 2006). Overall, sales force research has yet to 
fully embrace the climate factors to explain the key sales job 
variables such as turnover and retention (Boles et al. 2012), 
and there is surprisingly little research on PCI. As a result, 
our understanding of the relationship between PCI and the 
salesperson job outcome variables is limited.

The authors are grateful for the constructive feedback and invaluable 
guidance from the three anonymous reviewers and the editor.

Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, vol. XXXIII, no. 4 (fall 2013), pp. 373–387.
© 2013 PSE National Educational Foundation. All rights reserved. Permissions: www.copyright.com
ISSN 0885–3134 (print) / ISSN 1557–7813 (online)
DOI: 10.2753/PSS0885-3134330402


374 

Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management

Salespeople are not often recognized as creative, as creative 
employees generally refer to knowledge workers such as sci-
entists,  engineers,  artists,  performers,  designers,  architects, 
and  so  on.  However,  salespeople  do  have  to  be  creative  in 
performing their job in situations that call for novel solutions 
(Brooks 2002; Wang and Netemeyer 2004). Sales research has 
highlighted the importance of adaptive selling to sales perfor-
mance and customer relationship management (Weitz, Sujan, 
and Sujan 1986). As such, sales managers face the challenge of 
fostering creativity and retaining creative and high-performing 
salespeople (Darmon 2004; Lopez and McMillan-Capehart 
2009; Wang and Netemeyer 2004).

Given the lack of research on PCI in the sales area and 
the challenges that sales managers face when managing and 
retaining  a  creative  sales  force,  this  study  aims  to  examine 
the  relationship  between  PCI  and  two  outcome  variables: 
salespeople’s job creativity and voluntary turnover intention 
(VTI). Based on the extant literature on climate and sales, we 
identify learning orientation and job satisfaction as a partial 
mediating  mechanism,  through  which  PCI  enhances  sales 
creativity and reduces VTI.

Although  turnover  intention  is  not  the  same  as  actual 
turnover, VTI is important in its own right for a number of 
reasons. It is the strongest direct predictor of actual turnover 
behavior, as shown in numerous studies (e.g., Griffeth, Hom, 
and Gaertner 2000); it avoids the unexplainable factors beyond 
employees’ control that cause them to terminate the employ-
ment relationship; and it also captures those dysfunctional 
cases when the salespeople have the intention but fail to leave, 
and their work engagement might decrease, causing reduction 
in job performance and customer service (Hausknecht, Trevor, 
and Howard 2009; McNeilly and Russ 1992).

Our main contribution is twofold. First, we establish a sel-
dom studied link between PCI and VTI. Sales force turnover 
is a perennial issue that has puzzled researchers and practi-
tioners for decades (Boles et al. 2012; DeConinck 2011; Yi, 
Nataraajan, and Gong 2011). Numerous possible antecedents 
have been examined, including personal characteristics, job 
satisfaction and other dimensions of work experience, external 
environment, and job behaviors (Griffeth, Hom, and Gaert-
ner 2000), and climate for innovation can be an additional 
explanatory variable for us to understand turnover, especially 
since organizations are increasingly innovation driven (Boles 
et al. 2012).

Second, we add to the nascent literature on the relation-
ship between contextual factors (e.g., psychological climate) 
and creativity in the sales context (West and Richter 2008). 
Although it has long been recognized that learning and adapt-
ability are key to sales success (Sujan, Weitz, and Kumar 1994; 
Weitz, Sujan, and Sujan 1986), creativity remains an under-
researched area in the sales literature (Evans et al. 2012; Wang 
and Netemeyer 2004). By investigating the effects of PCI on 

learning orientation, job satisfaction, and sales creativity, we 
delineate a mechanism through which organizational climates 
directly and indirectly lead to sales creativity. If creativity is a 
valued contribution salespeople can make, preventing creative 
salespeople from leaving should be of managerial interest to 
sales organizations. As such, our research links two seemingly 
distant research areas (i.e., creativity and turnover) in the sales 
setting, as they are both results of the organization’s innova-
tive climate.

In the remainder of this paper, we first present a conceptual 
model and develop hypotheses relating PCI, mediating vari-
ables (learning orientation and job satisfaction), and outcomes 
(sales creativity and VTI). We then describe an empirical study 
and report study findings. We conclude with a discussion of 
theoretical and managerial implications and future research 
directions.

CONCEPTUAL MODEL AND HYPOTHESES

Empirical research has shown a strong relationship between 
organizational  climate  perceptions  and  job  attitudes  (e.g., 
job satisfaction and organizational commitment), while job 
attitudes may mediate the climate–performance relationship 
(Parker et al. 2003). Building on the extant research on motiva-
tion, learning, and creativity, we propose a conceptual model 
as illustrated in Figure 1. An innovative work climate fosters 
an upbeat environment where workers are encouraged to be 
open-minded, to try new ideas, and to not be afraid of failure 
(Isaksen and Ekvall 2010). Such a climate can be perceived as a 
job resource in the workplace, which is motivational according 
to the job demands-resources model (Bakker and Demerouti 
2007). We argue that PCI may intrinsically motivate salespeo-
ple to learn new knowledge and job skills, which is a fulfilling 
experience, leading to enhanced job satisfaction. Learning and 
job satisfaction in turn affect creativity and turnover intention. 
From the referent cognitions model perspective (Aquino et 
al. 1997), PCI can also be viewed as increasing the likelihood 
of amelioration since innovative organizations are likely to be 
perceived as adaptive to the market environment and have a 
better chance of survival in the future. Thus, we conceptualize 
a positive PCI–creativity relationship and a negative PCI–VTI 
relationship, and propose that the relationships are partially 
mediated by learning orientation and job satisfaction.

Psychological Climate for Innovation

Psychological climate is considered to be a molar construct 
comprising an employee’s psychologically meaningful repre-
sentations  of  proximal  organizational  structures,  processes, 
and events that are assumed to influence the employee’s atti-
tudes and behaviors (Glick 1985; James et al. 1978; Rousseau 
1988).  It  serves  as  a  medium  through  which  employees 


Figure 1 

Conceptual Model

Fall 2013  375 

interpret and understand the environment and enables them 
to impute meaning to organizational events and determine 
the appropriate actions that will lead to desired outcomes, 
and  subsequently  directs  their  energy  to  appropriate  work 
attitudes and behaviors (Jones and James 1979; Parker et al. 
2003). These climate perceptions can be based on different 
situational facets or referents and have been classified into a 
number of categories, including fairness, cohesion, recogni-
tion,  innovation,  autonomy,  pressure,  and  preeminence  of 
profit motive (Koys and DeCotiis 1991; Strutton, Pelton, and 
Lumpkin 1993). Such representations are interpretations of 
organizational events and values based on the individual’s per-
sonal value and knowledge structure, therefore, the construct 
of psychological climate is a property of the individual, and 
the individual is the appropriate level of theory, measurement, 
and analysis. For other constructs such as group climate or 
organizational culture, group or organizational level treatments 
are more suitable (Jones and James 1979; Parker et al. 2003; 
Rousseau 1988).

PCI  refers  to  the  employee’s  perception  of  the  practices 
and  norms  supported  by  an  organization  that  encourage 
employees to take initiative and explore and develop new ideas, 
processes,  or  products  that  benefit  the  organization  (Scott 
and Bruce 1994; West et al. 2003). In the sales organization, 
such a climate is reflected in perceived openness-mindedness 
and flexibility to encourage and accept new ways of problem 
solving in relation to the sales function (Evans et al. 2007). An 
innovative climate is suggested to promote employee adapt-
ability and improve job performance in general (Hellriegel 
and Slocum 1974).

Only  limited  research  has  been  conducted  in  the  sales 
context with regard to the effect of climate on salespeople’s 
job attitudes. For instance, Strutton, Pelton, and Lumpkin 

(1993) investigated the effect of seven psychological climates 
on salespeople’s trust in their sales manager, and found that 
six  of  them  (fairness,  cohesion,  recognition,  innovation, 
autonomy,  and  the  absence  of  the  preeminence  of  profit 
motive) were positively related to trust. Evans et al. (2007) 
studied  three  climate  variables  (customer  orientation,  sales 
supportiveness, and sales innovativeness) as mediators between 
formal sales controls and job outcomes, and found that sales 
innovativeness is positively related to job satisfaction but not to 
outcome performance. Our focus is on one particular climate 
dimension, climate for innovation, as an explanatory variable 
for sales creativity and VTI.

Learning Orientation

Conditions in the work environment can influence the sales-
person’s  goal  orientation  (Amabile  et  al.  1996;  Ames  and 
Archer 1988). Researchers have suggested two motivational 
goal orientations in the workplace: learning and performance. 
Learning orientation refers to the salesperson’s motivation to 
pursue the goal of learning new knowledge and skills related 
to the sales job (DeShon and Gillespie 2005). It promotes 
an enjoyment of the process of discovering how to sell more 
effectively in different and challenging sales situations. Sales-
people with a strong learning orientation are willing to experi-
ment with different approaches and they value the feelings of 
personal growth and the mastery they derive from their job 
challenges (Sujan, Weitz, and Kumar 1994). In contrast, sales-
people with a strong performance orientation are motivated 
by, and focus on, sales results and favorable evaluations from 
their peers and superiors, and tend to avoid the uncertainty 
related to new and challenging situations and experimentation 
in the sales process.


376 

Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management

Motivation theory suggests that an organizational climate 
that promotes individual initiatives and creativity is likely to 
resonate  with  the  intrinsic  human  need  for  ingenuity  and 
exploration (Deci and Ryan 2002). Such a climate is also a 
valuable resource for salespeople to acquire new knowledge 
and skills as they can count on organizational, supervisory, and 
peer support for their learning effort (Bakker and Demerouti 
2007). Thus, one direct effect of PCI may be to promote a 
learning environment (Senge 1990) that motivates a learning 
orientation  among  salespeople  (Sujan,  Weitz,  and  Kumar 
1994; Van  der  Sluis  2004).  As  such,  we  propose  that  PCI 
encourages  salespeople  to  engage  in  a  continuous  effort  to 
acquire new skills, learn about different problems, and examine 
alternative solutions to sales problems:

Hypothesis 1: PCI positively affects salespeople’s learning 
orientation.

Job Satisfaction

Job satisfaction is one of the most critical job attitudes in the 
workplace. It refers to a pleasurable emotional state that arises 
from a perceived relationship between what is desired and what 
is received from a job (Locke 1976). Although job satisfaction 
may be conceptualized as a multidimensional construct con-
sisting of various facets such as satisfaction with pay, coworkers, 
and supervisors, it is treated here as a global, summary attitude 
reflecting a salesperson’s overall affective evaluation of the job 
(Netemeyer et al. 1997). Research has demonstrated that job 
satisfaction is related to many other important job outcomes, 
including performance and turnover (Bridges, Johnston, and 
Sager 2007; Childers, Dubinsky, and Skinner 1990). Since 
salespeople are boundary-spanning employees, their job satis-
faction will affect customer satisfaction in a fundamental way, 
which will then affect firm market performance, and therefore 
deserves special attention (Sharma 2012).

For  the  salesperson  with  a  high  learning  orientation, 
acquiring new knowledge, devising new solutions, and test-
ing new selling approaches can be a satisfying experience by 
itself. Research has shown that learning orientation motivates 
salespeople to work both smarter and harder as they enjoy 
the selling process and continue striving in the face of failure 
and  difficulty  (Ames  and  Archer  1988;  Sujan,  Weitz,  and 
Kumar 1994). An interest in learning about different custom-
ers  and  sales  situations  is  likely  to  increase  task  enjoyment 
(Sujan,  Weitz,  and  Sujan  1988).  Learning  orientation  has 
been found to be positively related to adaptive selling, sales 
performance, and job satisfaction (Park and Holloway 2003). 
We thus expect learning orientation to enhance salespeople’s 
job satisfaction:

Salespeople  in  an  innovative  working  environment  are 
encouraged to experiment with new ideas; they are responsible 
for serving customer needs and solving customer problems 
in  new  and  creative  ways.  As  such,  while  PCI  promotes 
salespeople’s  learning,  salespeople  may  experience  greater 
excitement  by  just  being  in  a  creative  environment  and 
being  part  of  an  innovative  group  (Brief  and  Nord  1990; 
Hackman and Oldham 1980). This process is likely to fulfill 
their  intrinsic  needs  for  personal  value  and  growth,  lead-
ing to a heightened sense of personal accomplishment and 
enrichment (Bandura 1997) and resulting in a higher level 
of  psychological  empowerment  (Spreitzer  1995; Thomas 
and Velthouse 1990). Thomas and Tymon (1994) argue that 
assessments of empowerment generate intrinsic rewards and 
thus should be positively related to job satisfaction. The sense 
of accomplishment through adaptation and innovation has 
been found to contribute to job attractiveness (Ford, Walker, 
and Churchill 1985). There is also empirical evidence that an 
innovative sales climate enhances job satisfaction (Evans et al. 
2007). Therefore, we hypothesize:

Hypothesis 3: PCI positively affects job satisfaction.

Sales Creativity

Creativity  in  the  workplace  involves  employee  production 
of useful and novel ideas in relation to the firm’s products, 
services, processes, and operations so that the firm is better 
able to deal with changes and uncertainty in the competi-
tive market (Gilson et al. 2005). Sales creativity refers to the 
salesperson’s sales-related behaviors and ideas that are novel 
and useful and that can potentially increase sales effectiveness 
and efficiency (Scott and Bruce 1994; Wang and Netemeyer 
2004). Creative salespeople generate novel responses that are 
more effective or more efficient in dealing with the tasks at 
hand and use them to their advantage (Wang and Netemeyer 
2004). Such creative responses may take the form of refining 
existing procedures, devising new processes, and developing 
new  techniques to  improve  customer service, reduce costs, 
expand distribution, or reach new customers.

Creativity and knowledge are intertwined (Weisberg 1999). 
An elaborate knowledge structure enables the salesperson to 
identify problems and devise new solutions (Szymanski 1988). 
A learning orientation helps update the knowledge and infor-
mation related to technology, customers, and the competition 
(Kohli,  Shervani,  and  Challagalla  1998;  Sujan, Weitz,  and 
Kumar 1994; Wang and Netemeyer 2002). Knowledge acqui-
sition through continuous learning is a critical contributor 
to creativity and innovation (Senge 1990). As such, learning 
orientation is likely to enhance salespeople’s creativity:

Hypothesis  2:  Learning  orientation  positively  affects  job 
satisfaction.

Hypothesis 4: Salespeople’s learning orientation positively 
affects sales creativity.


The relationship between job satisfaction and sales creativity 
is a peculiar one and deserves discussion. On the one hand, 
both job satisfaction and creativity are associated with intrinsic 
motivation and thus should be positively associated; jobs that 
allow and encourage more creative performance also increase 
the  worker’s  intrinsic  motivation  and  satisfaction  (Amabile 
1988). The experience of positive affect associated with job 
satisfaction has been suggested to increase expectancy, open-
mindedness,  and  self-efficacy,  which  could  lead  to  greater 
creativity (Bandura 1997; Isen, Daubman, and Nowicki 1987; 
Staw, Sutton, and Pelled 1994). The job enrichment model 
suggests that jobs requiring a variety of skills are more likely 
to motivate and satisfy employees, who will then exhibit more 
creativity (Hackman and Oldham 1980). A large-scale study 
reveals that job satisfaction, creativity requirements, and accom-
modating work environments go hand in hand (Shalley, Gilson, 
and Blum 2000). Gallivan (2003) examined the relationship 
between  creative  styles  and  job  satisfaction  and  found  that 
innovators enjoyed a higher level of job satisfaction than adapt-
ers. Nerkar, McGrath, and MacMillan (1996) found that job 
satisfaction was positively related to the innovative performance 
of teams. Wang and Netemeyer (2004), in their development 
of a salesperson creative performance scale, demonstrated that 
sales creativity is positively related to job satisfaction.

However, there are reasons to believe that job satisfaction 
and creativity may be negatively related. First, many creative 
ideas to change the way things are done may stem from less 
than  satisfactory  work  situations  (e.g.,  existing  processes 
and policies or prevailing mental models), whereas satisfied 
employees may be content with the status quo, grow over-
confident with their skills, hesitate to change, and thus be 
less likely to initiate innovative ideas. Just like many mature 
organizations, salespeople who are too comfortable with the 
status quo may become complacent and unwilling to change 
(Sinkula 2002).

Second,  innovative  employees  tend  to  experience  more 
conflict  and  tension  in  the  workplace  than  others  (Isaksen 
and Kaufmann 1990). Although both positive and negative 
types of tension are possible, they are stressors that can lead to 
dissatisfaction (Isaksen and Ekvall 2010). However, research 
has even demonstrated that dissatisfaction can lead to greater 
creativity if the work environment is supportive of innovation 
(Zhou and George 2001). Positive affect from job satisfaction 
can  be  less  conducive,  while  negative  mood  may  be  more 
conducive, to creativity (George and Zhou 2002). A study 
on artist employees shows that while artists with a creative 
personality working in an creative environment demonstrated 
a good level of job satisfaction, the most creative artists were 
actually the least satisfied with their jobs (Runco 1995).

Third, sales creativity is different from creativity in other 
domains in that salespeople face many organizational con-
straints since company rules and policies must be adhered to, 

Fall 2013  377 

and that creative, untried ideas carry great risks and uncer-
tainty in terms of customer reactions and sales outcomes. If 
customers  respond  negatively  to  the  new  ideas,  both  sales 
revenue  and  customer  relationship  may  suffer,  resulting  in 
reduced performance for the salesperson and the company. 
From an agency theory perspective, salespeople, as employees, 
are generally risk averse (Bergen, Dutta, and Walker 1992). It 
is therefore reasonable to surmise that when things are going 
well and salespeople are satisfied with the job situation, they 
may be less motivated to take risks and try new sales ideas.

In light of the above discussion, given that sales creativity 
as an outcome of job satisfaction has received little attention, 
we put forward two competing hypotheses on the relationship 
between job satisfaction and sales creativity:

Hypothesis  5a:  Job  satisfaction  positively  affects  sales 
creativity.

Hypothesis  5b:  Job  satisfaction  negatively  affects  sales 
creativity.

PCI  may  also  directly  influence  salespeople’s  creativity. 
Research suggests that employee creativity in organizations is 
affected by the work environment. Organizational support for 
innovation is a valuable motivational resource and has been 
found to positively influence employees’ innovative behavior 
(Scott and Bruce 1994). Encouragement for innovation oper-
ating at organizational, supervisory, and work group levels has 
been demonstrated to be fundamental to employee creativity 
(Amabile et al. 1996). A constructive and responsive evaluation 
and reward system that encourages innovation and creativity 
can be highly motivating and conducive to creativity (Abbey 
and Dickson 1983; Deci and Ryan 1985). Innovative firms 
are often the ones that promote diversity, encourage experi-
mentations, and provide adequate resources that are critical 
for innovation (Amabile 1983, 1988). When salespeople feel 
that innovation and creativity are supported and encouraged, 
they are more likely to experiment with new ideas to sell and 
to serve customers. Therefore, we hypothesize:

Hypothesis 6: PCI positively affects sales creativity.

Turnover Intention

The relationship between job satisfaction and turnover inten-
tion has been studied extensively, and empirical evidence is 
strong for a negative correlation between the two variables 
(Brown and Peterson 1993; Jaros 1997; Yi, Nataraajan, and 
Gong 2011). A meta-analysis shows that while various job 
attitudes may predict turnover, work satisfaction is one of the 
strongest predictors, and the decision to leave is most often 
initiated  by  the  experience  of  job  dissatisfaction  (Griffeth, 
Hom,  and  Gaertner  2000).  Generally,  given  alternatives, 
people are more likely to stay when they are satisfied with 


378 

Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management

their job than when they are not. Sales research also suggests 
the same (Jones et al. 1996; Speier and Venkatesh 2002). VTIs 
indicate that employees’ dissatisfaction with the employment 
relationship  and  quitting  the  job  is  one  of  the  most  overt 
ways for employees to react to job dissatisfaction (Rousseau 
2003). Thus,

Hypothesis 7: Job satisfaction negatively affects VTI.

The mediation effect of learning orientation and job satis-
faction on VTI is likely to be partial rather than complete, as 
PCI may influence VTI through other factors. For instance, 
higher levels of organizational innovativeness push firms to 
become more entrepreneurial internally and more competitive 
externally (Ribeiro-Soriano and Urbano 2010). These orga-
nizations gain competitive advantage in this knowledge- and 
innovation-based economy, and are more likely to survive and 
excel in the marketplace (Kontoghiorghes 2003). Firms with 
better chances of long-term survival are more likely to provide 
job security and stability and therefore are better able to retain 
their employees and reduce VTI. The innovative climate may 
provide a source for referent cognitions that the company is 
adaptive and will do well or better in the future (Aquino et al. 
1997). Even if salespeople are faced with a less than satisfactory 
situation, such cognitions may send positive signals about the 
firm’s promising future, and as a result they are more likely to 
stay than to leave. Given a likely partial mediation, we expect 
a direct effect of PCI on VTI:

Hypothesis 8: PCI negatively affects VTI.

METHOD

Sample and Data Collection

We  made  personal  contact  with  businesses  located  in  a 
large  metropolitan  area  in  the  northeastern  United  States. 
Twenty  companies  with  an  active  internal  sales  force  were 
invited to participate in the survey, and 11 of them agreed to 
allow their salespeople to participate. These firms employed 
between  7  and  53  business-to-business  field  salespeople  at 
the participating locations. The survey was delivered to the 
sales managers who then distributed the survey to their sales-
people. After completion, the surveys were returned to the 
researchers  directly  in  postage-paid  envelopes  to  maintain 
confidentiality  and  anonymity.  A  total  of  210  completed, 
usable  surveys  were  received  from  salespeople  in  these  11 
firms, representing 90 percent of all the salespeople employed 
by these firms. The firms were from the following industries: 
pharmaceutical (3 firms), financial (4 firms), electronics (2 
firms), commercial printing (1 firm), and advertising (1 firm). 
The median annual firm sales revenue was in the $50 million 
to $100 million range. All of the respondents were selling to 
business  customers.  Sixty-four  percent  of  the  respondents 

were male, and 42 percent were in the 30–39 age bracket. 
The median annual income of the respondents was between 
$80,000 and $100,000. To assess possible nonresponse bias, 
we compared the annual sales of the previous year, the number 
of employees, and the number of salespeople between the 11 
responding firms and the 9 nonresponding ones, and found 
no significant difference.

Measures

All of the measurement items were culled from the existing 
literature and adapted to the study setting. PCI was measured 
with four items adapted from Scott and Bruce (1994). The 
items ask respondents whether innovation and creativity are 
encouraged, respected, and rewarded in their organization. 
Learning  orientation  was  measured  with  four  items  modi-
fied from Sujan, Weitz, and Kumar (1994), evaluating the 
salespeople’s willingness and effort to learn new job-related 
knowledge and skills. Job satisfaction was assessed with three 
items adapted from Netemeyer et al. (1997). The items tapped 
general feelings about the salesperson’s job. Sales creativity was 
measured with three items adapted from Wang and Netemeyer 
(2004), assessing the frequency with which salespeople exhibit 
certain creative behaviors. The items were anchored on scales 
ranging from 1 = “practically never” to 5 = “almost always.” 
VTI was measured with three items adapted from Rusbult 
et  al.  (1988). We  asked  the  respondents  “How  would  you 
rate your chance of quitting working for this company?” and 
the responses were anchored on 1 = “very low” to 5 = “very 
high” for three future time frames (sometime in the next year, 
sometime in the next two years, and sometime in the next 
three years). With the exception of sales creativity and VTI, 
the other constructs were measured on five-point Likert scales 
(1 = “strongly disagree” to 5 = “strongly agree”). All of the 
measures are presented in Table 1.

ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

Measurement Reliability and Validity

We assessed the psychometric properties of our measures using 
confirmatory factor analysis. The measurement model includes 
5 latent constructs with 17 manifest indicators. The fit statistics 
were as follows: χ2 = 366.15 (df [degrees of freedom] = 109), 
root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) = 0.069 
(90 percent confidence interval = 0.062~0.077), nonnormed 
fit index (NNFI) = 0.96, comparative fit index (CFI) = 0.97, 
goodness-of-fit index (GFI) = 0.92, and adjusted goodness-of-
fit index (AGFI) = 0.89. Therefore, the measurement model is 
deemed to fit the data reasonably well (Hair et al. 2006).

The measures were evaluated in terms of their reliability, 
unidimensionality,  convergent  validity,  and  discriminant 


Measures and Standardized Factor Loadings

Table 1

Measurement

Loading

Fall 2013  379 

Construct

Psychological Climate 

for Innovation

Learning Orientation

Job Satisfaction

In my company, creativity and innovation are always encouraged.
Salespeople’ ability to function creatively is respected by management.
This organization is open and responsive to changes.
The rewards system here encourages innovation.
It is important for me to continuously learn and improve my sales-related skills.
I spend a lot of time learning and finding better approaches to doing my sales job.
I am willing to put in a great deal of effort to learn new sales-related knowledge and skills.
I am always learning something new about my customers.
I feel fairly happy with my present line of work.
All things considered (i.e., pay, promotions, supervisors, coworkers, etc.), I am very satisfied with my 

line of work.

Sales Creativity

I feel a great sense of personal fulfillment from my line of work.
How often do you exhibit the following behaviors? (1 = practically never, 5 = almost always)

Carrying out sales tasks in ways that are resourceful.
Coming up with new ideas to satisfy customer needs.
Generating creative selling ideas.

Voluntary Turnover 

How would you rate your chance of quitting working for this company? (1 = very low, 5 = very high)

Intention

Sometime in the next year
Sometime in the next two years
Sometime in the next three years

0.82
0.78
0.60
0.65
0.82
0.85
0.84
0.73
0.79
0.84

0.88

0.82
0.88
0.73

0.75
0.92
0.81

validity. The average variance extracted (AVE) ranged from 
0.52 to 0.70, and the Cronbach’s alphas from 0.72 to 0.88, 
demonstrating satisfactory reliability. All of the items loaded 
significantly on their expected factors, and the modification 
indices indicated no significant cross-loadings, suggesting con-
vergent validity of the measurement items and unidimension-
ality of the latent constructs. To assess discriminant validity, we 
compared the squared correlation with the average AVE of each 
pair of latent constructs, and found no squared correlation to 
exceed the average AVE for any pair of constructs, in strong 
support of discriminant validity (Fornell and Larcker 1981). 
We also conducted a series of chi-square difference tests for all 
the possible pairs of constructs by comparing a measurement 
model in which the correlation between the two constructs 
was freely estimated and a model in which the correlation was 
constrained to unity. Without exception, the unconstrained 
model fit the data better than the constrained model, demon-
strating the discriminant validity of all the constructs. These 
results indicate acceptable measurement properties. All of the 
measurement items and their standardized factor loadings are 
shown in Table 1, and the means, standard deviations, AVEs, 
correlation matrix, and Cronbach’s alphas of the latent con-
structs are shown in Table 2.

Multicollinearity and Common Method Variance

Although the data exhibited satisfactory measurement prop-
erties, two issues required attention before proceeding with 

hypothesis  testing.  First,  multicollinearity  seems  to  exist 
among the model variables, which may cause biased coeffi-
cient estimates (Grewal, Cote, and Baumgartner 2004; Hair 
et al. 2006). Thus, we assessed the degree of multicollinearity 
by regressing VTI on the other four variables, and found the 
variance inflation factor (VIF) of the independent variables 
to be in the range between 1.284 (PCI) and 2.054 (learning 
orientation), well below the threshold value of 10, and the 
minimum tolerance to be 0.487, much greater than the rec-
ommended 0.10 (Hair et al. 2006). In the structural equation 
context, Grewal, Cote, and Baumgartner (2004) suggest that 
the adverse effects of multicollinearity on estimation accuracy 
occur primarily at the most extreme levels of multicollineareity 
(0.90 or greater), and that when measures are reliable and the 
sample sizes are large, even fairly high levels of multicollinearity 
can be tolerated. Given the reliability of our measures (mini-
mum α is 0.72) and the adequate sample size (sample size to 
free parameter ratio is about 3), we feel that multicollinearity 
should not significantly impact our results.

Second, because all of the construct measures were collected 
with a paper-and-pencil survey instrument, common method 
variance (CMV) may contaminate the model relationships 
(Podsakoff et al. 2003). When designing the survey, we used 
three  different  response  formats  as  described  earlier,  and 
randomized the order of the Likert scale items, which should 
help  mitigate  method  bias.  Harmon’s  one-factor  test  was 
conducted using both exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and 
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) (Craighead et al. 2011). 


380 

Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management

Descriptive Statistics and Construct Correlations

Table 2

1

0.52
0.36
0.58
0.26
–0.38
0.02
0.05
–0.02
3.56
0.80
0.72

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.65
0.55
0.71
–0.23
0.26
0.22
0.02
4.04
0.80
0.88

0.70
0.27
–0.09
0.23
0.07
0.03
4.01
0.70
0.78

0.66
–0.49
0.06
0.19
–0.04
3.61
1.05
0.88

0.69
–0.08
–0.29
0.01
2.47
1.38
0.88

0.52
0.07
0.05
2.45
0.71
0.73

—
0.09
2.57
0.87
—

—
3.86
1.28
—

Climate for Innovation
Learning Orientation
Job Satisfaction
Sales Creativity
Turnover Intention
Use of Sales Teams
Sales Experience
Firm Size
Mean
Standard Deviation
Cronbach’s Alpha

Note: AVEs are on the diagonal.

Five factors emerged from the EFA as expected, and the first 
factor explained only 35 percent of the total variance. The sin-
gle-factor CFA model with all the items loaded on one factor 
had a terrible fit (χ2 = 3,507.85, df = 119, RMSEA = 0.241), 
and the model with five separate constructs fit the data well 
as reported earlier.

To further assess the degree of CMV, we used the CFA with 
a marker variable procedure developed by Williams, Hartman, 
and Cavazotte (2010). We chose “use of sales teams” as the 
marker variable that we believe is theoretically unrelated to 
the model constructs. The variable was measured with three 
items adapted from Homburg, Workman, and Jensen (2002): 
“When  there  is  a  problem  related  to  the  relationship  with 
our key customers, a group is brought in to solve it,” “Major 
customer-related decisions are made by teams,” and “We have 
teams that plan and coordinate activities for our key custom-
ers.” This measure had a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.73. Two of 
the observed correlations between use of sales teams and the 
model constructs were significant: 0.23 for creativity and 0.26 
for learning orientation. All the other correlations were less 
than 0.10 and statistically nonsignificant.

A series of models were progressively estimated based on 
Williams, Hartman, and Cavazotte (2010). The first model 
(Model 1) is a regular CFA model that has the five model con-
structs and the one marker construct. Each construct loaded 
only with its respective indicators (χ2 = 458.81, df = 155). In 
the second model (baseline model), the loadings and error 
variances of the three indicators for use of sales teams were 
fixed at the unstandardized values obtained from Model 1, 
and the correlations between the marker and the five model 
constructs were fixed to zero (χ2 = 523.90, df = 165). The 
third model (constrained model) was the same as the base-
line model except that it had all the 17 indicators of the 5 

substantive model constructs loaded on the marker construct 
(hence, the method factor) and these 17 method loadings were 
constrained to be equal (χ2 = 493.51, df = 164). The fourth 
model (unconstrained model) set the 17 method loadings to 
be freely estimated (χ2 = 399.89, df = 148).

The  chi-square  difference  between  the  constrained  and 
baseline  models  suggests  that  method  variance  existed 
(∆χ2 = 30.39, ∆df = 1, p < 0.01). However, the constrained 
model  had  significantly  worse  fit  than  the  unconstrained 
model (∆χ2 = 93.62, ∆df = 15, p < 0.01), indicating the CMV 
was not uniformly equal across all the indicators, and thus the 
17 method loadings on the marker variable should be freely 
estimated. Nine of the 17 method loadings were significant in 
the unconstrained model. The 5 largest standardized loadings 
were associated with the learning and creativity items and were 
in the 0.20–0.30 range.

Hypothesis Testing

Hypothesis testing was carried out using structural equation 
modeling. Because of the concern for CMV described above, 
we decided to incorporate the marker variable (use of sales 
teams)  in  the  structural  model  (Williams,  Hartman,  and 
Cavazotte  2010).  Also,  because  salespeople’s  attitudes  and 
behaviors may be influenced by some individual and firm char-
acteristics that are not of theoretical interest to this research, 
we included two demographic control variables in the model, 
that is, sales experience and firm size. Sales experience of the 
salesperson was measured in five categories (less than 1 year, 
1–3 years, 4–6 years, 7–9 years, and 10 years or more). Firm 
size was measured with the previous year’s sales revenue in 
five ranges (less than $10 million, $10–19 million, $20–49 
million, $50–100 million, more than $100 million).


Two considerations prompted us to forgo the conventional 
maximum likelihood (ML) parameter estimation in favor of 
a robust maximum likelihood (MLR) estimator available in 
Mplus (Muthen and Muthen 2010). First, since we collected 
data from multiple salespeople employed by each of the 11 
firms, the data are nested and the error terms may be corre-
lated, thus violating the assumption of independent observa-
tions. To rule out the possible influence of such confounding 
factors,  we  assessed  the  intraclass  correlations  (ICC)  and 
design effects (DEFF) of the measurement items (Muthen and 
Satorra 1995). The ICC’s ranged from 0.022 to 0.092, with a 
mean of 0.040, and the DEFF’s ranged from 1.396 to 2.667, 
with an average of 1.722 (below the recommended threshold 
of 2.0), while three items had DEFF’s over 2 (Muthen and 
Satorra 1995). Although data nestedness does not appear to be 
a significant problem as indicated by the ICC’s and DEFF’s, 
a  model  that  incorporates  firms  as  clusters  of  respondents 
will help control for possible firm-level effects. Such a model 
requires the MLR estimator.

Second, several measures seem to deviate from the normal 
distribution.  Learning  and  job  satisfaction  are  negatively 
skewed,  with  z-test  scores  of  –2.68  and  –3.90  (p  <  0.01), 
respectively, while VTI is positively skewed (z = 3.08, p < 0.01), 
thus violating the normality assumption of ML estimation. 
Therefore, to ensure that the nestedness and nonnormality in 
our data do not bias our results, we use the MLR in Mplus for 
model estimation (Muthen and Muthen 2010).

The structural model contained one marker construct to 
capture the CMV, five substantive latent constructs, and two 
control variables, with individual firms as clusters. Following 
Williams, Hartman, and Cavazotte (2010), we estimated two 
structural models. Both models had paths leading from the 
two control variables to four endogenous constructs (learning, 
creativity, job satisfaction, and VTI) that were freely estimated, 
as well as the paths depicted in Figure 1. In both models, the 
loadings and error variances of the marker construct’s own 
indicators were fixed to the unstandardized values obtained 
from the CFA model, and the correlation between the marker 
and PCI was set to zero. The two models differed only in the 
treatment of the marker variable. In the first model (Model A), 
the marker had only its own three indicators loaded on it with 
loadings fixed. In the second (Model B), the marker not only 
had its own three indicators whose loadings were fixed but 
also all 17 substantive indicators whose loadings were freely 
estimated. Thus, Model A gives the path estimates without the 
CMV controlled for, while Model B controls for the CMV.

Model A fit the data well, with the following fit indices: 
χ2 = 461.60 (df = 198), RMSEA = 0.052 (90 percent con-
fidence interval: 0.046~0.058), NNFI = 0.92. CFI = 0.93. 
However, the fit of Model B seemed to be better: χ2 = 373.22 
(df = 181), RMSEA = 0.047 (90 percent confidence interval: 
0.040~0.053), NNFI = 0.94. CFI = 0.95. Using the formula 

Fall 2013  381 

for difference test with scaled chi-square adjusted for nonnor-
mality (Satorra and Bentler 2001), we calculated the chi-square 
difference test statistic to be 78.98 (df = 17, p < 0.01), thus 
concluding that Model B, which controlled for the CMV, was 
the better fitting model.

The standardized structural path estimates are reported in 
Table 3. Although Model B has a significantly better fit than 
Model A, the path estimates between the two models are vir-
tually identical, and thus the results pertaining to hypothesis 
testing are consistent. Most of the hypotheses are supported by 
the data. PCI has a positive effect on learning orientation (sup-
porting H1), which in turn positively affects job satisfaction 
(supporting H2) and sales creativity (supporting H4). PCI also 
significantly improves job satisfaction, confirming H3. With 
regard to the competing hypotheses H5a and H5b, we find 
support for H5b as the path coefficient from job satisfaction 
to sales creativity is negative and significant. As expected, job 
satisfaction significantly and negatively affects VTI (H7). H8 
is also supported by the negative, significant coefficient for the 
direct PCI–VTI path. Contrary to H6, however, the direct 
path from PCI to sales creativity is nonsignificant.

The model explains significant amounts of variance in the 
endogenous constructs. Since the results from the two models 
are highly similar, and Model B is the better fitting one, we 
report here the results from Model B. The R2 values are 0.16 
for  learning  orientation,  0.46  for  job  satisfaction,  0.48  for 
sales creativity, and 0.29 for VTI.

The direct, indirect, and total effects of PCI on sales cre-
ativity are –0.113 (t = 1.257), 0.138 (t = 1.853), and 0.251 
(t = 3.417), respectively. More specifically, the indirect effect 
of PCI on creativity is –0.09 (t = –2.473) through job satis-
faction, –0.023 (t = –1.900) through learning and job satis-
faction, and 0.251 (t = 4.060) through learning orientation. 
As such, the indirect negative effect through job satisfaction 
(–0.090  +  –0.023  =  –0.113)  and  the  direct  positive  effect 
(0.113) are cancelled out almost entirely, and the net effect 
of  PCI  on  creativity  is  positive  and  only  through  learning 
orientation.

The  direct,  indirect,  and  total  effects  of  PCI  on  VTI 
are –0.162 (t = –2.610), –0.197 (t = –4.328), and –0.360 
(t = –6.947), respectively. The indirect effect of PCI on VTI 
was –0.157 (t = –3.472) through job satisfaction and –0.041 
(t  =  –4.744)  through  learning  and  job  satisfaction. Thus, 
learning orientation and job satisfaction partially mediate the 
effect of PCI on VTI, with the proportion of mediation being 
54.7 percent (Iacobucci, Saldanha, and Deng 2007). In addi-
tion, only about 20.7 percent of the total effect (0.574) of PCI 
on job satisfaction is indirect through learning orientation.

We further tested for possible competing models by adding 
and estimating paths from creativity and learning to VTI. Nei-
ther path was statistically significant, suggesting the proposed 
model is empirically robust.


382 

Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management

Table 3

Structural Model Results

Model A 

Model B

Path 

Path 

Hypothesis

Path from

Path to

coefficient

t-Value

coefficient

t-Value

Support

H1
H2
H3
H4
H5a/b
H6
H7
H8

Climate for innovation 
Learning orientation
Climate for innovation
Learning orientation
Job satisfaction 
Climate for innovation
Job satisfaction
Climate for innovation 
Sales experience
Sales experience
Sales experience
Sales experience
Firm size
Firm size
Firm size
Firm size

Learning orientation
Job satisfaction
Job satisfaction
Sales creativity
Sales creativity
Sales creativity
Turnover intention 
Turnover intention
Learning orientation
Sales creativity
Job satisfaction
Turnover intention
Learning orientation
Sales creativity
Job satisfaction
Turnover intention

0.34
0.35
0.46
0.79
–0.20
0.10
–0.34
–0.16
0.22
–0.06
0.10
–0.23
0.01
0.05
0.00
–0.01

3.81
6.69
9.52
14.60
–2.35
1.08
–5.32
–2.59
5.46
–1.70
2.04
–6.67
0.19
1.69
0.07
–0.26

0.34
0.35
0.46
0.74
–0.20
0.11
–0.34
–0.16
0.21
–0.06
0.10
–0.23
–0.01
0.04
0.01
–0.01

4.01
5.98
9.24
12.28
–2.57
1.28
–5.29
–2.61
4.80
–1.78
2.05
–6.73
–0.19
1.07
0.14
–0.25

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
H5b
No
Yes
Yes

DISCUSSION

Summary

Although organizational climate research has a long history in 
social psychology, climate perceptions have received only scat-
tered attention in the sales context (Evans et al. 2007; Strutton, 
Pelton, and Lumpkin 1993). In particular, research on PCI 
in the sales literature is scarce and a better understanding of 
the construct in relation to other sales job variables is much 
needed in today’s innovation-driven economy. The purpose of 
this study is to investigate the effect of PCI on two important 
sales job outcome variables (i.e., sales creativity and VTI). We 
propose and test a model that links PCI to these two outcome 
variables through a partial mediation mechanism, and find 
empirical support for most of the hypotheses. We find that 
PCI  has  little  direct  effect  on  sales  creativity;  it  indirectly 
enhances sales creativity mostly through heightened learning 
orientation. While PCI has a positive effect on job satisfac-
tion, the latter actually reduces sales creativity. Furthermore, 
PCI  reduces  salespeople’s  turnover  intention  both  directly 
and indirectly through promoting learning orientation and 
enhancing job satisfaction.

Theoretical Implications

This study has a number of important implications. First, we 
contribute to the nascent literature on the relationship between 
contextual factors (e.g., PCI) and creativity in the sales context 
by elucidating a mechanism through which PCI influences 

sales creativity. There is a shortage of research on sales force 
creativity, although the boundary-spanning nature of the sales 
job calls for creative performance in many situations (Wang 
and Netemeyer 2004; West and Richter 2008). Sales research-
ers have long recognized the importance of learning to effective 
selling (Park and Holloway 2003; Sujan, Weitz, and Kumar 
1994), but have yet to examine the role of learning in the effect 
of an innovative climate on sales job attitudes and behaviors. 
Due  to  intrinsic  motivation,  learning  leads  to  greater  job 
satisfaction and creative performance. Our results highlight 
the role of learning in translating an innovative climate into 
greater creativity, and emphasize the importance of individual 
learning on both satisfaction and sales creativity.

Second,  while  we  build  on  the  findings  of  Evans  et  al. 
(2007)  and  confirm  that  an  innovative  climate  positively 
affects job satisfaction, we reveal a negative effect of job sat-
isfaction  on  sales  creativity,  thereby  offering  a  complicated 
view that PCI may enhance and reduce sales creativity at the 
same time, depending on the mediating variable. The role of 
job satisfaction has always been regarded as positive given its 
association with other desirable job outcomes such as perfor-
mance and organizational commitment. As such, the existing 
research has paid little attention to the potential problems 
of job satisfaction, such as possible complacency and lack of 
innovation motivation. Our finding of a negative effect of sat-
isfaction on creativity corresponds to research on the positive 
effects of job dissatisfaction and negative moods on creativity 
(George and Zhou 2002; Zhou and George 2001), and calls 
for further scrutiny of job satisfaction in affecting critical job 


outcomes such as creative performance. We hope that future 
research will identify motivational factors that offset the feel-
ings of complacency caused by job satisfaction and conditions 
under which satisfaction affects creativity either positively or 
negatively. Sales creativity is characterized by high organiza-
tional constraints coupled with high risks, which distinguish 
it from other kinds of creativity, and therefore deserves greater 
research attention.

Finally, we demonstrate that PCI, a specific facet of psy-
chological  climate,  has  a  great  potential  as  an  explanatory 
factor for sales force turnover and turnover intention. Sales 
force  turnover  has  been  and  will  continue  to  be  a  critical 
issue for researchers and managers alike (DeConinck 2011). 
Although numerous variables have been examined as turnover 
antecedents, PCI has not. While the finding that PCI reduces 
VTI both directly and indirectly is consistent with relevant 
theories such as motivation theory (Deci and Ryan 2002), the 
job demands-resources model (Bakker and Demerouti 2007), 
and the referent cognitions model (Aquino et al. 1997), these 
theories do not explicitly identify PCI as a predictor variable. 
The referent cognitions model, for instance, suggests that if 
people believe the organization is amenable to change, even 
if they are not satisfied with its current state of affairs, they 
are  more  likely  to  direct  their  energy  constructively  to  self 
and organizational improvement instead of leaving (Aquino 
et  al.  1997).  In  the  face  of  heightened  competition  in  the 
marketplace, an innovative climate is perhaps most indicative 
of the firm’s readiness and ability to embrace and meet future 
challenges. The introduction of PCI to the turnover literature 
may not only yield new insights on the process of salesperson 
turnover but also enrich theories of employee turnover.

The finding that PCI indirectly reduces turnover intention 
through its positive effect on job satisfaction is consistent with 
a large body of literature that documents a strong negative 
relationship between job satisfaction and turnover (Griffeth, 
Hom,  and  Gaertner  2000;  Hom  and  Griffeth  1995).  Job 
dissatisfaction  is  regarded  as  a  direct  trigger  for  voluntary 
withdrawal (Griffeth, Hom, and Gaertner 2000). While it is 
critical to acknowledge the role of PCI and learning orienta-
tion, it is also imperative to ensure job satisfaction in order 
to reduce voluntary turnover. The negative effect of job sat-
isfaction on both creativity and VTI suggests a complicated 
dilemma in managing job satisfaction.

It  should  be  noted  that  some  researchers  conceptualize 
climate for innovation as a multidimensional construct that 
consists of trust, idea support, debate, conflicts, risk taking, 
and so on (Isaksen and Ekvall 2010). While we treat the vari-
able as unidimensional, our results show promise and do point 
to  the  need  for  further  enquiries  using  more  sophisticated 
conceptualizations. Together with the recent interest in the 
role of ethical climate in sales management (Jaramillo, Mulki, 
and  Solomon  2006),  research  in  organizational  climate  in 

Fall 2013  383 

general, and PCI in particular, may further our understanding 
of salespeople’s attitudes and behaviors.

Managerial Implications

To survive in the era of heightened global competition, orga-
nizations  must  develop  an  innovative  culture  and  climate 
to encourage all employees to contribute new ideas. Losing 
creative and innovative employees can bring about significant 
costs to the firm in the form of recruiting, training, experience, 
knowledge, customers, and network relationship, thus causing 
erosion of competitive advantage (Hamel 2006; Hausknecht, 
Trevor, and Howard 2009; Hult, Hurley, and Knight 2004). 
For sales organizations, it damages sales force morale, market 
knowledge, customer relationships, and firm competitiveness 
and performance if their salespeople are dissatisfied and are 
constantly leaving. Thus, innovation-driven firms must find 
effective ways to foster creativity and retain their sales force. 
This research points to the intermediary factors that may help 
sales managers understand how to ensure high sales creativity 
and low turnover among their salespeople.

Our findings highlight the critical importance of fostering 
salespeople’s  learning  to  enhance  their  job  satisfaction  and 
creativity, and to ensure their willingness to continue their 
employment relationship with the firm. Salespeople who are 
intrinsically motivated to learn new skills and to keep up with 
market development enjoy their work as personally meaningful 
and significant. They are more likely to be satisfied and stay 
with the firm, and therefore are more valuable to the firm in 
the long run. Encouraging salespeople to learn, to grow, and to 
value their work is an aspect that sales managers often neglect 
as their priorities are monitoring salespeople’s daily job activi-
ties and meeting challenging sales goals. Although learning 
orientation can be treated as a stable trait to be screened in 
the hiring process, it can also be managed and nurtured. As 
this study demonstrates, it can be effectively influenced by 
the perception of an organizational climate for innovation. 
The more innovative the firm is perceived to be, the more 
likely  salespeople  will  be  willing  to  invest  in  learning  new 
knowledge and skills.

Learning  encourages  and  enhances  salespeople’s  creative 
performance, which is often needed in solving novel market 
and customer problems. We find that PCI does not have a 
direct effect on sales creativity, but exerts its effect indirectly 
through learning orientation. Thus, to encourage sales creativ-
ity, managers must nurture an innovative climate to intrinsi-
cally motivate salespeople and channel their energy to learning 
new job knowledge and skills.

Our results also indicate that it may be a challenge to main-
tain job satisfaction and sales creativity at the same time, as sat-
isfied salespeople may grow complacent and become hesitant 
to try new ideas. Sales creativity involves many organizational 


384 

Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management

constraints, it can be highly risky, and it may cause tension 
and conflict within the organization. While a good level of 
job satisfaction should be maintained, salespeople need to be 
motivated and encouraged properly to meet new challenges 
and solve old and new problems in creative ways. Sales man-
agers thus must carefully manage job satisfaction, sales force 
complacency, motivation for creativity, and the tension and 
conflict brought about by salespeople’s creative ideas. Man-
agers must help reduce the risk and tension salespeople face 
when proposing and implementing innovative ideas, and make 
sure that the nature and level of such tension and conflict are 
functional and productive for the individual salespeople as well 
as for the organization. As products and services are becom-
ing more knowledge based, the job of selling becomes more 
complex. Therefore, sales managers should more consciously 
foster creative ideas, design systems to implement them, and 
incorporate more incentives for creativity.

In addition to the intermediary factors we have identified, 
PCI can also directly reduce VTI. The climate for innovation 
may in general create a more positive, energetic, and promising 
work environment conducive to better individual job perfor-
mance, employee well-being, and firm performance. To com-
pete in today’s competitive marketplace, sales organizations 
must focus on managing an innovative work environment. In 
this spirit, our findings raise interesting questions for managers 
to ponder. For instance, how do sales organizations foster an 
innovative climate and manage creativity so as to maximize 
positive job outcomes according to the firm’s marketing objec-
tives but minimize potential negative consequences such as 
job  complacency?  How  can  companies  optimize  the  effect 
of job satisfaction so that it helps retain salespeople but also 
maintains their creativity level? How do managers make sure 
the tension caused by creativity is functional and is conducive 
to positive job attitudes and behaviors?

Limitations and Future Research Directions

Our findings should be interpreted in the context of a few 
limitations,  which  can  also  serve  as  directions  for  future 
research. First, the data are survey based and cross-sectional. 
While associations among variables are evident through struc-
tural equation modeling, the inference of causality is purely 
theoretical,  as  empirical  support  for  causality  may  only  be 
established with experimental and longitudinal studies. Sec-
ond, although we included a method factor in the structural 
model to statistically account for the CMV, and also employed 
other means to minimize CMV (e.g., different scale formats, 
response confidentiality and anonymity), method bias may 
still be present due to various other sources of bias (Podsakoff 
et al. 2003). Third, we examined learning orientation and job 
satisfaction as mediating variables to understand the effect of 
PCI, but other mediators are also possible. The significant 

direct path from PCI to VTI is indicative of such possibilities. 
Finally, our model is limited in scope in that it included only 
one climate variable, two outcomes, and two mediators. A 
more comprehensive model might incorporate other climate 
facets and other job outcome variables, especially objective 
job performance and actual sales force turnover. 

REFERENCES

Abbey, Augustus, and John W. Dickson (1983), “R&D Work 
Climate and Innovation in Semiconductors,” Academy of 
Management Journal, 26 (2), 362–368.

Amabile, Teresa M. (1983), The Social Psychology of Creativity. 

New York: Springer.

———  (1988),  “A  Model  of  Creativity  and  Innovation  in 
Organizations,”  Research  in  Organizational  Behavior,  10, 
123–167.

———,  Regina  Conti,  Heather  Coon,  Jeffrey  Lazenby,  and 
Michael Herron (1996), “Assessing the Work Environment 
for  Creativity,”  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  39  (5), 
1154–1184.

Ames, Carole, and Jennifer Archer (1988), “Achievement Goals 
in the Classroom: Students’ Learning Strategies and Mo-
tivation  Processes,”  Journal  of  Educational  Psychology,  80 
(3), 260–267.

Aquino, Karl, Rodger W. Griffeth, David G. Allen, and Peter 
W. Hom (1997), “Integrating Justice Constructs into the 
Turnover Process: A Test of Referent Cognitions Model,” 
Academy of Management Journal, 40 (5), 1208–1227.

Babin, Barry J., James S. Boles, and Donald P. Robin (2000), 
“Representing the Perceived Ethical Work Climate Among 
Marketing Employees,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, 28 (3), 345–358.

Bakker, Arnold B., and Evangelia Demerouti (2007), “The Job 
Demands-Resources Model: State of the Art,” Journal of 
Managerial Psychology, 22 (3), 309–328.

Bandura,  Albert  (1997),  Self-Efficacy: The  Exercise  of  Control, 

New York: W.H. Freeman.

Barney, Jay B. (1991), “Firm Resources and Sustained Competi-
tive Advantage,” Journal of Management, 17 (1), 99–120.
Bergen,  Mark,  Shantanu  Dutta,  and  Orville  C.  Walker,  Jr. 
(1992), “Agency Relationships in Marketing: A Review of 
the Implications and Applications of Agency and Related 
Theories,” Journal of Marketing, 56 (March), 1–24.

Boles, James S., George W. Dudley, Vincent Onyemah, Domi-
nique Rouzies, and William A. Weeks (2012), “Sales Force 
Turnover and Retention: A Research Agenda,” Journal of 
Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32 (1), 131–140.

Bridges, Eileen, Holly H. Johnston, and Jeffrey K. Sager (2007), 
“Using  Model-Based  Expectations  to  Predict  Voluntary 
Turnover,” International Journal of Research in Marketing, 
24 (1), 65–76.

Brief, Arthur P., and Walter R. Nord (1990), Meanings of Oc-

cupational Work. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Brooks,  Bill  (2002),  “How To  Create  Your  Own  Creativity,” 

American Salesman, 47 (10), 3–5.


Brown, Steven P., and Thomas W. Leigh (1996), “A New Look at 
Psychological Climate and Its Relationship to Job Involve-
ment, Effort, and Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 81 (4), 358–368.

———, and Robert A. Peterson (1993), “Antecedents and Con-
sequences of Salesperson Job Satisfaction: Meta-Analysis and 
Assessment of Causal Effects,” Journal of Marketing Research, 
30 (2), 63–77.

Childers, Terry L., Alan J. Dubinsky, and Steven J. Skinner (1990), 
“Leadership Substitutes as Moderators of Sales Supervisory 
Behavior,” Journal of Business Research, 21 (4), 363–382.

Craighead,  Christopher  W.,  David  J.  Ketchen,  Jr.,  Kaitlin  S. 
Dunn, and G. Thomas M. Hult (2011), “Addressing Com-
mon Method Variance: Guidelines for Survey Research on 
Information Technology,  Operations,  and  Supply  Chain 
Management,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment, 58 (3), 578–588.

Darmon, Rene Y. (2004), “Controlling Sales Force Turnover Costs 
Through Optimal Recruiting and Training Policies,” Euro-
pean Journal of Operations Research, 154 (1), 291–303.

Deci, Edward L., and Richard Ryan (1985), Intrinsic Motivation 
and  Self-Determination  in  Human  Behavior,  New  York: 
Plenum Press.

———, and ———, eds. (2002), Handbook of Self-Determination 

Research, Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.

DeConinck, James B. (2011), “The Effects of Leader-Member 
Exchange and Organizational Identification on Performance 
and Turnover Among Salespeople,” Journal of Personal Sell-
ing & Sales Management, 31 (1), 21–34.

DeShon, Richard P., and Jennifer Z. Gillespie (2005), “A Moti-
vated Action Theory Account of Goal Orientation,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 90 (6), 1096–1127.

Evans, Kenneth R., Timothy D. Landry, Po-Chien Li, and Sha-
oming Zou (2007), “How Sales Controls Affect Job-Related 
Outcomes: The Role of Organizational Sales-Related Psy-
chological Climate Perceptions,” Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, 35 (3), 445–459.

———, Richard G. McFarland, Bart Dietz, and Fernando Ja-
ramillo  (2012),  “Advancing  Sales  Performance  Research: 
A Focus of Five Underresearched Topic Areas,” Journal of 
Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32 (1), 89–105.

Ford, Neil M., Orville C. Walker, Jr., and Gilbert A. Churchill, Jr. 
(1985), “Differences in the Attractiveness of Alternative Re-
wards Among Industrial Salespeople: Additional Evidence,” 
Journal of Business Research, 7 (April), 123–138.

Fornell, Claes, and David F. Larcker (1981), “Evaluating Struc-
tural  Equation  Models  with  Unobservable Variables  and 
Measurement  Error,”  Journal  of  Marketing  Research,  18 
(February), 39–50.

Fournier, Christophe, John F. Tanner, Lawrence B. Chonko, and 
Chris  Manolis  (2010),  “The  Moderating  Role  of  Ethical 
Climate  on  Salesperson  Propensity  to  Leave,”  Journal  of 
Personal Selling & Sales Management, 30 (1), 7–22.

Gallivan, Michael J. (2003), “The Influence of Software Develop-
ers’ Creative Style on Their Attitudes to and Assimilation of 
a Software Process Innovation,” Information & Management, 
40 (5), 443–465.

Fall 2013  385 

George,  Jennifer  M.,  and  Jing  Zhou  (2002),  “Understanding 
When Bad Moods Foster Creativity and Good Ones Do 
Not: The Role of Context and Clarity of Feelings,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 87 (4), 687–697.

Gilson,  Lucy  L.,  John  E.  Mathieu,  Christina  E.  Shalley,  and 
Thomas M. Ruddy (2005), “Creativity and Standardization: 
Complementary or Conflicting Drivers of Team Effective-
ness?” Academy of Management Journal, 48 (3), 521–531.

Glick,  William  H.  (1985),  “Conceptualizing  and  Measuring 
Organizational  and  Psychological  Climate:  Pitfalls  in 
Multilevel Research,” Academy of Management Review, 10 
(3), 601–616.

Grewal, Rajdeep, Joseph A. Cote, and Hans Baumgartner (2004), 
“Multicollinearity  and  Measurement  Error  in  Structural 
Equation Models: Implications for Theory Testing,” Mar-
keting Science, 23 (4), 519–529.

Griffeth, Rodger W., Peter W. Hom, and Stefan Gaertner (2000), 
“A  Meta-Analysis  of  Antecedents  and  Correlates  of  Em-
ployee Turnover: Update, Moderator Tests, and Research 
Implications for the Next Millennium,” Journal of Manage-
ment, 26 (3), 463–488.

Hackman, J. Richard, and Greg R. Oldham (1980), Work Rede-

sign, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Hair, Joseph F., Jr., William C. Black, Barry J. Babin, Rolph E. 
Anderson, and Ronald L. Tatham (2006), Multivariate Data 
Analysis, 6th ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Hamel, Gary (2006), “The Why, What and How of Innovation 

Management,” Harvard Business Review, 84 (2), 72–84.

Hausknecht, John P., Charlie O. Trevor, and Michael J. Howard 
(2009),  “Unit-Level Voluntary Turnover  Rates  and  Cus-
tomer Service Quality: Implications of Group Cohesiveness, 
Newcomer  Concentration,  and  Size,”  Journal  of  Applied 
Psychology, 94 (4), 1068–1075.

Hellriegel, Don, and John W. Slocum, Jr. (1974), “Organizational 
Climate: Measures, Research and Contingencies,” Academy 
of Management Journal, 17, 255–280.

Hom, Peter W., and Rodger W. Griffeth (1995), Employee Turn-

over, Cincinnati: South-Western.

Homburg,  Christian,  John  P. Workman,  Jr.,  and  Ove  Jensen 
(2002),  “A  Configurational  Perspective  on  Key  Account 
Management,” Journal of Marketing, 66 (April), 38–60.

Hult, G. Thomas M., Robert F. Hurley, and Gary A. Knight 
(2004),  “Innovativeness:  Its  Antecedents  and  Impact  on 
Business Performance,” Industrial Marketing Management, 
33 (5), 429–438.

Iacobucci, Dawn, Neela Saldanha, and Xiaoyan Deng (2007), “A 
Meditation on Mediation: Evidence that Structural Equa-
tions Models Perform Better Than Regressions,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 17 (2), 139–153.

Isaksen, Scott G., and Goran Ekvall (2010), “Managing for In-
novation: The Two Faces of Tension in Creative Climates,” 
Creativity and Innovation Management, 19 (2), 73–88.

———, and Geir Kaufmann (1990), “Adapters and Innovators: 
Different Perceptions of the Psychological Climate for Cre-
ativity,” Studia-Psychologica, 32 (3), 129–141.

Isen, Alice M., Kimberly A. Daubman, and Gary P. Nowicki 
(1987),  “Positive  Affect  Facilitates  Creative  Problem 


386 

Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management

Solving,”  Journal  of  Personality  and  Social  Psychology,  52 
(6), 1122–1131.

James, Lawrence R., John J. Hater, Michael J. Gent, and John R. 
Bruni (1978), “Psychological Climate: Implications from 
Cognitive Social Learning Theory and Interactional Psychol-
ogy,” Personnel Psychology, 31 (4), 783–813.

Jaramillo,  Fernando,  Jay  Prakash  Mulki,  and  Paul  Solomon 
(2006), “The Role of Ethical Climate on Salesperson’s Role 
Stress, Job Attitudes, Turnover Intention, and Job Perfor-
mance,” Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 26 
(3), 271–282.

Jaros, Stephen J. (1997), “An Assessment of Meyer and Allen’s 
(1991) Three-Component Model of Organizational Com-
mitment  and Turnover  Intentions,”  Journal  of Vocational 
Behavior, 51 (3), 319–337.

Jones, Allan P., and Lawrence R. James (1979), “Psychological 
Climate: Dimensions and Relationships of Individual and 
Aggregated Work Environment Perceptions,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance, 23 (2), 201–250.

Jones, Eli, Donna Massey Kantak, Charles M. Futrell, and Mark 
W. Johnston (1996), “Leader Behavior, Work-Attitudes, and 
Turnover of Salespeople: An Integrative Study,” Journal of 
Personal Selling & Sales Management, 16 (2), 13–23.

Kohli, Ajay K., Tasadduq A. Shervani, and Goutam N. Chal-
lagalla (1998), “Learning and Performance Orientation of 
Salespeople: The Role of Supervisors,” Journal of Marketing 
Research, 35 (May), 263–274.

Kontoghiorghes,  Constantine  (2003),  “Identification  of  Key 
Predictors of Organizational Competitiveness in a Service 
Organization,” Organizational Development Journal, 21 (2), 
28–42.

Koys,  Daniel  J.,  and Thomas  A.  DeCotiis  (1991),  “Inductive 
Measures of Psychological Climate,” Human Relations, 44 
(March), 265–285.

Locke, Edwin A. (1976), The Nature and Causes of Job Satisfaction, 

Chicago: Rand McNally.

Lopez, Tara, and Amy McMillan-Capehart (2009), “Elements of 
Salesperson Control: An Organization Theory Perspective,” 
Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 24 (2), 98–107.
McIntosh, Nancy J. (1995), “Exhilarating Work: An Antidote 
for  Dangerous Work?”  in  Organizational  Risk  Factors  for 
Job Stress, Steven L. Sauter and Lawrence R. Murphy, eds., 
Washington,  DC:  American  Psychological  Association, 
303–316.

McNeilly, Kevin M., and Frederick A. Russ (1992), “The Mod-
erating Effect of Sales Force Performance on Relationships 
Involving  Antecedents  of Turnover,”  Journal  of  Personal 
Selling & Sales Management, 12 (1), 9–20.

Moorman, Robert H. (1991), “Relationship Between Organi-
zational Justice and Organizational Citizenship Behaviors: 
Do Fairness Perceptions Influence Employee Citizenship?” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 76 (6), 845–855.

Muthen, Bengt O., and Linda K. Muthen (2010), Mplus User’s 

Guide, 6th ed., Los Angeles: Muthen & Muthen.

———, and Albert Satorra (1995), “Complex Sample Data in 
Structural Equation Modeling,” Sociological Methodology, 
25 (1), 267–316.

Nerkar, Atul A., Rita Gunther McGrath, and Ian C. MacMillan 
(1996), “Three Facets of Satisfaction and Their Influence on 
the Performance of Innovation Teams,” Journal of Business 
Venturing, 11 (3), 167–188.

Netemeyer, Richard G., James S. Boles, Daryl O. McKee, and 
Robert  McMurrian  (1997),  “An  Investigation  into  the 
Antecedents of Organizational Citizenship Behaviors in a 
Personal Selling Context,” Journal of Marketing, 61 (July), 
85–98.

Park,  Jeong-Eun,  and  Betsy  B.  Holloway  (2003),  “Adaptive 
Selling Behavior Revisited: An Empirical Examination of 
Learning Orientation, Sales Performance, and Job Satisfac-
tion,” Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 23 
(3), 239–251.

Parker, Christopher P., Boris B. Baltes, Scott A. Young, Joseph 
W.  Huff,  Robert  A.  Altmann,  Heather  A.  Lacost,  and 
Joanne  E.  Roberts  (2003),  “Relationship  Between  Psy-
chological  Climate  Perceptions  and  Work  Outcomes:  A 
Meta-Analytic Review,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, 
24 (4), 389–411.

Podsakoff, Philip M., Scott B. MacKenzie, Jeong-Yeon Lee, and 
Nathan P. Podsakoff (2003), “Common Method Biases in 
Behavioral Research: A Critical Review of the Literature 
and Recommended Remedies,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 88 (5), 879–903.

Pritchard, Robert D., and Bernard W. Karasick (1973), “The 
Effects of Organizational Climate on Managerial Job Per-
formance  and  Job  Satisfaction,”  Organizational  Behavior 
and Human Performance, 9 (1), 126–46.

Ribeiro-Soriano, Domingo, and David Urbano (2010), “Em-
ployee-Organization Relationship in Collective Entrepre-
neurship: An Overview,” Journal of Organizational Change 
Management, 23 (4), 349–359.

Rousseau, Denise M. (1988), “The Construction of Climate in 
Organizational Research,” in International Review of Indus-
trial and Organizational Psychology, Cary L. Cooper and Ivan 
T. Robertson, eds., New York: Wiley, 139–158.

——— (2003), “Extending the Psychology of the Psychological 
Contract: A Reply to ‘Putting Psychology Back into Psy-
chological Contracts,’” Journal of Management Inquiry, 12 
(3), 229–238.

Runco, Mark A. (1995), “The Creativity and Job Satisfaction 
of Artists in Organizations,” Empirical Studies of the Arts, 
13 (1), 39–45.

Rusbult,  Caryl  E.,  Dan  Farrell,  Glen  Rogers,  and  Arch  G. 
Mainous III (1988), “The Impact of Exchange Variables 
on Exit, Voice, Loyalty and Neglect: An Integrated Model 
of  Responses  to  Declining  Job  Satisfaction,”  Academy  of 
Management Journal, 31 (3), 599–628.

Satorra, Albert, and Peter M. Bentler (2001), “A Scales Difference 
Chi-Square Test Statistic for Moment Structure Analysis,” 
Psychometrica, 66 (4), 507–514.

Schneider,  Benjamin,  and  Robert  A.  Snyder  (1975),  “Some 
Relationships Between Job Satisfaction and Organizational 
Climate,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 60 (3), 318–328.

Scott, Susanne G., and Reginald A. Bruce (1994), “Determinants 
of Innovative Behavior: A Path Model of Individual Innova-


tion in the Workplace,” Academy of Management Journal, 
37 (3), 580–607.

Senge, Peter M. (1990), The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Prac-
tice of the Learning Organization, New York: Doubleday/
Currency.

Shalley, Christina E., Lucy L. Gilson, and Terry C. Blum (2000), 
“Matching  Creativity  Requirements  and  the Work  Envi-
ronment: Effects on Satisfaction and Intention to Leave,” 
Academy of Management Journal, 4 (2), 215–223.

Sharma, Arun (2012), “The Role of the Sales Employee in Secur-
ing Customer Satisfaction,” European Journal of Marketing, 
46 (3–4), 489–508.

Sinkula, James M. (2002), “Market-Based Success, Organizational 
Routines, and Unlearning,” Journal of Business & Industrial 
Marketing, 17 (4), 253–269.

Speier, Cheri, and Viswanath Venkatesh (2002), “The Hidden 
Minefields in the Adoption of Sales Force Automation Tech-
nologies,” Journal of Marketing, 66 (July), 98–111.

Spreitzer, Gretchen M. (1995), “Psychological Empowerment in 
the Workplace: Dimensions, Measurement, and Validation,” 
Academy of Management Journal, 38 (5), 1442–1165.

Staw,  Barry  M.,  Robert  I.  Sutton,  and  Lisa  H.  Pelled  (1994), 
“Employee Positive Emotion and Favorable Outcomes at 
the Workplace,” Organization Science, 5 (1), 51–71.

Strutton, David, Lou E. Pelton, and James R. Lumpkin (1993), 
“The Relationship Between Psychological Climate and Sales-
person–Sales Manager Trust in Sales Organizations,” Journal 
of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 13 (4), 1–14.

Sujan, Harish, Barton A. Weitz, and Nirmalya Kumar (1994), 
“Learning Orientation, Working Smart, and Effective Sell-
ing,” Journal of Marketing, 58 (July), 39–52.

———, ———, and Mita Sujan (1988), “Increasing Sales Pro-
ductivity by Getting Salespeople to Work Smarter,” Journal 
of Personal Selling & Sales Management 8 (2), 9–19.

Szymanski,  David  M.  (1988),  “Determinants  of  Selling  Ef-
fectiveness: The Importance of Declarative Knowledge to 
the  Personal  Selling  Concept,”  Journal  of  Marketing,  52 
(January), 64–77.

Thomas, Kenneth W., and Walter G. Tymon, Jr. (1994), “Does 
Empowerment Always Work: Understanding the Role of 
Intrinsic Motivation and Personal Interaction,” Journal of 
Management Systems, 6 (3), 39–54.

———, and Betty A. Velthouse (1990), “Cognitive Elements 
of  Empowerment:  An  ‘Interpretive’  Model  of  Intrinsic 
Task Motivation,” Academy of Management Review, 15 (4), 
666–681.

Fall 2013  387 

Tyagi, Pradeep (1985), “Organizational Climate, Inequities, and 
Attractiveness of Salesperson Rewards,” Journal of Personal 
Selling & Sales Management, 5 (November), 31–38.

Van der Sluis, Lidewey E.C. (2004), “Designing the Workplace 
for Learning and Innovation,” Development & Learning in 
Organizations: An International Journal, 18 (5), 10–13.

Wang, Guangping, and Richard G. Netemeyer (2002), “The Ef-
fects of Job Autonomy, Customer Demandingness, and Trait 
Competitiveness on Salesperson Learning, Self Efficacy, and 
Performance,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 
30 (3), 217–228.

———, and ——— (2004), “Salesperson Creative Performance: 
Conceptualization, Measurement, and Nomological Valid-
ity,” Journal of Business Research, 57 (8), 805–812.

Weisberg,  Robert  W.  (1999),  “Creativity  and  Knowledge:  A 
Challenge to Theories,” in Handbook of Creativity, Robert 
J. Sternberg, ed., New York: Cambridge University Press, 
226–250.

Weitz, Barton A., Harish Sujan, and Mita Sujan (1986), “Knowl-
edge, Motivation, and Adaptive Behavior: A Framework for 
Improving Selling Effectiveness,” Journal of Marketing, 50 
(October), 174–191.

West, Michael A., and Andreas W. Richter (2008), “Climates 
and Cultures for Innovation and Creativity at Work,” in 
Handbook  of  Organizational  Creativity,  Jing  Zhou  and 
Christina  E.  Shalley,  eds.,  New  York: Taylor  &  Francis 
Group, 3–31.

———, Carol S. Borrill, Jeremy F. Dawson, Felix Brodbeck, 
David A. Shapiro, and Bob Haward (2003), “Leadership 
Clarity and Team Innovation in Health Care,” Leadership 
Quarterly, 14 (4–5), 393–410.

Williams,  Larry  J.,  Nathan  Hartman,  and  Flavia  Cavazotte 
(2010), “Method Variance and Marker Variables: A Review 
and Comprehensive CFA Market Technique,” Organiza-
tional Research Methods, 13 (3), 477–514.

Yi, Youjae, Rajan Nataraajan, and Taeshik Gong (2011), “Cus-
tomer Participation and Citizenship Behavioral Influences 
on  Employee  Performance,  Satisfaction,  Commitment, 
and Turnover Intention,” Journal of Business Research, 64, 
87–95.

Zhou, Jing, and Jennifer M. George (2001), “When Job Dis-
satisfaction Leads to Creativity: Encouraging the Expres-
sion  of Voice,”  Academy  of  Management  Journal,  44  (4), 
682–696.


