British Journal of Management, Vol. 20, 187–203 (2009)
DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8551.2007.00557.x

Examining the Antecedents and

Consequences of Corporate Reputation:

A Customer Perspective

Gianfranco Walsh, Vincent-Wayne Mitchell,1 Paul R. Jackson2

and Sharon E. Beatty3

Institute for Management, University of Koblenz-Landau, Universita¨ tsstrasse 1, 56070 Koblenz, Germany,
1CASS Business School, 106 Bunhill Row, London EC1Y 8TZ, UK, 2Manchester Business School, University

of Manchester, Manchester M15 6PB, UK, and 3Culverhouse College of Commerce and Business

Administration, University of Alabama, PO Box 870225, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0225, USA

Corresponding author email: v.mitchell@city.ac.uk

This paper extends previous work to examine the antecedents and customer-related
consequences of corporate reputation for one important stakeholder group, customers,
and within a special service sector where product and corporate associations are
synonymous. We begin by linking the concept of corporate reputation to related
concepts. Then, using structural equation modelling on customer survey data (n 5 511),
we examine the impact of customer satisfaction and trust on corporate reputation, as
well as how corporate reputation aﬀects customer loyalty and word of mouth behaviour.
The management implications of these results are discussed.

Introduction

A growing body of research demonstrates that a
ﬁrm’s soft assets,
its identity and reputation,
represent a competitive advantage that is hard to
imitate and can contribute to superior proﬁts (e.g.
Gardberg and Fombrun, 2002; Gotsi and Wilson,
2001; Groenland, 2002; Whetten and Mackey,
2002; Yoon, Guﬀey and Kijewski, 1993). Indeed,
some management academics and practitioners feel
that the managerial considerations of reputation
are no less signiﬁcant than those involved with
operational, legal and ﬁnancial decisions (Jones,
Jones and Little, 2000). This is because a strong
corporate reputation has been shown to be
associated with reduced transaction costs together
with beneﬁcial ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial out-
comes (e.g. Caruana, Ramasashan and Krentler,
2004; Eberl and Schwaiger, 2005; Rose and
Thomsen, 2004; Shapiro, 1983). While reputation
has attracted attention in the management and
marketing literatures (e.g. Davies et al., 2002;

Fryxell and Wang, 1994; Gardberg and Fombrun,
2002; Roberts and Dowling, 2002),
there are
limitations to what we currently know.

First, most previous research on corporate
reputation (e.g. Doney and Cannon, 1997;
Fombrun, Gardberg and Sever, 2000) has used
multiple stakeholder groups, and studies of
speciﬁc stakeholder groups such as customers
have been much less common (exceptions to this
include Davies et al., 2002; Page and Fearn,
2005). This is despite the fact that customers are
one of the most important stakeholder groups
because they create revenue streams. As a result,
existing empirical
tend to focus on
antecedents of corporate reputation that are not
associated with consumer experiences, such as
critical news reports (e.g. Dunbar and Schwal-
bach, 2000), but do not examine variables related
to customer behaviour.

studies

Second, previous studies are mainly concerned
with identifying antecedents of corporate reputa-
tion, but the potential ‘consequences of corporation

r 2008 British Academy of Management. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford
OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA, 02148, USA.


188

G. Walsh et al.

reputation have been less well examined empiri-
cally’
(Jones, Jones and Little, 2000, p. 21).
This weakness needs further research as the
relevance of corporate reputation arises mainly
from its postulated impact on stakeholders’ (e.g.
customers’) behaviour as a reaction to their
perception of corporate reputation (Herbig and
Milewicvz, 1993). For example, can a good
corporate reputation have promotional, i.e. custo-
mer recruitment, beneﬁts as well as retention, i.e.
customer loyalty, beneﬁts? Consequences such as
positive word of mouth are seen by some authors as
much more powerful than traditional forms of
marketing (Silverman, 2001).

Third, most previous work has been under-
taken in manufacturing companies, yet it can be
argued that the importance of corporate reputa-
tion is greater for services ﬁrms than manufac-
turers. This is because other factors, such as
reputation, become particularly important
in
services where there is little physical evidence to
evaluate and for
services high in credence
qualities where customers cannot evaluate ele-
ments of the service at all sometimes (Bromley,
2001; Hardaker and Fill, 2005). As Wang, Lo and
Hui (2003, p. 76) argue ‘Reputation plays an
especially important strategic role in service
markets because the pre-purchase evaluation of
service quality is necessarily vague and incom-
plete’. Due to their intangibility, the quality of
services may be more diﬃcult to evaluate by
consumers and thus service ﬁrms may be more
likely to feel the eﬀects of reputation loss than
other types of ﬁrms (Fombrun, 1996; Kim and
Choi, 2003). The eﬀects of reputation are there-
fore more likely to aﬀect service ﬁrms than
manufacturers especially when these services are
high in credence qualities. Unfortunately, most
previous work has ignored the complication of
the diﬀerence between the corporate reputation
for goods and service brands. The service context
of energy supply ﬁrms was purposely chosen for
this study partly because of the credence qualities
of energy and partly because the corporate brand
is synonymous with the product brand. More-
over, as we conceptualized corporate reputation
as an attitude that results from a customer’s
interaction with a given ﬁrm, these interactions
are more likely to take place when customers deal
with service ﬁrms, where customers’ evaluations
are driven as much by the process of service
delivery and the interpersonal interaction experi-

ences with service personnel as by the actual
product itself.

Since the empirical evidence on the relationship
between corporate reputation and potential ante-
cedents and consequences is scarce, this study
attempts to establish the direction and strength of
these relationships using a new measure and in a
unique service context. Our main contributions
are (1) to apply a US customer-based corporate
reputation scale in Europe, by drawing on a scale
from Walsh and Beatty (2007); (2) to propose a
conceptual model that links corporate reputation
to antecedents and consequences – based on the
model, we develop and test hypotheses connecting
corporate reputation to important marketing
variables, such as loyalty and word of mouth,
which need to be monitored by companies; (3) to
use signalling theory to provide an explanation for
corporate reputation’s relationship with outcome
variables; (4) to provide advice on how companies
can aﬀect corporate reputation using trust and
satisfaction. The paper begins by delineating
corporate reputation from the related concepts
of corporate identity and corporate image.

Conceptual background

Corporate reputation and other corporate
associations

it

is important

to delineate it

its constituents;

As the literature on the relationship between
corporate identity and corporate reputation has
been criticized for being ‘foggy’ (Balmer, 2001),
it
from related
concepts. For example, according to Fombrun
(1996, p. 111),
identity is the ‘backbone of
reputation’, and to ‘focus on a company’s
reputation also is to determine how it deals with
all of
is to focus on a
company’s character or identity’. One way to
delineate the related concepts of corporate
identity, corporate image (intended and con-
strued) and corporate reputation is to view them
as diﬀerent kinds of
‘corporate associations’
(Berens, van Riel and van Bruggen, 2005; Brown
and Dacin, 1997). Brown and Dacin (1997, p. 69)
use corporate associations as a ‘generic label for
all the information about a company that a
person holds’. In extending Brown and Dacin’s
work and in an attempt to propose a unifying
terminology, Brown et al.
(2006) distinguish
between four types of corporate associations:

r 2008 British Academy of Management.


Antecedents and Consequences of Corporate Reputation

189

(3)

(1) ‘identity’, which refers to mental associations
about the organization held by organizational
members; (2) ‘intended image’, which refers to
mental associations about the organization that
organization leaders want important audiences to
hold;
‘construed image’, which refers to
mental associations that organization members
believe others outside the organization hold
about the organization; (4) reputation, which
refers to mental associations about the organiza-
tion actually held by others outside the organiza-
tion. It is the last-mentioned category which we
use in this study by focusing on one stakeholder
group, customers, and the associations they hold
about their service supplier. Thus, the primary
distinction between identity and reputation ap-
pears to be in the eye of the beholder, i.e. who is
doing the evaluation.

Deﬁnitions of corporate reputation

There is a similar diversity in deﬁnitions of the
concept of corporate reputation (see Table 1), as
well as in its measurement. That said, most
authors who have put
forth a deﬁnition of
corporate reputation seem to agree that corpo-
rate reputation is a collective phenomenon as
their deﬁnitions revolve around a given group’s
(e.g.
stakeholders) ability to recognize and
correctly interpret ‘what a ﬁrm stands for’ (e.g.
Rose and Thomsen, 2004; Weiss, Anderson and
MacInnis, 1999). An implicit assumption in this
seems to be either that such groups will collec-
tively have a similar view of the company or that
diﬀerences between groups are not managerially
signiﬁcant. We suggest
limiting
is
because each stakeholder group (e.g.
industry
experts, ﬁnancial analysts) is bound by a com-
mon past and shared value system which leads to
shared and similar within group perceptions of a
ﬁrm, but which will diﬀer between groups.
Roberts and Dowling (2002) for example exam-
ined perceptions of industry analysts, as well as
company managers and directors, but they admit
that their reputations scores are probably con-
founded by their respondents’ knowledge of the
ﬁnancial performance of the ﬁrm. Furthermore,
the assumption that all stakeholders such as
competitors, employees and in particular custo-
mers will have similar managerial relevance and
importance is questionable. Rose and Thomsen
(2004) used manager and analyst perceptions of

that

this

r 2008 British Academy of Management.

corporate reputations, and concluded that ‘the
case for questioning business people rests on an
assumption that they are better informed about
other companies than the population at large, but
it is clear that the causes and eﬀects of general
public image may be diﬀerent and that this invites
further research’ (p. 204). Indeed over 20 years
ago Freeman (1984) suggested that since diﬀerent
publics attend to diﬀerent features of a ﬁrm’s
performance, reputation reﬂects a ﬁrm’s relative
success in fulﬁlling the expectations of multiple
stakeholders.

this

impact has

Customers seem to be a company’s most
important stakeholder as they are the primary
generators of revenue for the business. This alone
indicates a reason to study them separately,
relative to corporate reputation. Also, customers
can have a greater impact on each other through
word of mouth regarding the ﬁrm’s reputation
than the company’s advertising or publicity
materials are likely to have on customers. The
scale of
recently increased
dramatically with on-line communications and
word of mouth or word of mouse being able to
inﬂuence thousands of consumers almost
in-
stantly. Second, consumers in particular can be
very easily inﬂuenced by non-company commu-
nications such as a TV or press news story about
the company. Third, most
researchers have
addressed dimensions of corporate reputation,
e.g. ﬁnancial performance, social and environ-
mental responsibility, reliability of service deliv-
ery. These would appear to depend heavily on
how customers perceive the company as to what
eﬀect they will have on the overall reputation of
the ﬁrm. For example, social responsibility is not
a company-generated phenomenon, as compa-
nies simply try to do what society, i.e. consumers,
think is good at a given point in time. Financial
performance of the company is largely a result of
the customers
liking the company and its
products.

We might also argue that the previous multiple
stakeholder approaches which have measured
perceptions of employees, city analysts, share-
holders and the media are actually measuring a
‘derived’ perception and that the perceptions of
these stakeholders are determined to a large
extent by what customers think of the company.
We are not the only scholars to mention this
omission in the literature. For instance, Dowling
(2001) argues that when measuring corporate


190

G. Walsh et al.

Table 1. Deﬁnitions of corporate reputation and studies

Author(s)

Deﬁnition

Herbig and Milewicvz
(1993), p. 18

Fombrun (1996), p. 72

Weiss, Anderson and
MacInnis (1999), p. 75
Fombrun, Gardberg and
Sever (2000), p. 243

Bromley (2000), p. 241

Bromley (2001), p. 317

Schultz, Mouritsen and
Gabrielsen (2001), p. 24

Gotsi and Wilson
(2001), p. 29

Rose and Thomsen
(2004), p. 202

Schwaiger (2004), p. 49

‘Reputation is an aggregate composite
of all previous transactions over the
life of the entity, a historical notion, and
requires consistency of an entity’s actions
over a prolonged time’
‘(. . .) corporate reputation is a snapshot
that reconciles images of a company
held by all its constituencies’
‘Thus (. . .) reputation reﬂects how well it
has done in the eyes of the marketplace’
‘A reputation is therefore a collective
assessment of a company’s ability to
provide valued outcomes to a
representative group of stakeholders’

‘(. . .) the way key external stakeholder
groups or other interested parties
conceptualise that organization’
‘Reputation can be deﬁned as a distribution
of opinions (the overt expression of a collective
image) about a person or other entity, in
a stakeholder or interest group’
‘Reputation combines everything that is
knowable about a ﬁrm. As an empirical
representation, it is a judgement of the
ﬁrm made by a set of audiences on
the basis of perceptions and assessments’
‘A corporate reputation is a stakeholder’s
overall evaluation of a company over
time. This evaluation is based on the
stakeholder’s direct experience with
the company, any other form of communication
and symbolism that provides information about
the ﬁrm’s actions and/or a comparison with the
actions of other leading rivals’
‘[corporate reputation] is identical to all
stakeholders’ perception of a given ﬁrm,
i.e. based on what they think they
know about the ﬁrm, so a corporation’s
reputation may simply reﬂect people’s
perceptions’
‘we conceptualize reputation as an
attitudinal construct, where attitude
denotes subjective, emotional, and
cognitive mindsets’

Walsh and Beatty (2007),
p. 129

‘the customer’s overall evaluation of a
ﬁrm based on his or her reactions to
the ﬁrm’s goods, services, communication
activities, interactions with the ﬁrm and/or its
representatives (e.g. employees, management)
and/or known corporate activities’

Study

Conceptual study

Conceptual study

258 US respondents (key informants),
mail survey, ﬁve items (a 5 0.86; a 5 0.80)a
Measurement scale developed in the USA, focus
groups and three pilot studies (n 5 663; n 5 2516;
n 5 8454), EFA, the a coeﬃcient for the (ﬁnal)
20-item scale was 0.84, the Cronbach alphas for
the six subscales were not reported
Conceptual study

Conceptual study

Conceptual study on the mechanics
of reputation rankings drawing
on secondary data

Conceptual study

Two types of data were used: image ratings
from a Danish business periodical and ﬁnancial
information from the Copenhagen Stock
Exchange (of 62 ﬁrms), CA, EFA, RA

The sample contained 300 German,
American and British respondents,
respectively, that were asked to
evaluate several German ﬁrms, CA,
EFA, CFA, reputation was measured
as a two-dimensional construct
(a 5 0.76; a 5 0.78)
Five-dimensional measurement scale
developed in the USA, depth interviews,
expert judgement, pilot study (n 5 504),
scale validation (n 5 698), EFA, CFA,
the alpha coeﬃcients for the ﬁve
subscales ranged from 0.80 to 0.93

Notes: CA, correlation analysis; CFA, conﬁrmatory factor analysis; EFA, exploratory factor analysis; RA, regression analysis.
aWeiss, Anderson and MacInnis measure two types of reputation: (1) the manufacturer’s impression of how customers perceive its
own reputation and (2) the manufacturer’s impression of how customers perceive its representative’s reputation.

r 2008 British Academy of Management.


Antecedents and Consequences of Corporate Reputation

191

that

also argues

images and reputations it is important to identify
the opinion leaders in the community because
these people will have a disproportionate inﬂu-
ence on how other people evaluate the organiza-
tion. He
an important
determinant of the reputation a person holds of
a company is the relationship that the person has
with the organization, and customers are more
likely than other stakeholders to have a ‘relation-
ship’ with a company. Roberts and Dowling
(2002) recommend that future research should
focus on customers as probably the most
important stakeholder group.

Scholars’ views of the dimensionality of the
corporate reputation construct have evolved over
time. Some researchers have conceptualized and
measured corporate reputation in a unidimen-
sional way (e.g. Anderson and Robertson, 1995;
Bhattacharya, Rao and Glynn, 1995; Doney
and Cannon, 1997). More recently, a more
sophisticated notion of corporate reputation as
a multidimensional construct has begun to gain
increasing acceptance. Dowling (2001) suggests
that the reputation of a company is a combina-
tion of admiration, respect, trust and conﬁdence
in the future actions of the organization. Repre-
senting those that view corporate reputation as a
multidimensional construct, Fombrun, Gard-
berg and Sever (2000, p. 243) deﬁne a corporate
reputation as
‘a collective assessment of a
company’s ability to provide valued outcomes
to a representative group of stakeholders’. Other
researchers have discussed corporate reputation
in relation to trust, service quality and proﬁt-
ability (e.g. Roberts and Dowling, 2002; Rose
and Thomsen, 2004). We follow this approach by
viewing customer-based corporate reputation as
a multidimensional construct (Davies et al., 2002;
Walsh and Wiedmann, 2004).

Following Walsh and Beatty’s (2007, p. 129)
recent study of customer-based corporate reputa-
tion, we adopt their deﬁnition of the construct of
customer-based reputation as ‘the customer’s
overall evaluation of a ﬁrm based on his or her
reactions to the ﬁrm’s goods, services, commu-
nication activities, interactions with the ﬁrm and/
or its representatives or constituencies (such as
employees, management, or other customers)
and/or known corporate activities’.

Walsh and Beatty (2007) view customer-based
corporate reputation to be composed of ﬁve
information content dimensions. Customer orien-

r 2008 British Academy of Management.

tation refers to the customers’ perception of the
willingness of company employees to satisfy
customer needs (e.g. Brown et al., 2002). The
good employer dimension is concerned with
customers’ perceptions about how the company
and its management treats its employees and pays
attention to their interests, and customer expec-
tations that the company has competent employ-
ees. The reliable and ﬁnancially strong company
dimension is about customers’ perception of the
company in terms of competence, solidity and
proﬁtability. Moreover, it measures customers’
expectations that
the company uses ﬁnancial
resources in a responsible manner and that
investing in the company would involve little
risk. The product and service quality dimension
refers to customers’ perceptions of the quality,
innovation, value and reliability of the ﬁrm’s
the social and
goods and services. Finally,
environmental responsibility dimension captures
customers’ beliefs
the company has a
positive role in society and towards the environ-
ment in general. As our focus is not on the
dimensionality of corporate reputation, but on
the antecedents and consequences, we ﬁrst
demonstrate the multidimensional scale’s validity
and then treat corporate reputation as a uni-
dimensional construct
in the analysis. This
approach is consistent with Fombrun, Gardberg
and Sever (2000).

that

The starting point for our conceptual model
and the hypotheses derived from it is the notion
that customer-based corporate reputation is
inﬂuenced by, as well as inﬂuences, important
customer variables. We visualize a conceptual
model which includes
two antecedents and
consequences of customer-based corporate repu-
tation, respectively. See Figure 1.

Antecedents of corporate reputation

Whereas most researchers treat corporate reputa-
tion as an independent variable (i.e. antecedent)
(e.g. Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Helm, Eggert,
and Garnefeld, 2005; Walsh, Dinnie and Wied-
mann, 2006; Weiss, Anderson and MacInnis,
1999), some researchers treat it as an outcome
variable (e.g. Wang, Lo and Hui, 2003). It
appears that it is not entirely clear if corporate
reputation functions as a predictor or conse-
quence of other variables. For example, Fisher
(1996, p. 90) points out that it is diﬃcult to


192

G. Walsh et al.

Customer
satisfaction

H1

0.46 **

R2 = 0.93

Customer-based

corporate reputation

0.87 **

H3

H4

0.53 **

0.96 **

Trust

H2

** p < 0.01

R2 = 0.76

Customer
Customer
Customer

loyalty
loyalty
loyalty

R2 = 0.92

Word of mouth

Figure 1. Model of antecedents and consequences of customer-based corporate reputation

understand the causality between a good reputa-
tion and relevant outcomes such as ﬁnancial
performance and argues ‘Good name is to strong
ﬁnancial performance as chicken is to egg. It’s
not always clear which begets which, but it’s
awfully hard to have one without the other.’ This
notion of reverse causality is echoed by Roberts
and Dowling (2002) and Fombrun and Shanley
(1990). The latter found that a higher perfor-
mance leads to a good corporate reputation,
which in turn enhances a ﬁrm’s likelihood of
performing well in the future. However, the focus
of our study is not on ﬁnancial but customer-
behaviour-related antecedents and consequences
of reputation, for which we do not imply reverse
causality. There is a general premise that the
more favourable general estimation the public
has of an entity (individual, organization etc.),
the more positive the impact of the public’s
attitude, actions and behaviour on that entity. In
the following section we develop predictions
related to two antecedents of reputation: custo-
mer satisfaction and trust.

Customer satisfaction. The relationship between
satisfaction and trust and customer-based corpo-
rate reputation has not been examined before.
However, some studies have suggested antece-
dents of a good corporate reputation, e.g.
organizational behaviour (Fombrun and Rindo-
va, 2000). Importantly for our study researchers
have also identiﬁed customers’ evaluations of a
ﬁrm’s actions and what is known about the ﬁrm
as key antecedents (e.g. Fombrun and Shanley,

corporate

1990; Sobol and Farrelly, 1988). One of these key
customer indicators is satisfaction. In a retailing
context, Davies et al. (2002) demonstrated that a
positive
reputation and customer
satisfaction are associated. Walsh, Dinnie and
Wiedmann (2006) had a similar ﬁnding in the
context of utility services. Whilst these studies
show an association between customer satisfac-
tion and customer-based reputation,
they do
not assess whether or how customer satisfaction
impacts upon customer-based reputation. Nguyen
and Leblanc (2001) argue that reputation can be
used as an eﬀective means of predicting the
outcome of the service-production process, and
can, perhaps, be considered the most reliable
indicator of the ability of a service ﬁrm to satisfy a
customer’s desires. Even when satisfaction has
been measured as service quality and overall
product quality in a banking context, a signiﬁcant
positive relationship with the bank’s reputation
has been found (Wang, Lo and Hui, 2003). Given
the previous research it is likely that customers will
attribute a good reputation to a company that
fulﬁls or exceeds their expectations. We therefore
hypothesize that

H1: Customer satisfaction has a positive eﬀect
on customer-based corporate reputation.

Trust. The relationship between trust and cor-
porate reputation has been emphasized in mar-
keting (e.g. Doney and Cannon, 1997; Ganesan,
1994). Several authors have mentioned trust and
conﬁdence in the future actions of the organiza-

r 2008 British Academy of Management.


Antecedents and Consequences of Corporate Reputation

193

tion as a key correlate of corporate reputation
(e.g. Dowling, 2001; Roberts and Dowling, 2002;
Rose and Thomsen, 2004). However, this link has
rarely been empirically established. Walsh and
Beatty (2007) show that trust is a correlate of
customer-based corporate reputation; however,
trust was not modelled as a predictor of reputa-
tion. The beneﬁts of reputation postulated in the
literature are associated primarily with the
reduction of uncertainty. This plays an important
role in the marketing of energy because of the
intangibility of the oﬀering. As electricity has
many credence qualities because it cannot be
evaluated even after purchase, this suggests that
the value of energy products must be taken on
faith (trust). Like previous researchers (Anderson
and Weitz, 1989; Moorman, Zaltman and Desh-
pande, 1992), we see trust in terms of willingness
to rely on an exchange partner in whom one has
conﬁdence. An important aspect of this is that
trust is seen as a belief, a sentiment or expectation
about the exchange partner that results from the
partner’s expertise, reliability and intentionality.
By trusting a company, customers are likely to
think the company is acting fairly, being reliable,
and showing concern for its exchange partners,
including customers, over a period of time. If
consumers trust a company this will positively
aﬀect
the
company and its reputation will
improve. We
therefore hypothesize that

feelings and evaluations of

their

H2: Trust has a positive eﬀect on customer-
based corporate reputation.

Now we turn to the consequences of corporate
reputation.

Consequences of corporate reputation

A good corporate reputation has been shown to
positively impact on ﬁnancial performance (e.g.
Fombrun and Shanley, 1990), as well as on
diﬀerent constructs, such as customer retention
(e.g. Andreassen and Lindestad, 1998; Barich and
Kotler, 1991) and positive word of mouth
behaviour (e.g. Fombrun and van Riel, 1997;
Groenland, 2002). Adopting an information
economics perspective to corporate reputation
makes it possible to examine potential favourable
and unfavourable outcomes. Signalling theory
posits that information is not equally available to

r 2008 British Academy of Management.

all parties at the same time, and that information
asymmetry is the rule (Spence, 1973). It
is
generally suggested that a company’s reputation
is an important signal with the potential
to
reduce customers’ risks and to motivate custo-
mers to adopt a product (Fombrun and Shanley,
1990; Spence, 1973). A good reputation is a signal
of quality and sound company behaviour to-
wards market transactions. A ﬁrm’s reputation
signals to customers the level of output and
quality variance, with a lower variance engender-
ing a better reputation. Further, reputation is a
useful tool to ensure the production of quality
goods and services and to project information
about them. To be credible, companies must have
a ‘bonding’ component; otherwise a company
will suﬀer reputation loss if it falsely signals high
quality (Ippolito, 1991).

empirical

loyalty. Several

Customer
studies
have attempted to link perceived corporate
reputation with customer loyalty (e.g. Walsh
and Wiedmann, 2004). Others report that reputa-
tion has an indirect impact on customer retention
(e.g. Andreassen and Lindestad, 1998; Barich and
Kotler, 1991). A company’s reputation may serve
as a quality promise for customers. This should
push companies to continually focus on serving
their customers with high quality products and
services with integrity and honesty. If executed
well, it should reduce the customer’s transaction
costs and perceived risk and encourage greater
customer loyalty, functioning as a formidable
barrier to market entry (Dierickx and Cool, 1989;
Rose and Thomsen, 2004).
In a marketing
context, Wernerfelt (1988) showed that consu-
mers exposed to new products with a familiar
brand name extended characteristics of the brand
to the product and thus a good company
reputation would suggest consumers would judge
the products more favourably. Thus, our third
hypothesis is

H3: Customer-based corporate reputation
has a positive eﬀect on customer loyalty.

Word of mouth behaviour. The quality-enhan-
cing eﬀect of reputation can be explained by the
fact that companies oﬀering poor product quality
will be penalized by customers, who will engage


194

in negative word of mouth. On the other hand,
customers who perceive the company to have a
good reputation would be expected to be more
willing to engage in positive word of mouth than
those customers who do not perceive the com-
pany has a good reputation. This means that
companies with very good reputations will
stimulate positive word of mouth, while compa-
nies with very poor reputations may stimulate
negative word of mouth. This idea is supported
by Sundaram, Mitra and Webster (1998) who
found eight motives for word of mouth, one of
them being ‘helping the company’. It is likely that
companies with a good reputation can create a
goodwill reservoir for themselves which can
involve customers acting as advocates of the
company. We therefore hypothesize

H4: Customer-based corporate reputation
has a positive eﬀect on customers’ positive
word of mouth.

Method

Research setting, procedure and sample
characteristics

for

The focus
the study was a sample of
customers of a German energy supply company.
A total of 2000 randomly chosen customers were
written to and asked to ﬁll in the accompanying
questionnaire. As an incentive, several prizes
were raﬄed oﬀ among participants. The mailing
generated 511 usable responses. Table 2 provides
a description of the sample characteristics. The
majority (58%) were aged 50 years or older; just
over one-third of the sample were male; and
around one-third had been educated through to
at least intermediate secondary school. Given the
age proﬁle of the sample, it is not surprising that
the largest occupational category is pensioner.

Measures

Respondents were asked to give their responses
to the same set of items measuring the study
variables,
together with a number of demo-
graphic variables. Adopting Richins’s
(2004)
argument
form of
measures, corporate reputation was operationa-
lized using a 15-item subset of the corporate

for the value of a short

Table 2. Sample characteristics

G. Walsh et al.

Percentage

Characteristic

Age

Gender

Education

Occupation

19–29
30–39
40–49
50–59
601
No answer
Male
Female
Not graduated from school
Lower secondary school
(Hauptschule)
Intermediate secondary
school (Realschule)
Grammar school (Abitur)
University degree
No answer
White-collar worker
Blue-collar worker
Housewife/house-husband
Student
Pensioner
Self-employed
Civil servant
Unemployed
No answer

4.7
12.6
19.5
15.4
43.0
4.9
71.0
29.0
0.6
32.3

32.0

7.5
21.1
6.5
23.5
8.7
2.2
0.8
33.0
10.8
13.8
3.0
4.1

reputation scale developed by Walsh and Beatty
(2007). All
items were measured on ﬁve-point
Likert-type scales where 1 is ‘agree completely’
and 5 is ‘disagree completely’. Coeﬃcient alpha
for the 15-item scale was 0.93. This scale does not
make a distinction between corporate level and
product
level associations as the study was
conducted on a monolithic organization with
only one product. The items measuring the ﬁve
dimensions of customer-based corporate reputa-
tion are presented in Table 3.

Customer satisfaction reﬂects ‘a judgment of a
pleasurable level of consumption-related fulﬁl-
ment, including level of under-fulﬁlment or over-
fulﬁlment’ (Arnould, Price and Zinkhan, 2004, p.
755), and was measured by a three-item scale
adapted from Kelly and Davis (1994). Coeﬃcient
alpha was 0.87. Trust was assessed by four items
adapted from Doney and Cannon (1997) and
Andaleeb (1996). Coeﬃcient alpha was 0.82.
Loyalty was assessed by three items adapted
from Hennig-Thurau, Gwinner and Gremler
(2002) and Sproles and Kendall (1986). Coeﬃ-
cient alpha was 0.65. Word of mouth was assessed
by two items adapted from Hennig-Thurau,
Gwinner and Gremler (2002). The correlation

r 2008 British Academy of Management.


Antecedents and Consequences of Corporate Reputation

195

Table 3. Item wording for the customer-based corporate reputa-
tion scale

Table 4. Item wording for the antecedents and consequences of
corporate reputation

Customer orientation (a 5 0.92)

Customer satisfaction

1. The company treats its customers in a fair manner
2. The company’s employees are concerned about

customer needs

3. The company’s employees set great store by a courteous

1. I am satisﬁed with the services the company provides to

me

2. The company always fulﬁls my expectations
3. The company solves problems quickly and competently

customer treatment

Trust

4. The company takes customer rights seriously

Good employer (a 5 0.89)

1. Looks like a good company to work for
2. Looks like a company that would have good employees
3. Maintains a high standard in the way it treats people
4. Has excellent leadership

Reliable and ﬁnancially strong company (a 5 0.88)

1. I tend to trust the company’s goods and services
2. This is an honourable company
3. In general, I trust the company’s employees that sell

something to me

4. I do know the company’s prices are appropriate

Loyalty

1. The prospect of lower prices would make me switch to

1. Looks like a company with strong prospects for

another company (R)

future growth

2. If it were possible without a problem, I would choose

2. Recognizes and takes advantage of market opportunities
3. The company is aware of its responsibility to society

another company (R)

3. I intend to remain the company’s customer

Product and service qualitya

1. Oﬀers high quality products and services
2. Is a strong, reliable company

Social and environmental responsibilitya

1. Supports good causes
2. Is an environmentally responsible company

aA Cronbach alpha was not calculated for these two-item
dimensions.

between the two items was 0.67 (po0.01). All
items (see Table 4) were measured on ﬁve-point
Likert-type scales where 1 is ‘agree completely’
and 5 is ‘disagree completely’ (i.e. a low score
equals more of the concept measured). Scale
scores for each construct were created by aver-
aging the responses to individual
items, and
Table 5 shows means and standard deviations
for
together with the
correlation matrix.

study variables,

the

Measurement validation

In order to assess the quality of the measurement
model for the study variables, a conﬁrmatory
factor analysis was undertaken, where corporate
reputation was measured as a 15-item unidimen-
sional construct, and the hypothesized antecedents
and consequences were represented by four latent
variables. This oblique factor model was found to
be a reasonably good ﬁt to the input data, with
goodness of ﬁt index (GFI) 5 0.91, root-mean-
square residual index (RMR) 5 0.03, root mean
squared error of approximation (RMSEA) 5 0.05,
index (CFI) 5 0.95 and w2/
comparative ﬁt
df 5 2.38 (po0.001). All
indices exceeded the
recommended threshold levels (e.g. Bagozzi and

r 2008 British Academy of Management.

Word of mouth

1. If I were asked, I would recommend becoming a customer

of the company

2. I would recommend this company to friends and

acquaintances

Note: (R) item is reverse-scored.

Yi, 1988; Baumgartner and Homburg, 1996). All
loaded signiﬁcantly (po0.001) and
indicators
substantively on their respective constructs with
all standardized factor loadings exceeding 0.40
(standardized loadings ranged from 0.55 to 0.81).
Given these positive results, evidence is provided
for convergent validity of the measures (Steen-
kamp and van Trijp, 1991).

Because we use only one source (i.e. custo-
mers), who provide their assessment of
the
dependent and independent variables, we ac-
knowledge the possibility of common method
bias. Procedural
remedies cannot completely
eliminate the common method bias, so we apply
methods suggested by Podsakoﬀ et al. (2003) to
test for common method bias. Speciﬁcally, after
testing the multidimensional
customer-based
reputation scale, we examined the relative merits
of customer-based corporate reputation as a
second-order construct. The ﬁt of
the ﬁve-
dimensional model was good with GFI 5 0.92,
RMR 5 0.027, RMSEA 5 0.075, CFI 5 0.94 and
w2/df 5 3.88 (po0.001). The second-order model
(i.e. when we added a common method factor)
provided reasonably good ﬁt
that was only
slightly poorer than that of the multidimensional
RMR 5 0.028,
model,
RMSEA 5 0.076, CFI 5 0.94 and w2/df 5 3.90

GFI 5 0.91,

with


196

Table 5. Summary measures and correlations for study variables

1. Corporate reputation
Antecedents of reputation
2. Customer satisfaction
3. Trust
Consequences of reputation
4. Customer loyalty
5. Word of mouth
Mean
Standard deviation

1
 

0.77**
0.78**

0.49**
0.75**
3.90
0.58

2

 
0.82**

0.48**
0.85**
3.99
0.75

3

 

0.52**
0.80**
4.08
0.66

**Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level.

G. Walsh et al.

4

5

 
0.51**
3.62
0.91

 
3.98
0.79

Table 6. Regression with ﬁve corporate reputation dimensions on customer loyalty and word of mouth

Mean (SD)

Beta CL/WoM

Sig. CL/WoM

VIF CL/WoM

Customer loyalty (CL)
Word of mouth (WoM)
Customer orientation
Good employer
Reliable and ﬁnancially
strong company
Product and service quality
Social and environmental
responsibility

Summary results:

3.42 (0.91)
3.97 (0.79)
3.90 (0.71)
3.95 (0.64)
3.84 (0.70)

3.93 (0.88)
3.76 (0.69)

0.29**/0.38**
0.09/0.17**
0.16**/0.16**

0.14*/0.13**

–0.04/0.04

0.00/0.00
0.14/0.00
0.01/0.00

0.01/0.00
0.40/0.27

2.55/2.55
2.82/2.82
2.61/2.64

1.96/1.94
1.72/1.73

Regression summarycustomer loyalty: R 5 0.57; R2 5 0.32; adjusted R2 5 0.32; standard error
of estimate 0.75
Regression summaryword of mouth: R 5 0.76; R2 5 0.58; adjusted R2 5 0.58; standard error
of estimate 0.51

Notes: VIF, variance inﬂation factor; **po0.01; *po0.05.

(po0.001). Therefore, we conclude that common
method bias is not a signiﬁcant issue in our study.
Before using the customer-based corporate
reputation scale to test our research hypotheses,
the scale’s validity was further tested. Speciﬁcally,
to assess construct validity of the ﬁve-dimen-
sional corporate reputation scale, we regressed a
three-item variable measuring customer loyalty
on the ﬁve corporate reputation dimensions.
The corporate reputation items
in Table 3
measuring the ﬁve respective dimensions were
aggregated to ﬁve composite variables. The
results of
the regression analysis, which are
reported in Table 6, show a relatively high
coeﬃcient of determination (R2 5 0.32) and beta
values between   0.04 and 0.29 (at po0.05).

Next we

regressed the

two-item variable
measuring customer word of mouth on the ﬁve
corporate reputation dimensions. The results of

the regression analysis show a relatively high
coeﬃcient of determination (R2 5 0.58) and beta
values between 0.04 and 0.38 (at po0.05).

We also examined the level of collinearity
among the independent variables. A common
measure for collinearity in regression models is
the variance inﬂation factor (VIF). It is generally
suggested that VIF should be smaller than 10 for
all variables (e.g. Hair et al., 1998). This criterion
was met for all ﬁve independent variables in both
regression models. The results, as shown in Table
6, provide evidence for the scale’s predictive
validity.

Results

Using AMOS 6.0, a structural equation model
was ﬁtted to the study item set, with 27 observed

r 2008 British Academy of Management.


Antecedents and Consequences of Corporate Reputation

197

variables and latent variables representing corpo-
rate reputation (second-order factor model, with
ﬁve ﬁrst-order
factors and one second-order
factor) and its hypothesized antecedents and
consequences. The study hypotheses were assessed
by examining the standardized regression coeﬃ-
cients from the structural model (see Figure 1).

recommended

All four hypothesized paths were signiﬁcant.
Customer satisfaction and trust both have a
signiﬁcant impact on corporate reputation. In
addition, corporate reputation signiﬁcantly af-
fects customer loyalty and word of mouth. The
model ﬁts the data very well with all
indices
levels: GFI 5 0.90,
above
CFI 5 0.95, normed ﬁt
index (NFI) 5 0.92,
w2/
RMR 5 0.028,
df 5 2.55 (po0.001). All
items were retained,
although some indicators had coeﬃcients of
determination just above the threshold of 0.40.
The average variances extracted of each model
variable were above 0.50 (Bagozzi and Yi, 1988;
Fornell and Larcker, 1981).

RMSEA 5 0.055

and

The left side of the ﬁgure shows the path
coeﬃcients for predicting corporate reputation
from its two hypothesized antecedents. Both
predictors are signiﬁcant (for customer satisfac-
tion 0.46, po0.01;
for trust 0.53, po0.01),
indicating that they both make an independent
contribution to predicting corporate reputation.
Thus Hypotheses 1 and 2 are supported. Turning
next to the hypothesized consequences of corpo-
rate reputation, Figure 1 shows that corporate
reputation is a signiﬁcant predictor of customer
loyalty (0.87, po0.01), supporting Hypothesis 3;
and also a signiﬁcant predictor of word of mouth
(0.96, po0.01), supporting Hypothesis 4. This is
consistent with previous work (e.g. Andreassen
and Lindestad, 1998; Walsh and Wiedmann,
2004) that postulates a strong corporate reputa-
tion–loyalty link.

By explaining 93% of customer-based corpo-
rate reputation, the relevance of customer satis-
faction and trust for customers’ perceived ﬁrm
reputation is clearly demonstrated. Further, by
explaining 76% of customer loyalty and 92% of
the word of mouth construct, the relevance of
customer-based corporate reputation is also
demonstrated.

In addition, we established the validity of the
corporate reputation scale by regressing the ﬁve
dimensions on customer loyalty and word of
mouth. With this approach, we learned that three

r 2008 British Academy of Management.

of the ﬁve dimensions (‘Customer orientation’,
‘Reliable and ﬁnancially strong company’ and
‘Product and service quality’) are signiﬁcantly
related to customer loyalty, while four of the ﬁve
dimensions (all but ‘Social and environmental
responsibility’) are related to word of mouth.
Thus, we see reasonable consistency in ﬁndings
whether we are looking at the overall reputation
measure or the break-out dimensions. However,
we also learn that not all the dimensions are
equally important to consumers and their loyalty
and word of mouth.

Discussion and implications

All four hypothesized model relationships were
supported by the quantitative data collection and
assessment. Whilst some studies show an associa-
tion between customer satisfaction and customer-
based reputation, they had not assessed whether
satisfaction impacts upon
or how customer
customer-based reputation (Davies et al., 2002;
Walsh, Dinnie and Wiedmann, 2006; Wang, Lo
and Hui, 2003). Our results show that high levels
of customer satisfaction positively impact on
customer-based reputation. Hence, we believe
our ﬁndings support a causal explanation of the
satisfaction–reputation relationship. We agree
with Nguyen and Leblanc (2001) who argue that
reputation can be used as an eﬀective means of
predicting the outcome of the service-production
process, and can, perhaps, be considered the most
reliable indicator of the ability of a service ﬁrm to
satisfy a customer’s desires.

The same is true for trust. Although several
authors have mentioned trust and conﬁdence in
the future actions of the organization as a key
correlate of corporate reputation (e.g. Dowling,
2001; Roberts and Dowling, 2002; Rose and
Thomsen, 2004),
rarely been
empirically established. Even Walsh and Beatty
(2007) who show that trust is a correlate of
customer-based corporate reputation did not
model it as a predictor of reputation.

link has

this

In terms of consequence variables, signalling
theory predicts that customer-based reputation
would exhibit a strong impact on customer
loyalty and word of mouth. While several
empirical studies have attempted to link per-
ceived corporate reputation with customer loy-
alty (e.g. Walsh and Wiedmann, 2004) and others


198

G. Walsh et al.

report that reputation has an indirect impact on
customer retention (e.g. Andreassen and Lindes-
tad, 1998; Barich and Kotler, 1991), here we
show a direct, positive relationship between
corporate reputation and these variables. While
loyalty importance has never been underesti-
mated, recently the importance of word of mouth
has been stressed in the literature. In fact,
Reichheld (2003, 2006) suggests that whether a
customer will recommend the ﬁrm or not is the
only question ﬁrms really need to ask in order to
grow and succeed.

Managerial implications

For service managers, a key insight from this
study is that customer-based corporate reputa-
tion can be measured relatively parsimoniously
and that customer-based corporate reputation is
positively correlated with important consumer
antecedent and outcome variables. Conventional
managerial wisdom holds
that attending to
corporate reputation makes good business sense
because relevant commercial and non-commer-
cial factors are aﬀected. Based on the results of
this study, a more diﬀerentiated analysis seems
appropriate. A key assertion demonstrated in this
study is that customer-based corporate reputa-
tion is not only inﬂuenced by, but also inﬂuences,
critically important customer-behaviour-related
variables. This diﬀerentiated analysis of
the
antecedents–corporate reputation and corporate
reputation–outcomes
relationships may help
ﬁrms use their resources more eﬀectively by
focusing on antecedents and consequences that
are of the greatest strategic importance to them.
The ﬁndings suggest that managers wanting to
have a good corporate reputation should note
how important delivering customer satisfaction is
to achieving that goal. This is noteworthy as
much of the corporate reputation building con-
siders the views of many diﬀerent stakeholders as
important, and considers issues such as social
responsibility and ﬁnancial
strength as key
drivers of reputation. While this may be so, our
study points to the importance of getting your
service right as another key driver of a good
reputation. Indeed, what might be happening is
that satisfaction is casting a ‘halo’ eﬀect onto the
reputation items,
i.e. because consumers are
satisﬁed with the company’s service, they give
more favourable ratings to the elements of the

company’s reputation. Thus, rather than focusing
on the elements of corporate reputation such as
good employer, reliable and ﬁnancially strong
company, social and environmental responsibil-
ity, companies should focus more on the custo-
mer orientation and product and service quality
aspects of the reputation as these are probably
more directly linked to customer satisfaction.
This is evidenced by the strong impact of the
‘customer orientation’ dimension on customer
loyalty and word of mouth (see Table 6).

Another

implication for

satisfaction and trust

service ﬁrms of
inﬂuencing
customer
customer-based corporate reputation is
that
customers often derive their sense of a company’s
reputation from their interactions with its em-
ployees. This means that service organizations
should ensure that employees are empowered
to act in the way customers want and that leads
to satisfaction and engenders trust. Measures to
ensure high levels of satisfaction include satisfac-
tion monitoring and staﬀ training that will enable
employees
to try to help customers make
satisfactory purchase decisions and have enjoy-
able interactions with the ﬁrm.

Our

results

further

suggest

lifetime value.

that a good
corporate reputation has retention, i.e. customer
loyalty, beneﬁts as well as promotional,
i.e.
customer recruitment, beneﬁts. Increased custo-
mer loyalty beneﬁts are hugely important in
deepening relationships with customers and
assessing a customer’s
If a
company has a good reputation, then investments
in customer loyalty programmes would seem to
be a good way to spend money. However, with a
poor reputation, the company may be better oﬀ
to spend that money on increasing customer
satisfaction with their service and focusing on
service improvement goals as well as conducting
research to identify sources of dissatisfaction for
consumers. The second aspect is word of mouth
which is considered by some to be an independent
part of
the promotional mix (Warrington,
2001) because of its unique qualities of being a
non-marketing two-way ﬂow free exchange of
information which is an experience-delivery
mechanism, independent and therefore credible.
In addition, word of mouth is custom-tailored,
more relevant and complete, as well as self-
generating and self-breeding. Moreover, it can
help leverage other forms of promotion such as
sales promotions or advertising as consumers

r 2008 British Academy of Management.


Antecedents and Consequences of Corporate Reputation

199

have a favourable attitude towards the company
because of its good reputation and are more
willing to talk about their promotional cam-
paigns. Knowing the level of their organization’s
reputation should allow managers to decide on
whether it is beneﬁcial to enlist dedicated word of
mouth campaigns to support other ongoing
promotional activities or new product launches.
With a poor reputation, there will be little word
of mouth and such money would be wasted.

Finally, a general implication for the energy
suppliers in this newly deregulated sector is that
they should aim to quickly achieve a good
reputation because it can be a market-entry
barrier for competitors who might wish to enter
the newly opened market. Once established a
good reputation is very diﬃcult to replicate and
building a good reputation incurs costs (e.g.
Dierickx and Cool, 1989) which new entrants
might not be willing to pay. Existing energy
suppliers who are interested in building a strong
reputation need to accept costs in the short run
(reputation investment) in expectation of long-
term beneﬁts that will outweigh the investment
cost. Those same costs might be suﬃcient to
discourage new entrants but
the incumbent
companies must be willing to invest in reputation
building and do it quickly.

Conclusions, limitations and
further research

This study aimed to make four contributions.
The ﬁrst was to apply an abbreviated version of a
US scale in Germany. The second was to embed
customer-based corporate reputation in a model
connecting corporate reputation to important
antecedents and consequences. The third was to
draw on signalling theory to provide an explana-
tion for corporate reputation’s relationship with
the two selected outcome variables of customer
loyalty and word of mouth. The fourth was to
provide advice on how service ﬁrms can aﬀect
corporate reputation using trust and satisfaction.
In pursuing these objectives, we extend pre-
vious work to examine the antecedents and
customer-related consequences of corporate re-
putation of one important stakeholder group,
customers, within a service sector that has unique
properties for corporate reputation research. We
have been able to measure corporate reputation

r 2008 British Academy of Management.

for a company that
is not contaminated by
product brand associations as most previous
measures have been. We have also been the ﬁrst
to examine the impact of customer satisfaction
and trust on corporate reputation, as well as how
corporate reputation aﬀects important customer
outcomes such as customer loyalty and word of
mouth behaviour. We conclude that customer-
based reputation is an important outcome of
customer satisfaction and trust as well as a
predictor of customer
loyalty and word of
mouth. By specifying the consumer antecedents
and consequences of reputation in more detail,
appropriate steps can be taken by companies to
avoid a bad reputation. Companies that are able
to improve the way in which they deliver their
services can improve customer satisfaction and
trust and can lead to a positive reputation. Our
primary contribution to theory lies in applying an
adapted new customer-based corporate reputa-
tion scale in Europe which captures the views of
customers who have interacted with their service
ﬁrm. Thus, this study represents an important
step in that it attempts to measure corporate
reputation from a customer perspective.

it

example,

is conceivable

However, as with all empirical investigations,
the present study suﬀers limitations. The service
context used, although intentioned to test a
reputation measure, does not allow testing for
cross-sectional impacts of corporate reputation
and context-speciﬁc reputation eﬀects. Future
research could investigate if
the eﬀects we
examined can be conﬁrmed for other service
areas. For
that
corporate reputations are more relevant (and
hence have a stronger direct impact on loyalty)
for highly individualized and interactive services
or more ‘tangible’ services such as hairdressing or
restaurants. Similarly, since this study focused on
a service ﬁrm,
future studies could explore
whether the customer-based reputation scale is
equally eﬀective in measuring the reputation of
manufacturing ﬁrms. Another concern refers to
the issue of whether German cultural and
reputation-related peculiarities (e.g. Wiedmann,
2002; Witkowski and Wolﬁnbarger, 2002) may
inﬂuence the construct and its dimensionality, as
well the antecedents and consequences associated
with corporate reputations. A ﬁnal limitation is
the use of a single instrument to assess both the
independent and dependent variables. The use of
one method risks common method bias and


200

G. Walsh et al.

although it cannot explain the independent
contributions
that we ﬁnd when predicting
reputation, or the way in which the variables
work in diﬀerent ways across the model, further
research should consider using diﬀerent methods
to assess
the diﬀerent aspects of corporate
reputation.

In terms of further research, much of the work
in the corporate reputation area does not use
existing theories for explanation, and further
work could use contingency theory as it is likely
that corporate reputation only becomes truly
salient to motivate customers to boycott or be
loyal when the ﬁrm itself is in an industry with a
poor reputation, which would require looking at
diﬀerent ﬁrms in diﬀerent industries which have
good and bad reputations. It could be,
for
example, that the relationships we examine would
be far stronger in an industry such as the
insurance industry which has a poor reputation
and weaker in an industry such as cosmetics
which has a better reputation. Additional re-
search is
therefore needed to establish the
customer-based corporate reputation scale’s gen-
eralizability and to test it further across cultures
and service contexts. Further research could be
directed towards looking at the ﬁve dimensions of
corporate reputation and their relationship to the
antecedents and consequences identiﬁed, since in
this study we treated reputation as a unidimen-
sional construct for analysis purposes.
It might also be the case that

there are
similarities across or diﬀerences between drivers
and outcomes of customer-based versus other
stakeholder-based views on corporate reputation.
By understanding the antecedents of customer-
based reputation and customer-based reputation–
outcomes relationships across diﬀerent company
types, ﬁrms can come closer to developing a
comprehensive
reputation management pro-
gramme. Eﬀectively managing its reputation would
require a ﬁrm to know and communicate with its
diﬀerent target audiences. Thus, another extension
of the customer-based reputation scale would be to
use it for market segmentation and identify for each
stakeholder group which of the ﬁve dimensions of
corporate reputation was most important to them.
Knowing this, companies could tailor communica-
tions about speciﬁc dimensions to particular
stakeholders. Managing reputations also implies
that a ﬁrm identiﬁes all relevant correlates of
customer-based reputation. However, as we only

used two antecedents of corporate reputation, we
could not investigate other potential causes such as
customer commitment or customer citizenship
behaviour (Groth, 2005). In a similar vein, as our
focus was on consumer consequences, we were not
able to link measures of corporate reputation to
ﬁnancial and market performance indicators which
(together with customer-related factors) should be
part of the architecture of any organization’s
performance measurement and management pro-
cess. Future research might examine such linkages
to strengthen the business case for investing in
corporate reputation. Another aspect is to look at
the same relationships here longitudinally so that a
more accurate picture of the timing of antecedents
and consequences is built up. Finally, no research
has systematically assessed the relative importance
of each stakeholder group, e.g. customers, industry
analysts, shareholders, senior managers and direc-
tors, employees, general public, and suppliers, in
determining corporate reputation over time.

References

(1996).

Andaleeb, S. S.

‘An experimental

investigation of
satisfaction and commitment in marketing channels: the role
of trust and dependence’, Journal of Retailing, 72, pp. 77–93.
Anderson, E. and T. S. Robertson (1995). ‘Including multi-line
salespeople to adopt house brands’, Journal of Marketing, 59,
pp. 16–31.

Anderson, E. and B. A. Weitz (1989).

‘Determinants of
continuity in conventional industrial channel dyads’, Market-
ing Science, 8, pp. 310–323.

Andreassen, T. W. and B. Lindestad (1998). ‘The eﬀect of
corporate image in the formation of customer loyalty’,
Journal of Service Research, 1, pp. 82–92.

Arnould, E. J., L. L. Price and G. M. Zinkhan (2004).

Consumers, 2nd edn. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Bagozzi, R. P. and Y. Yi (1988).

‘On the evaluation of
structural equation models’, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 16 (1), pp. 74–94.

Balmer, J. M. T.

‘Corporate identity, corporate
branding and corporate marketing: seeing through the fog’,
European Journal of Marketing, 35, pp. 248–291.

(2001).

Barich, H. and P. Kotler (1991). ‘A framework for marketing image

management’, Sloan Management Review, 32, pp. 94–104.

Baumgartner, H. and C. Homburg (1996). ‘Applications of
structural equation modeling in marketing and consumer
research: a review’, International Journal of Research in
Marketing, 13 (2), pp. 139–161.

Berens, G., C. B. M. van Riel and G. H. van Bruggen (2005).
‘Corporate associations and consumer product responses: the
moderating role of corporate brand dominance’, Journal of
Marketing, 69, pp. 35–48.

Bhattacharya, C. B., H. Rao and M. A. Glynn (1995).
‘Understanding the bond of identiﬁcation: an investigation

r 2008 British Academy of Management.


Antecedents and Consequences of Corporate Reputation

201

of its correlates among art museum members’, Journal of
Marketing, 59, pp. 46–57.

Bromley, D. B. (2000).

‘Psychological aspects of corporate
identity, image and reputation’, Corporate Reputation Re-
view, 3, pp. 240–252.

Bromley, D. B. (2001). ‘Relationships between personal and
corporate reputation’, European Journal of Marketing, 35,
pp. 316–334.

Brown, T. J. and P. A. Dacin (1997). ‘The company and the
product: corporate associations and consumer product
responses’, Journal of Marketing, 61, pp. 68–84.

Brown, T. J., J. C. Mowen, D. T. Donovan and J. W. Licata
(2002).
service workers:
personality trait eﬀects on self and supervisor performance
ratings’, Journal of Marketing Research, 39, pp. 110–119.

‘The customer orientation of

‘Identity,

Brown, T. J., P. A. Dacin, M. G. Pratt and D. A. Whetten
(2006).
intended image, construed image, and
reputation: an interdisciplinary framework and suggested
terminology’, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
34, pp. 99–106.

Caruana, A., B. Ramasashan and K. A. Krentler (2004).
‘Corporate reputation, customer satisfaction, and customer
loyalty: what is the relationship?’. In H. E. Spotts (ed.),
Proceedings: Developments in Marketing Science, Vol. 27,
p. 301. Coral Gables, FL: Academy of Marketing Science.

Davies, G., R. Chun, R. J. V. da Silva and S. Roper (2002).
Corporate Reputation and Competitiveness. London: Rout-
ledge.

Dierickx, I. and K. Cool (1989). ‘Asset stock accumulation and
advantage’, Management

competitive

sustainability of
Science, 35, pp. 1504–1511.

Doney, P. M. and J. P. Cannon (1997). ‘An examination of the
nature of trust in buyer–seller relationships’, Journal of
Marketing, 61, pp. 35–51.

Dowling, G. R.

(2001). Creating Corporate Reputations.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Dunbar, R. L. M. and J. Schwalbach (2000).

‘Corporate
reputation and performance in Germany’, Corporate Reputa-
tion Review, 3, pp. 115–123.

Eberl, M. and M. Schwaiger (2005). ‘Corporate reputation:
disentangling the eﬀects on ﬁnancial performance’, European
Journal of Marketing, 39, pp. 838–854.

Fisher, A. B. (1996). ‘Corporate reputations: comebacks and

comeuppances’, Fortune, 133 (4), pp. 90–98.

Fombrun, C. J. (1996). Reputation: Realizing Value from the
Corporate Image. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.

Fombrun, C. J. and C. van Riel (1997).

‘The reputational

landscape’, Corporate Reputation Review, 1, pp. 5–13.

Fombrun, C. J. and V. P. Rindova (2000).

‘The road to
transparency: reputation management at Royal Dutch Shell’.
In M. Schultz, M. J. Hatch and M. H. Larsen (eds), The
Expressive Organization: Linking Identity, Reputation, and the
Corporate Brand, pp. 77–96. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Fombrun, C. J. and M. Shanley (1990). ‘What’s in a name:
reputation-building and corporate strategy’, Academy of
Management Journal, 33, pp. 233–258.

Fombrun, C. J., N. A. Gardberg and J. W. Sever (2000).
‘The reputation quotient: a multi-stakeholder measure of
corporate reputation’, Journal of Brand Management, 7, pp.
241–255.

r 2008 British Academy of Management.

Fornell, C. and D. G. Larcker (1981). ‘Evaluating structural
and
equation models with
measurement error’, Journal of Marketing Research, 18 (1),
pp. 39–50.

unobservable

variables

Freeman, R. E. (1984). Strategic Management: A Stakeholder

Approach. Boston, MA: Pitman.

Fryxell, G. E. and J. Wang (1994). ‘The Fortune Corporate
reputation for what?’, Journal of

Index:

‘Reputation’
Management, 20, pp. 1–13.

Ganesan, S. (1994). ‘Determinants of long-term orientation in
buyer–seller relationships’, Journal of Marketing, 58 (April),
pp. 1–19.

Gardberg, N. A. and C. J. Fombrun (2002).

‘The global
reputation quotient project: ﬁrst steps towards a cross-
nationally valid measure of corporate reputation’, Corporate
Reputation Review, 4, pp. 303–307.

Gotsi, M. and A. M. Wilson (2001). ‘Corporate reputation:
seeking a deﬁnition’, Corporate Communications, 6 (1), pp.
24–30.

Groenland, E. A. G. (2002). ‘Qualitative research to validate
the RQ-dimensions’, Corporate Reputation Review, 4, pp.
309–315.

Groth, M. (2005).

‘Customers as good soldiers: examining
citizenship behaviors in Internet service deliveries’, Journal of
Management, 31, pp. 7–27.

Hair, J. F. Jr, R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham and W. C. Black
(1998). Multivariate Data Analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.

Hardaker, S. and C. Fill (2005). ‘Corporate service brands: the
intellectual and emotional engagement of employees’, Cor-
porate Reputation Review, 7, pp. 365–376.

Helm, S., A. Eggert and I. Garnefeld (2005), ‘Modelling the
impact of corporate reputation on customer satisfaction and
loyalty using PLS’. Paper presented at PLS’05: 4th Interna-
tional Symposium on PLS and Related Methods, Barcelona,
September.

Hennig-Thurau, T., K. P. Gwinner and D. D. Gremler (2002).
‘Understanding relationship marketing outcomes: an inte-
gration of relational beneﬁts and relationship quality’,
Journal of Service Research, 5, pp. 230–247.

Herbig, P. and J. Milewicvz (1993).

‘The relationship of
reputation and credibility to brand success’, Journal of
Consumer Marketing, 10, pp. 18–24.

Ippolito, P. M. (1991). ‘Bonding and nonbonding signals of

product quality’, Journal of Business, 63 (1), pp. 41–60.

Jones, G. H., B. H. Jones and P. Little (2000). ‘Reputation as
reservoir: buﬀering against loss in times of economic crisis’,
Corporate Reputation Review, 3, pp. 21–29.

Kelly, S. and M. A. Davis (1994). ‘Antecedents to customer
expectations for service recovery’, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 22, pp. 52–61.

Kim, J.-B. and C. J. Choi (2003). ‘Reputation and product
tampering in service industries’, Service Industries Journal,
23, pp. 3–11.

Moorman, C., G. Zaltman and R. Deshpande (1992).
‘Relationships between providers and users of marketing
research: the dynamics of trust within and between organiza-
tions’, Journal of Marketing, 29, pp. 314–328.

Nguyen, N. and G. Leblanc (2001).

‘Corporate image and
corporate reputation in customers’ retention decisions in
services’, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 8, pp.
227–236.


202

G. Walsh et al.

Page, G. and H. Fearn (2005). ‘Corporate reputation: what do
really care about?’, Journal of Advertising

consumers
Research, 45, pp. 305–313.

Podsakoﬀ, P. M., S. B. MacKenzie, L. Jeong-Yeon and
N. P. Podsakoﬀ (2003).
in
behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and
recommended remedies’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 88
(5), pp. 879–903.

‘Common method biases

Reichheld, F. F. (2003). ‘The one number you need to grow’,

Harvard Business Review, 81 (December), pp. 46–54.

Reichheld, F. F. (2006).

‘The microeconomics of customer
relationships’, MIT Sloan Management Review, 47 (2), pp.
73–78.

Richins, M. L. (2004). ‘The material values scale: measurement
properties and development of a short form’, Journal of
Consumer Research, 31 (June), pp. 209–219.

Roberts, P. and G. R. Dowling (2002). ‘Corporate reputation
and sustained superior ﬁnancial performance’, Strategic
Management Journal, 23, pp. 1077–1093.

Rose, C. and S. Thomsen (2004). ‘The impact of corporate
reputation on performance: some Danish evidence’, Eur-
opean Management Journal, 22, pp. 201–210.

Schultz, M., J. Mouritsen and G. Gabrielsen (2001). ‘Sticky
reputation: analyzing a ranking system’, Corporate Reputa-
tion Review, 4, pp. 24–41.

Schwaiger, M.

‘Components and parameters of
corporate reputation – an empirical study’, Schmalenbach
Business Review, 56, pp. 46–71.

(2004).

Shapiro, C. (1983).

‘Premium for high quality products as
returns to reputations’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98,
pp. 659–679.

Silverman, G. (2001). The Secrets of Word of Mouth Marketing:
How to Trigger Exponential Sales Through Runaway Word of
Mouth. New York: AMACOM.

Sobol, M. G. and G. Farrelly (1988). ‘Corporate reputation: a
function of relative size or ﬁnancial performance?’, Review of
Business and Economic Research, 24, pp. 45–59.

Spence, M. (1973). ‘Job market signalling’, Quarterly Journal of

Economics, 87 (August), pp. 355–374.

Sproles, G. B. and E. L. Kendall (1986). ‘A methodology for
proﬁling consumers’ decision-making styles’, Journal of
Consumer Aﬀairs, 20, pp. 267–279.

Steenkamp, J.-B. E. M. and H. C. M. van Trijp (1991). ‘The use
of LISREL in validating marketing constructs’, International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 8 (4), pp. 283–299.

Sundaram, D. S., K. Mitra and C. Webster (1998). ‘Word-of-
mouth communications: a motivational analysis’, Advances
in Consumer Research, 25, pp. 527–531.

Walsh, G. and S. E. Beatty (2007). ‘Customer-based corporate
reputation of a service ﬁrm: scale development and validation’,
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 35 (1), pp. 127–
143.

corporate

Walsh, G. and K.-P. Wiedmann (2004). ‘A conceptualization
of
an evaluation
and extension of the RQ’, Corporate Reputation Review, 6,
pp. 304–312.

reputation in Germany:

reputation and customer

Walsh, G., K. Dinnie and K.-P. Wiedmann (2006). ‘How do
corporate
satisfaction impact
customer defection? A study of private energy customers
in Germany’, Journal of Services Marketing, 20 (6), pp. 412–
420.

Wang, Y., H.-P. Lo and Y. V. Hui (2003). ‘The antecedents of
service quality and product quality and their inﬂuence on
bank reputation: evidence from the banking industry in
China’, Managing Service Quality, 13, pp. 72–83.

Warrington, T. (2001). ‘The secrets of word of mouth market-
ing: how to trigger exponential sales through runaway word
of mouth. Book Review’, Journal of Consumer Marketing, 19,
p. 364(1).

Weiss, A. M., E. Anderson and D. J. MacInnis (1999).
‘Reputation management as a motivation for sales structure
decisions’, Journal of Marketing, 63, pp. 74–89.

Wernerfelt, B. (1988). ‘Umbrella branding as a signal of new
product quality: an example of signaling by posting a bond’,
RAND Journal of Economics, 19, pp. 458–466.

Whetten, D. and A. A. Mackey (2002).

‘A social actor
conception of organizational
identity and its implications
for the study of organizational reputation’, Business and
Society, 41, pp. 393–414.

Wiedmann, K.-P.

the German
reputation landscape’, Corporate Reputation Review, 4, pp.
337–353.

‘Analyzing

(2002).

Witkowski, T. H. and M. F. Wolﬁnbarger (2002).

‘Com-
parative service quality: German and American ratings
across serving settings’, Journal of Business Research, 55,
pp. 875–881.

Yoon, E., H. J. Guﬀey and V. Kijewski (1993). ‘The eﬀects
of information and company reputation on intentions to
buy a business service’, Journal of Business Research, 27, pp.
215–228.

r 2008 British Academy of Management.


Antecedents and Consequences of Corporate Reputation

203

Gianfranco Walsh is Professor of Marketing and Electronic Retailing at the University of Koblenz-
Landau, Germany. He is also a visiting Professor of Marketing at the University of Strathclyde
Business School in Glasgow. His research focuses on consumer behaviour, corporate reputation and
e-commerce. His work has been published in, amongst others, Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, Journal of Advertising, Journal of Consumer Aﬀairs, Journal of Interactive Marketing,
Journal of Macromarketing and Journal of Marketing Management.

Vincent-Wayne Mitchell is Professor of Consumer Marketing at CASS Business School, City
University London. His research focuses on consumer decision-making, complaining behaviour and
risk taking. He has won eight Best Paper Awards and has published over 200 academic and
practitioner papers in journals such as Harvard Business Review, Journal of Business Research,
British Journal of Management, Journal of Economic Psychology. He sits on the Editorial Boards of
six international journals, is an Expert Adviser for the Oﬃce of Fair Trading and is Head of
Marketing at CASS.

Paul Jackson is Professor of Corporate Communications in Manchester Business School at the
University of Manchester, UK. His research interests are in organizations as complex systems,
identity issues in mergers, communication technologies and organizational forms, and research
methodology. He has published in journals such as Academy of Management Journal, Journal of
Applied Psychology, Journal of Occupational Health Psychology and Human Relations.

Sharon Beatty is Reese Phifer Professor of Marketing and Marketing Doctoral Coordinator at the
University of Alabama. She has published in journals such as Journal of Marketing Research, Journal
of Consumer Research, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science and Journal of Retailing. She is on
four editorial review boards of journals, such as Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science and
Journal of Retailing. She is an AMS Distinguished Fellow and an SMA Distinguished Scholar, as well
as past member of AMA’s Academic Council and AMS’s Board of Governors.

r 2008 British Academy of Management.

