Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  1

Running Head:  Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects 

 

 
 

AN INVESTIGATION OF THE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN LEADER AND 

FOLLOWER PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL, SERVICE CLIMATE AND JOB 

PERFORMANCE  

 

 

FRED O. WALUMBWA* 
SUZANNE J. PETERSON  
Arizona State University 

BRUCE J. AVOLIO   

University of Washington  

CHAD A. HARTNELL 
Arizona State University 

 
 

 

*Address Correspondence to:  
 
Fred O. Walumbwa 
Department of Management 
W.P. Carey School of Business 
Arizona State University 
Tempe, AZ 85287-4006 
Phone: 602-543-6240 
Email:  Fred.Walumbwa@asu.edu 

 

Personnel Psychology (in press) 

 

Author Acknowledgements: 
We thank the Action Editor, Frederick Morgeson and three anonymous reviewers for their 
insightful comments and suggestions regarding this manuscript. All remaining errors are ours. 

 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  2

Abstract 

Using a sample of 79 police leaders and their direct reports (264 police followers), this study 

investigated the relationships of leader and follower psychological capital, service climate, and 

job performance. Hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) results revealed that leader psychological 

capital was positively related to follower performance, with this relationship mediated by 

follower psychological capital.  We also found that the follower psychological capital-

performance relationship was moderated by service climate such that the relationship was 

stronger when service climate was perceived to be high versus low. Finally, exploratory HLM 

analyses indicated that leader and follower psychological capital interacted to positively predict 

rated performance. We discuss implications of these findings, limitations, and directions for 

future research. 

 

 

 

Key words. Psychological capital, positive leadership, climate, job performance, police 

organizations 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  3

Research on positive forms of leadership has received increasing attention in the past 

decade (Avolio & Luthans, 2006; Ehrhart, 2004; Gardner, Avolio, Luthans, May, & Walumbwa, 

2005; Hess & Cameron, 2005; Ilies, Morgeson, & Nahrgang, 2005; Yammarino, Dionne, 

Schriesheim, & Dansereau, 2008).  A rise in interest in these positive forms of leadership is due 

in part to mounting evidence supporting the central role of positivity in enhancing human well-

being and performance at work (Avolio, Gardner, Walumbwa, Luthans, & May, 2004; Avolio & 

Walumbwa, 2006; Cameron, Dutton, & Quinn, 2003; Fredrickson, 2009; Luthans, Avolio, Avey, 

& Norman, 2007; Peterson & Seligman, 2004). For example, initial research (e.g., Liden, 

Wayne, Zhao, & Henderson, 2008; Peterson, Walumbwa, Byron, & Myrowitz, 2009; 

Walumbwa, Hartnell, & Oke, in press; Walumbwa, Luthans, Avey, & Oke, 2009) suggests that 

leaders who possess a variety of positive states or traits, goals, values, and character strengths are 

able to positively influence followers’ states, behavior, and performance.  

With the increasing attention being focused on positivity in the workplace and its 

documented effects, it is important to understand what predicts employee positivity and how 

employee positivity relates to performance. This knowledge will not only contribute to theory 

building in the areas associated with positive leadership, but will also help organizations to build 

effective policies and practices for enhancing employee positivity. Avolio and Luthans (2006) 

among other authors specifically suggested that to better understand the dynamics of the 

leadership process, research must examine how the leader’s influence is mediated through the 

followers they work with over time. Further, because research has yet to systematically examine 

the context in which employee positivity relates to their performance, we still know relatively 

little about when employee positivity is more or less likely to enhance performance. 

Accordingly the first objective of the present study was to extend previous research by 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  4

examining the process through which a leader’s level of positive psychological capital (Luthans 

& Avolio, 2003) predicts their followers’ job performance. Psychological capital is defined as 

“one’s positive appraisal of circumstances and probability for success based on motivated effort 

and perseverance” (Luthans et al., 2007, p. 550). Researchers (e.g., Avolio et al., 2004; Avolio & 

Luthans, 2006) have suggested that one key mechanism through which leaders’ psychological 

capital may influence their followers’ job performance is through followers’ psychological 

capital. Because leaders are frequently described by followers as role models, when followers 

perceive their leaders as behaving positively, we expect those followers to behave in a similarly 

positive fashion in an attempt to emulate their leaders (Avolio & Walumbwa, 2006; Ibarra, 1999; 

Peterson & Seligman, 2004; Yammarinno et al., 2008). By testing whether leader psychological 

capital influences follower psychological capital, we elucidate the process through which leader 

positivity impacts follower performance.  In addition, we also aim to provide practical advice 

regarding the importance of leaders modeling positivity for followers.  

We know from prior research that positive psychological capital fosters positive work 

outcomes and also reduces counterproductive work behaviors (Avey, Luthans, & Youssef, 2009; 

Luthans et al., 2007; Walumbwa et al., 2009). To date, however, research has yet to examine 

potential boundary conditions that serve to either promote or impede the positive effects of 

employee psychological capital on performance. As Hackman (2009) observes in his critique of 

prior psychological capital research, “I look forward to further empirical work on the conditions 

that most powerfully foster and sustain positive states at work” (p. 321). Climate, such as service 

climate (Schneider, Salvaggio, & Subirats, 2002), may constitute a potent moderator of the 

relationship between employees’ psychological capital and their performance because service 

climate signals to employees what the group values (i.e., customer service) (Liao & Chuang, 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  5

2007; Schneider, Ehrhart, Mayer, Saltz, & Niles-Jolly, 2005). In the present study, we begin to 

address Hackman’s challenge to research on psychological capital by focusing on the moderating 

effect of service climate, which we define as employees’ collective perceptions of the policies, 

practices, and procedures that are rewarded, supported, and expected concerning customer 

service (Schneider et al., 2002).  Thus, our second objective was to examine the cross-level 

moderating effect of service climate by targeting the relationship between employees’ 

psychological capital and their performance. By focusing on service climate as a cross-level 

moderator, we add to the emerging theoretical and empirical research on psychological capital by 

highlighting the importance of incorporating situational or contextual factors and, in doing so, 

help broaden psychological capital theory and practical utility in terms of enhancing service 

performance.  

Our third and final objective was to begin to examine how leader and follower 

psychological capital interact to predict performance. In particular, an exploratory aspect of our 

study focused on examining whether leader positivity provided a more or less optimal context for 

the effects of follower positivity on their performance. Although prior leadership research has 

been frequently criticized for not taking a more integrative view of theory building and research 

(Avolio, 2007), including an interactive perspective, scant research has examined whether 

leadership is a more or less optimal context for the effect of followers’ positivity on their 

performance. Our exploratory analysis aims to address this gap in the literature. If the degree to 

which follower positivity is associated with performance varies as a function of leader positivity, 

then organizations should consider psychological capital development at multiple levels, taking 

into account both followers and their immediate supervisors. 

 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  6

Theory and Hypothesis Development 

Psychological Capital 

Psychological capital represents an individual’s positive psychological state of 

development that is characterized by four psychological resources: efficacy (confidence to take 

on and put in the necessary effort to succeed at challenging tasks), hope (one’s ability to 

persevere toward a goal), optimism (a positive expectation about succeeding now and in the 

future), and resilience (being able to sustain and bounce back to attain success when beset by 

problems and adversity) (Luthans et al., 2007).  A key distinguishing factor between 

psychological capital and other positive core constructs that already exist in the organizational 

literature is that psychological capital is conceptualized to be state-like and open to development, 

differentiating it from the more fixed, trait-like constructs such as core self-evaluations. In 

support, Luthans and his colleagues (e.g., Avey et al., 2009; Luthans et al., 2007) have provided 

initial evidence suggesting that psychological capital is distinct from core self-evaluations, 

positive affectivity, and the “Big Five” personality traits. Evidence regarding the discriminant 

validity of psychological capital with respect to core self-evaluations and the “Big Five” 

personality traits is particularly important because each has been associated with a variety of 

positive employee behaviors including performance (e.g., Bono & Colbert, 2005; Kacmar, 

Collins, Harris, & Judge, 2009; Judge, Bono, Ilies, & Werner, 2002). 

Although the four psychological capital dimensions have each received considerable 

research attention in the psychological literature, recent theory and empirical research suggests 

that combining these four resources into a core construct results in a common synergistic 

capacity or resource. For example, Stajkovic (2006) argued, “that the four constructs share a 

common confidence core that exists at a higher level of abstraction” (p. 1212). In line with this 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  7

argument, Luthans, Avolio, Walumbwa, and Li (2005) pointed out that although being optimistic 

may certainly help with one’s motivation and performance, it is not as powerful as combining 

optimism with hope, resilience and/or efficacy. Thus, consistent with recent theoretical and 

empirical evidence (Luthans et al., 2007), we examine psychological capital as a higher order 

construct comprised of the four positive resources of hope, optimism, efficacy, and resilience. 

From Leader Psychological Capital to Follower Psychological Capital 

Recently, researchers have suggested that psychological capital may play an important 

role in explaining the leader-follower relationship and how followers subsequently behave (e.g., 

Avolio & Luthans, 2006; Luthans & Avolio, 2003; Walumbwa et al., 2009). Not only should 

leaders who score higher in psychological capital display more positive attitudes and higher 

performance themselves, but such leaders should also serve as role models for followers by 

displaying higher levels of positivity about their work. According to Bandura’s (1977) social 

learning cognitive theory, individuals learn by attending to and observing the behavior of 

credible role models.  In organizations, supervisors often have higher status and power than their 

followers, and thus, are influential sources of information to employees regarding what behavior 

is important and appropriate to potentially model.  Therefore, to the extent that followers respect 

their supervisors’ status and performance within the organization, they will be more likely to 

emulate their leader’s behavior to attain similarly positive behavioral outcomes (Bandura, 1977).   

With respect to psychological capital, leaders who are more hopeful tend to set more 

alternative goals, are highly motivated to achieve those goals, and find ways around obstacles to 

goal achievement (Peterson et al., 2009).  Similarly, leaders who are efficacious, optimistic, and 

resilient put forth the effort and persistence needed to succeed, tend to have positive expectations 

about their environment, and bounce back from adversity or failure.  As followers observe the 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  8

combined positive impact of these four resources in action, they are more likely to emulate the 

behaviors associated with their leader’s psychological capital. Specifically, we would expect 

followers to mimic their supervisors’ behavior such that the positive supervisor states are 

transferred to their followers (Yammarino et al., 2008).  This transfer may occur through the 

process of emotional contagion whereby positivity displayed by leaders may ‘rub off’ on 

followers (e.g., O'Neill, Harrison, Cleveland, Almeida, Stawski, & Crouter, 2009; Sy, Côté, & 

Saavedra, 2005). Supporting the link between leader and follower emotion, Bono and Ilies 

(2006) found that leaders’ positive emotional expressions were positively associated with 

follower moods, concluding that the leader’s behavior is a salient source of information that can 

influence followers’ perceived psychological resources. 

Therefore, in this study, we suggest that leaders exhibiting higher levels of psychological 

capital act as attractive and credible role models for followers to imitate these positive 

states/behaviors (Bandura, 1977). Specifically, leaders who report having higher levels of 

efficacy, hope, optimism, and resilience would be expected to ‘transfer’ those levels to followers, 

by serving as exemplary guides to their followers’ behavior (Ibarra, 1999). We examine this 

possibility in this study and propose the following hypothesis:  

Hypothesis 1: Leader psychological capital positively relates to follower psychological 

capital. 

Follower Psychological Capital and Job Performance 

Research has generally supported a positive relationship between psychological capital 

and performance (Avey et al., 2009; Luthans et al., 2007; Walumbwa et al., 2009).  The positive 

relationship between psychological capital and performance is explained by suggesting that 

when the four facets of efficacy, hope, optimism, and resilience combine to form an individual’s 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  9

level of psychological capital, they trigger a synergistic agentic capacity considered to be critical 

to goal accomplishment, motivation, success and resulting performance (Stajkovic, 2006). 

Support for this combined agentic capacity can be found in psychological resource theories (see 

Hobfoll, 2002). Hobfoll posits that psychological resources have support synergies that operate 

between and within the various components, creating higher-order ‘resource caravans’ or in this 

case, psychological capital. Similarly, Fredrickson (2001) in her broaden-and-build theory of 

individual potential suggests that higher levels of positivity will contribute to maintaining higher 

levels of individual motivation and performance. Fredrickson makes this assertion based on the 

assumption that higher levels of positivity can ‘build’ an individual’s  intellectual, physical, 

social, and psychological resources to help them cope with and address varying challenges in 

work situations, thereby enhancing their performance. 

Thus, based on theory and past research, individuals who score higher in psychological 

capital can be expected to put forth extra effort and perseverance based on greater confidence 

(efficacy), more willpower and energy to generate multiple solutions to problems or goal 

blockages (hope), will be more likely to voice positive expectations about results (optimism), 

and will respond more positively to adversity and setbacks (resilience). In other words, higher 

levels of psychological capital should facilitate a stronger motivational force aimed at the 

successful accomplishment of goals and tasks, which should lead to desired performance 

outcomes. Thus, we expect psychological capital comprising efficacy, hope, optimism, and 

resilience to improve follower performance by enhancing an individual’s overall motivation and 

perseverance. We propose the following hypothesis:  

Hypothesis 2: Follower psychological capital positively relates to their job performance. 

Extending previous research on psychological capital and following the logic of 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  10

Hypotheses 1 and 2 above, we examined leader psychological capital as a more distal predictor 

of followers’ job performance. We believe that leader psychological capital is likely to play a 

role in followers’ performance by enhancing their psychological capital reservoir (Walumbwa et 

al., 2009; Yammarino et al., 2008). By affecting follower psychological capital, leader 

psychological capital behavior becomes an indirect antecedent of followers’ job performance. 

Supporting this argument, Carmeli, Ben-Hador, Waldman, and Rupp (2009) examined how 

leader relational behavior cultivates social capital, reporting that employees’ social capital played 

a significant role on how relational leadership subsequently predicted employee job performance. 

Similarly, Walumbwa et al. (2009) found that employee psychological capital served as a 

potential mediator in the relationship between leaders described as authentic and performance. 

Based on these findings, we expect employees’ psychological capital to serve as a mediator of 

the relationship between leader psychological capital and employee job performance. We 

therefore propose the following hypothesis: 

Hypothesis 3: Follower psychological capital mediates the positive relationship between 

leader psychological capital and follower job performance. 

Follower Psychological Capital, Service Climate, and Performance 

Although narrow measures of climate show a direct effect with specific performance 

outcomes (Carr, Schmidt, Ford, & DeShon, 2003), we argue that service climate has broader and 

direct utility within service organizations because customer service is an implicit facet of an 

individual’s performance. In the most general sense, most sales employees’ performance is 

typically evaluated based on customers’ satisfaction with their service. For example, a common 

performance evaluation measure for healthcare professionals is the patient experience or level of 

satisfaction. Similarly, hospitality employees’ performance is commonly assessed based on 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  11

‘guest’ comments regarding their service. 

Police officers or firefighters, in a similar manner, provide service to their communities 

and society by competently enforcing the law and positively engaging with their constituents. 

Part of the motivation for embedding police officers in neighborhoods through community 

outreach or locating neighborhood precincts has been to develop a more positive relationship 

with their constituents. This is because police officers, fire fighters and other service 

professionals are seen by their constituents as being an important part of their satisfaction with 

living in their communities.  Also, when these service professionals perform exemplary service, 

they are often rewarded with medals, promotions, salary increments, etc.  In contrast, when they 

fail to serve their community in a satisfactory manner, they are often publicly reprimanded or 

punished. Given these examples, we expand the literature’s traditional definition of customer 

service performance to include the extent to which service professionals competently carry out 

their jobs (i.e., delivering the expected or beyond expected levels of service), a more germane 

evaluation of customer service performance in the context of police organizations.  

Service climates are seen as being an integral source of information to employees by 

elucidating what behavior is desirable, expected, and rewarded (Schneider et al., 2005). Thus, 

positive service climate is likely to provide specific, positive cues to employees that direct their 

attention toward achieving superior service performance.  For instance, service goals such as 

building positive customer relationships and providing excellent customer service, are salient in 

a high service climate. In support Liao and Chuang (2007) investigated and found that service 

employees thrived in a service-oriented environment that promoted higher quality service to 

clients and customers. Thus, employees in a positive service climate are more likely to focus 

their effort in attaining those outcomes by being cognizant of how they perform their duties such 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  12

that they deliver or exceed the expected level of service.   

Employees with high psychological capital are more likely to persist in their effort to 

enhance performance in a positive service climate because they believe they have the ability and 

desire to meet their customers’ as well as their colleagues’ expectations.  Further, employees in a 

positive service climate would be expected to aim to attain high performance standards to 

reinforce and contribute to the positive psychological environment that the service climate 

imbues.  Consequently, a positive service climate should motivate employees with high levels of 

psychological capital to perform their duties with excellent service because the cues from their 

work group would signal that such behavior is both meaningful and valuable to both the unit and 

to its external customers.   

Conversely, when service climates are low, employees are less likely to attain high 

performance standards because the social context provides either negative or ambiguous cues 

that would inform employees about what they shouldn’t do or how they should behave.  When 

expectations are more negative or unclear, employees may either reduce their effort or behave in 

a manner that they expect will be rewarded, which could run counter to meeting customer 

expectations.  Although employees with high psychological capital may still exert effort to 

improve their performance, they may be less likely to be recognized or rewarded as being high 

performers.  Therefore, we argue that employees’ psychological capital would interact with the 

positive service climate to amplify individual job performance.  

Although we are not aware of any prior research that has examined the interaction 

between follower psychological capital and service climate in predicting follower performance, 

one recent study is relevant in supporting our proposition. Walumbwa et al. (in press), using data 

from multinational companies operating in Kenya, reported that a positive service climate 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  13

moderated the relationship between employee commitment to the supervisor and organizational 

citizenship behavior. Specifically, they found that positive service climate enhanced the 

individual-level influence of commitment to the supervisor on citizenship behaviors exhibited by 

employees. Therefore, because climate signals the valued behavior desired from employees and 

what typically gets rewarded (Schneider et al., 2005), we expect a positive service climate to 

strengthen the relationship between followers’ psychological capital and their performance. We 

propose the following hypothesis: 

Hypothesis 4: Service climate moderates the influence of follower psychological capital 

on their performance, such that the influence of follower psychological capital is more 

positive when service climate is high than when service climate is low. 

In addition to the above cross-level moderating effect of positive service climate 

(Hypothesis 4), we also explored the interactive effects of leader and follower psychological 

capital in predicting follower performance. For example, one could argue that the follower 

psychological capital-performance relationship is moderated by the leader’s psychological 

capital, such that when both leaders and followers have positive psychological capital, 

performance is higher (i.e., a cross-level interaction). Such a cross-level interaction would 

suggest that leader psychological capital behavior constitutes a contextual enhancer that further 

strengthens the positive effect of follower psychological capital on their performance. The basis 

for this exploratory analysis comes from earlier work that has shown that group leaders may help 

shape followers’ attitudes through recurring practices that translate formal policies and 

procedures (Zohar, 2000). Wang and Walumbwa (2007), using a sample of employees from 

China, Kenya, and Thailand examined how transformational leadership behavior shapes 

followers’ reactions to family-friendly policies, and how these responses relate to followers’ 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  14

attitudes and behaviors. Providing evidence of the potential moderating effect of leadership, 

Wang and Walumbwa found that transformational leadership positively moderated the 

relationships between employee perceptions of family-friendly policies and both organizational 

commitment and work withdrawal. Specifically, the relationship was more positive for 

organizational commitment and more negative for work withdrawal when supervisors 

demonstrated more transformational leadership behaviors. 

Additional support for exploring this research question comes from social exchange 

theory (Blau, 1964).  According to social exchange theory (Blau 1964), leaders and followers 

who each exhibit more psychological capital would be more likely to reciprocate by displaying 

further positive resources that in turn would enhance performance. This is because leaders who 

create and encourage positive exchanges with their followers would also encourage followers to 

express themselves openly in interactions with their leader resulting in more energy and 

commitment (Avolio & Luthans, 2006). Thus, there is reason to suspect that the relationship 

between follower psychological capital and their performance is likely to be stronger when they 

have leaders who rate themselves higher on psychological capital. We examined this potential 

cross-level interaction in an exploratory fashion.  

Research question: Does leader psychological capital influence the relationship between 

follower psychological capital and their performance? 

Figure 1 summarizes the relationships tested in this study. In general, we propose that 

leader psychological capital positively influences follower individual performance and does so 

by enhancing follower psychological capital. We also test the cross-level influence of service 

climate in the relationship between follower psychological capital and their performance. Finally 

and as indicated by the dotted line in Figure 1, we explore the cross-level interaction between 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  15

follower and leader psychological capital in predicting follower performance.  

------------------------------------------ 

Insert Figure 1 about here 

------------------------------------------ 

Method 

Participants and Procedures 

Participants for this study were police officers from a large metropolitan city in the 

southwestern United States. Prior research has emphasized the importance of positive leadership 

when leading in pervasive crises—a context particularly germane to the police organization 

(Fredrickson, 2009). Therefore, we believe that the police organization setting provides a 

dynamic context for the study of psychological capital, especially how leader and followers’ 

psychological capital relates to performance.  

Data were collected from leaders (i.e., lieutenants) and their direct followers (i.e., 

sergeants). To be included in the study, a leader had to satisfy at least two criteria: (1) he or she 

had to have at least three of his or her direct reports rate his or her leadership behavior (for 

internal training and development) and (2) the leader had to complete a measure assessing his or 

her psychological capital and later provide an assessment of their direct reports’ job 

performance. Of the 105 identified, 79 volunteered to participate in this study representing 

approximately 75% effective participation rate. All surveys were completed on-line during 

regular work hours. The leader averaged 44 years of age and had been with the police force on 

average 10.2 years, and all had at least two years of college education. Ninety percent were 

males. Seventy four percent of the leaders were white Caucasians, 12% Hispanics, 6% Blacks, 

and 8% others. Ninety-four percent of participants were males and had on average 2 years of 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  16

college education.  

We contacted a total of 338 followers (sergeants) and 264 completed the surveys, 

yielding a 78% response rate. The names of the sergeants were provided by their respective 

leaders (3-5 followers per leader). The followers’ average age was 31 years, with an average 

tenure of approximately 6 years.  Sixty eighty percent of the followers were Caucasians, 16% 

Hispanics, and 16% other. Eighty one percent of participants were males and at least 91% had at 

least an equivalent of a community college diploma. 

Time 1: Psychological capital. Both leaders and followers received an email containing a 

cover letter from the researchers and endorsed by the Police Chief. The cover letter explained the 

purpose of the study and provided assurances of the participants’ confidentiality. As an incentive 

to participate, participants were informed that they would receive a timely feedback report on 

their leadership behavior as part of an ongoing effort by the police organization to develop 

leadership within its ranks. This feedback session was held after all data collection was 

completed.  

Participants were given a measure that evaluated their own level of psychological capital. 

The psychological capital measure assessed the extent to which participants (i.e., police officers) 

exhibited efficacy, hope, optimism, and resilience. They also provided personal information such 

as age, sex, tenure, race, etc. Participants were told they would be receiving another short survey 

in approximately six weeks (performance evaluations to be completed by leaders and service 

climate to be completed by followers). Participants were assigned a random number to be used as 

identification and matching purposes for data to be collected at a later time.  

Time 2: Service climate. Each follower was asked to evaluate the service climate of their 

respective work group.  


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  17

Time 3: Supervisor rated job performance. Approximately two weeks after Time 2 data 

were coded, each leader rated at least 3 followers’ (3-5) job performance. The job performance 

measure assessed how well followers performed in working with their patrol officers, as well as 

in fulfilling their respective job duties. We were able to obtain performance ratings from all the 

79 leaders contacted, representing a 100% response rate.   

Measures 

Psychological capital.  We used a modified version of the recently validated 

psychological capital questionnaire (PCQ; Luthans et al., 2007). Each dimension was represented 

by four or five of the most relevant items for the police context based on discussions with the 

client organization. The result was a 19-item Likert-type survey from the original 24 items. 

Participants were instructed to indicate their degree of agreement from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 

(strongly agree) for each item. Sample items included: (1) Efficacy: “I feel confident in 

representing my work area in meetings with management”, and “I feel confident helping to set 

targets/goals in my work area”; (2) Hope: “Right now I see myself as being pretty successful at 

work”, and “If I should find myself in a jam at work, I could think of many ways to get out of it”; 

(3) Resilience: “When I have a setback at work, I have trouble recovering from it, moving on 

(R)”, and “I usually take stressful things at work in stride”; and (4) Optimism: “ I always look on 

the bright side of things regarding my job”, and “If something can go wrong for me work-wise, it 

will (R)”.  The internal consistency reliability (alpha) estimate for the composite psychological 

capital was .75 for leaders and .88 for followers. Although we used only 19 items, our overall 

scale reliability is comparable to that reported by Luthans et al. (2007).  

Because our hypotheses were concerned with the leader’s level of psychological capital 

in a general sense, and not its specific manifestations, we collapsed the four dimensions of 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  18

efficacy, hope, optimism, and resilience into a single construct as suggested by Stajkovic (2006). 

This strategy has both theoretical and empirical support.  Law, Wong, and Mobley (1998) noted 

that because latent models are defined in terms of the commonality among the dimensions, there 

has to be evidence that the dimensions are correlated to justify the summing of component 

dimensions into a single overall representation of those dimensions. In this study, the average 

correlation among the four dimensions was .58 and .61 for leaders and followers, respectively. 

We further examined the dimensionality of the construct by conducting a principle axis factor 

analysis with varimax rotation. This analysis obtained a one-factor solution in which all 19 items 

had high loadings on the single factor. The factor explained 65% and 69% of the total variance in 

the items for followers and leaders, respectively. These results and the single measures high 

reliability suggests that the psychological capital items used in this study form a reliable scale. 

Service climate. Service climate (α = .80) was measured with a 5-item scale developed by 

Schneider, White, and Paul (1998). The items asked followers to respond to each question based 

on what they have personally observed in their work group (1 = poor, 5 = excellent). Sample 

items are, “How would you rate the job knowledge and skills of employees in your workgroup to 

deliver superior quality work and service?” and “How would you rate efforts to measure and 

track the quality of the work and service in your workgroup?”  

Because service climate is formed through bottom-up emergent processes (Liao & 

Chuang, 2007; Schneider et al., 1998), we used the referent-shift consensus approach (e.g., Chan, 

1998) to aggregate followers’ scores of service climate to the work group level represented by 

each leader. We computed the internal consistency reliability estimate for service climate at the 

work group level and the internal consistency estimate was .85. We further assessed both 

between-group differences and within-group agreement, using two intra-class correlations (ICCs) 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  19

(e.g., Bliese, 2000) and rwg (e.g., James, Demaree, & Wolf, 1984). The ICC (1) was .39 and ICC 

(2) was .71 (p <.01). The rwg was .86, ranging from .61 to .98, providing empirical evidence for 

the appropriateness of aggregating individual scores of service climate. 

Leader rated job performance. We measured job performance based on a 4-item scale 

used by Walumbwa, Avolio, and Zhu (2008b). The first two items were originally developed by 

Heilman, Block, and Lucas (1992). The immediate supervisor of each follower was asked to 

provide a performance rating on this measure, using a 5-point response format. These items were 

“All in all, how competently does this individual perform the job?”, “In your estimation, how 

effectively does this individual get the work done?”, “How would you judge the overall quality 

of this individual’s work?”, and “ How would you judge the overall competence of this 

individual” using the following 5 anchors: 1 = Consistently performs way below expectations, 2 

= Consistently performs below expectations, 3 = Consistently performs at expectations, 4 = 

Consistently performs above expectations, and 5 = Consistently performs way beyond 

expectations’. The Cronbach’s alpha coefficient was .84. We conducted a principle axis factor 

analysis with varimax rotation and obtained a one-factor solution in which the four items had 

high loadings on the single factor. The factor explained 72% of the total variance in the items, 

suggesting that these items form a reliable scale. 

Analytic Strategy 

Our data is nested and multilevel in nature. For example, followers who evaluated their 

own perceptions of the service climate (a group-level construct) and their own psychological 

capital are nested within supervisors. Similarly, each leader evaluated at least 3 direct reports 

besides evaluating their own psychological capital. Therefore, we used hierarchical linear 

modeling (HLM) as an analytic tool to test our hypotheses (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002). In all 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  20

the analyses, Level 1 predictor was grand-mean centered to facilitate the interpretation of the 

HLM results (Hofmann & Gavin, 1998). We used ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions to 

estimate the variance explained by our variables (Hofmann, Morgeson, & Gerras, 2003).  

Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the study variables. 

Results 

--------------------------------------------- 

Insert Table 1 about here 

-------------------------------------------- 

Hypothesis Tests 

We first examined the degree of between group variance in individual job performance as 

required by HLM. Results of a null model revealed that 28% of the variance in individual job 

performance resides between groups. The chi-square test revealed that the between group 

variances was significant; that is, the intercept term significantly varied across groups.  

Hypotheses 1-2: Direct effects of leader and follower psychological capital. Table 2 

presents the HLM results testing the effect of leader psychological capital on follower 

psychological capital as well as the effect of follower psychological capital on their performance. 

Hypothesis 1 suggested that leader psychological capital would be positively related to follower 

psychological capital whereas Hypothesis 2 posited that follower psychological capital would be 

positively related to their supervisory-rated performance. As shown in Table 2, HLM results 

revealed that leader psychological capital as a Level 2 predictor significantly predicted Level 1 

follower psychological capital (ŷ = .52, p < .01, Model 1). Similarly, HLM results revealed that 

follower psychological capital significantly predicted their supervisory-rated performance (ŷ = 

.31, p < .01, Model 2).  These results provide support for Hypotheses 1 and 2, respectively. 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  21

------------------------------------------- 

Insert Table 2 about here 

------------------------------------------- 

Hypothesis 3: The mediating effect of follower psychological capital in the leader 

psychological capital-performance relationship. Hypothesis 3 predicted that follower self-rated 

psychological capital would mediate the relationship between leader psychological capital and 

rated performance. HLM results testing this hypothesis are also shown in Table 2. We followed 

the four-step procedure for mediation described by Kenny, Kashy, and Bolger (1998). In Step 1, 

leader psychological capital needs to be related to rated performance. In support of this 

condition, HLM results revealed that leader psychological capital was significantly related to 

rated performance (ŷ = .29, p < .01, Model 3). Step 2 requires that leader psychological capital 

be related to follower psychological capital. This requirement was supported by the results of 

Hypothesis 1 above (see Model 1). Step 3 requires that follower psychological capital be related 

to rated performance. This requirement was supported by the results of Hypothesis 2 above (see 

Model 2). Finally, Step 4 requires that the significant relationship between leader psychological 

capital and rated performance (Step 1, Model 1) be reduced (partial mediation) or eliminated 

(complete mediation) when follower psychological capital is introduced in the same model. 

HLM results revealed that follower psychological capital was significantly related to rated 

performance (ŷ = .29, p < .01, Model 4). However, the effect of leader psychological capital on 

rated performance was no longer significant after introducing follower psychological capital in 

the same model (ŷ = .17, ns, Model 4). These results suggest that follower psychological capital 

completely mediated the effect of leader psychological capital on rated performance. A Sobel 

test (1982) confirmed that the indirect effect was significant (z = 1.85, p < .05; one-tailed test). 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  22

Hypothesis 3 is supported by our data. 

Cross-Level Interaction Effects of Follower Psychological Capital and Service Climate 

Hypothesis 4 predicted that perceptions of service climate would moderate the 

relationship between followers’ psychological capital and their rated performance. As suggested 

by one of the reviewers, we controlled for leader psychological capital because leaders who see 

their followers as more positive may tend to rate those employees more highly simply because of 

their nature (not because the employees are actually performing more highly). Therefore, 

controlling for leader psychological capital in the relationship between follower psychological 

capital and rated performance helps mitigate this potential bias.  

We followed the procedure of Hofmann et al. (2003) by estimating two models. In the 

first model, we regressed rated performance on follower psychological capital and service 

climate. This model provides an overall assessment of the relationship between follower 

psychological capital and rated performance. It also provides an estimate of the main effect for 

service climate and the overall assessment of the variability in the relationship between follower 

psychological capital and rated performance across groups. If significant variance in the 

relationships across groups is found, then the test of Hypothesis 4 is the extent to which service 

climate explains this variability.  

As shown in the upper part of Table 3 (preliminary model), HLM results revealed a 

significant within-group relationship between follower psychological capital and rated 

performance (ŷ = .32, p < .01), and significant variance in the Level 1 slopes relating follower 

psychological capital to rated performance (U1 variance = .44). These findings suggest that there 

is a significant within-group relationship between follower psychological capital and rated 

performance, and that the magnitude of this relationship varies significantly across service 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  23

climate groups. Using OLS, we determined that this block of variables accounted for 31% of the 

variance in rated performance. 

------------------------------------------- 

Insert Table 3 about here 

----------------------------------------- 

In the second model, we added service climate as a predictor of the variance in the slopes 

relating follower psychological capital and rated performance. As shown in Table 3, HLM 

results revealed that the cross-level interaction (i.e., follower psychological capital x service 

climate) was significant (ŷ = .33, p < .01). Importantly, after including service climate in the 

model, the residual variance in the Level 1 slopes was no longer significant (U1 variance = .22). 

Using these two variance components, the R2 for service climate was .41 (i.e., [.37-.22]/.37). The 

block of variables accounted for 35% of the variance in rated performance. We plotted this 

interaction using a cut value of one standard deviation below the mean and one standard 

deviation above the mean of service climate (Aiken & West, 1991) and the result is shown in 

Figure 2a. Further, using a moderated regression analysis, we determined that this interaction 

term accounted for additional 4% of the variance in rated performance. Therefore, Hypothesis 4 

is supported by our data. 

--------------------------------------------------- 

Insert Figure 2a and 2b about here 

-------------------------------------------------- 

As noted in our introduction, we also conducted an exploratory analysis to assess whether 

follower and leader psychological capital interacted to predict rated performance, following the 

procedures used for testing Hypothesis 4 above. HLM results revealed that follower and leader 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  24

psychological capital interacted positively to predict rated performance (ŷ = .30, p < .01). Figure 

2b shows the form and nature of the significant interaction graphically, using a cut value of one 

standard deviation below and above the mean of leader psychological capital. Specifically, 

Figure 2b shows that the relationship between follower psychological capital and rated 

performance is more positive when leader psychological capital is high rather than low.  

Discussion 

This study examined how and in what ways leader psychological capital can contribute to 

follower psychological capital and performance. We also examined the cross-level moderating 

effect of service climate in the relationship between followers’ psychological capital and their 

job performance.  In line with what has been suggested in previous theoretical work (e.g., Avolio 

& Luthans, 2006), we found that leader psychological capital positively related to their 

followers’ performance. This relationship was fully mediated through followers’ level of self 

reported psychological capital. Regarding the hypothesized cross-level interaction, we found that 

followers’ psychological capital influenced their own job performance to a greater extent when 

service climate was more positive. Finally, based on our exploratory analysis, we found a 

significant interaction between leader and follower psychological capital with respect to 

predicting performance above and beyond the contribution of the leader and followers’ self 

reported levels of psychological capital.  

Theoretical Implications  

Although the effect of positive leadership behavior has been well documented in the 

charismatic/transformational leadership literature (e.g., Bass & Bass, 2008) and has recently 

been highlighted in the newly emerging literatures on authentic (e.g., Avolio & Luthans, 2006; 

Walumbwa, Avolio, Gardner, Wernsing, & Peterson, 2008a; Walumbwa et al., 2009) and servant 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  25

(e.g., Ehrhart, 2004; Liden et al., 2008; Walumbwa et al, in press) leadership, less attention has 

been given to how other forms of positive leadership such as combining a leader’s level of hope, 

efficacy, optimism and resilience relates to employee performance. Adding to the existing 

research on psychological capital, our findings revealed that both leader and followers’ 

psychological capital were positively associated with follower job performance. These findings 

extend earlier work that focused solely on the employee level of psychological capital to both the 

leader and their followers’ levels of psychological capital and the relationships each have with 

job performance.  

In addition, our work extends psychological capital research into a new organizational 

setting—a police organization. The majority of work on psychological capital has been focused 

on more traditional manager-employee work organizations. Thus, the current study also offers 

some support for the generalizability of the effects of psychological capital in a different work 

context than has been examined in previous research. Moreover, given that the majority of 

research in police organizations has focused primarily on examining negative predictors and 

outcomes associated with police work such as officer stress, burnout, depression, and anxiety 

(Harrison, 1998), our findings may also open up more positive approaches to the study of 

leadership in police or other similar community service organizations that operate in high risk 

environments.  

Second, although prior research has shown how an individual’s own psychological 

capital relates to his or her own performance (see Luthans et al., 2007), there have been 

relatively few investigations linking leader psychological capital to his or her followers’ 

performance. In this study, we examined how the leader’s self reported psychological capital 

related to their followers’ self reported psychological capital, and consequently follower job 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  26

performance. We found that the leader’s level of psychological capital stimulates followers’ 

psychological capital, which, in turn was related to the followers’ performance. As such, this 

study presents an initial empirical test of potential mediating processes through which leader 

psychological capital may influence follower performance.   

Third, very little research has focused on the conditions under which psychological 

capital is more (or less) effective in promoting employee performance. In this study we tested the 

cross-level moderating influence of service climate to determine whether or not this makes a 

difference. Specifically, the results of this study provide fairly strong support for service 

climate’s cross-level moderating effect with the relationship between employees’ psychological 

capital and their performance. Thus, our finding complements the work of Liao and Chuang 

(2007) and Walumbwa et al. (in press) by revealing that service climate plays an important role 

in amplifying the influence of followers’ psychological capital on their performance.   

Finally, we explored and found an interaction between leader and follower psychological 

capital in predicting rated performance. We found that followers’ psychological capital had a 

stronger influence on their performance when their leaders demonstrated more positive resources 

such as efficacy, hope, optimism, and resilience. Although our results should be interpreted with 

caution because we did not offer an a priori prediction, at the very least our finding adds to 

research focused on positive leadership perspectives by suggesting that leadership is a dynamic 

and reciprocal social process that can benefit both leaders and followers (Hannah, Woolfolk, & 

Lord, 2009).   

Practical Implications 

Our results suggest several practical implications.  First, our findings suggest that leaders 

who wish to enhance the performance of their direct reports will derive some benefit from 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  27

exhibiting higher levels of psychological capital. Specifically, because leaders are expected to 

serve as role models to followers, it is extremely important that they visibly engage in the 

behaviors associated with higher levels of psychological capital.  For example, if leaders persist 

toward goal accomplishment and do not let setbacks deter them, followers will be more likely to 

follow suit. In addition, when adversity strikes or uncertainty surrounds leaders, how they cope 

will be observed and perhaps mimicked by followers.  In short, leaders are always on stage and 

followers are watching and taking cues about how to handle situations, what is valued in the 

organization, and what is expected and rewarded.  Leaders who become more aware of how their 

psychological capital and/or level of positivity in general, influences their follower’ 

psychological states and subsequent behaviors will be more likely to see positive performance 

outcomes.  

Our work also has implications for those charged with selecting and developing talent in 

organizations. Given the pivotal role of the leader in developing the psychological capital of 

followers, we suggest that organizations consider the leader’s positivity level among other 

required capabilities when making appointments to leadership roles, especially in high stress 

contexts. Specifically, there are very reliable and valid trait measures of positivity that could be 

included as part of the overall assessment of a leader’s capacity to be effective in roles that 

require higher levels of positivity, such as in police work (Fredrickson, 2009). In addition, 

because psychological capital is conceptualized to be state-like and open to development, 

psychological capital can be integrated into organizations’ talent development programs. Indeed, 

there is already preliminary evidence showing that the psychological capital can be boosted with 

short training interventions (Avey, Avolio, Luthans, & Peterson, in press). The emphasis in these 

interventions is on teaching employees to frame and approach situations, especially those with 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  28

challenges, in a constructive manner. Because of the positive impact of psychological capital on 

performance outcomes, developmental efforts focused on enhancing psychological capital in 

leaders and followers may offer a strong return on investment. 

Furthermore, our results suggest that when service climate perceptions are high, 

psychological capital has an even a stronger impact on performance than when service climate 

perceptions are low.  Given this potential fit between psychological capital and service climate, 

organizations need to focus on how to better foster a service climate so as to accelerate the 

benefits they could derive from psychological capital.  Specifically, organizations need to both 

better articulate the expectations associated with a service climate and reward and recognize 

exemplary service when they see it (Schneider, 1987).  

Finally, although this research has broader implications for many types of organizations, 

especially those who operate in the service environment, it also has some specific practical 

implications for police organizations. For example, promoting positive aspects of officer 

leadership, such as psychological capital, could further ameliorate the personal resources 

available to sustain followers through stressful events. Specifically, by instilling psychological 

capital in their followers, supporting them when they need to bounce back from adversity or by 

encouraging followers to persist in goal pursuits, leaders will keep followers strong, positive and 

able to perform their jobs through the highs and lows of police work.  

Study Limitations 

Although data for the current study came from two independent sources (e.g., immediate 

supervisors and their direct reports), in a sense removing any transient causes of same source 

bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003), this study was cross-sectional in nature. 

Thus, we cannot draw causal inferences from our results although the links investigated in this 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  29

study followed a presumed causal order.  Indeed, there could certainly be alternative 

explanations for our findings. For example, rather than leaders’ psychological capital evoking 

psychological capital in followers, it is possible that leaders who are high in psychological 

capital simply select followers who are also high in psychological capital. Moreover, because 

leaders in the present study rated their followers’ performance, it could be the case that leaders 

who are high in psychological capital are biased to rate followers higher in general due to their 

bias toward the positive, although we did try to control for these effects in our analyses (i.e., 

leniency).  Because of these potential limitations, future research should examine how these 

relationships develop over time using experimental or longitudinal research designs.  

We also realize that it would have been useful to collect additional measures of 

performance other than from the leaders participating in the current study. However, we found 

that it was difficult to link specific measures of performance to individual followers because of 

the nature of police work, which led us to collect data from the leader who knew the followers’ 

performance best. Regarding the issue of the generalizability of our findings, we suggest that a 

first step might be to collect data from relatively comparable stress-oriented professions such as 

firefighting, military or healthcare (EMT, surgical units, etc) so that we could determine whether 

the results of the current study generalize to these respective organizations that deal in high risk 

contexts. 

Finally, it is important to note that we did not cover the full range of items constituting 

psychological capital to keep the survey short as required by the client organization. Although, 

our reliabilities for this scale was comparable to that of the original scale developed and 

validated by Luthans and his colleagues (e.g., Luthans et al., 2007), future research should 

replicate our findings using the full scale to assess psychological capital.  In addition, more 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  30

established and recently emerging measures of leadership including transformational leadership 

(e.g., Bass & Avolio, 2000), authentic leadership (e.g., Walumbwa et al., 2008a), ethical 

leadership (e.g., Brown, Treviño, & Harrison, 2005), and servant leadership (e.g., Ehrhart, 2004; 

Liden et al., 2008) should be included for comparison purposes, and also to provide a more 

complete picture of the focal leader’s leadership and effects on followers.  Similarly, more 

comprehensive measures of climate, including safety climate (e.g., Hofmann et al., 2003; Zohar, 

2000) should also be collected so as to compare different types of specific climates and how they 

relate to measures of psychological capital and performance.  

Suggestions for Future Research 

We offer several suggestions for future research. First, because previous research (e.g., 

Liao & Chuang, 2007; Walumbwa et al., in press) suggests that positive forms of leadership such 

as servant and transformational leadership may enhance a positive service climate, more research 

is needed on how psychological capital may shape a positive group or unit climate above and 

beyond these other leadership styles.  Achieving this aim would include the collection of multi-

rater surveys so as to gather a complete picture of a leader’s psychological capital as well as to 

ensure a comprehensive view of climate from all constituents. In this study, we used follower 

self-reported evaluations of their specific service climate. Of course, future work could include a 

more complete assessment of these variables and should also include possible attitudinal 

mediators, such as social exchange perceptions, positive affect and status, which may also play 

important roles in explaining why or how positive psychological capital transmits its effects to 

individuals, groups, and organizations. 

Second, the finding of the presence of an interaction between leader and follower 

psychological capital points to the need for more integration of various positive leadership 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  31

perspectives such as authentic (Avolio & Luthans, 2006; Walumbwa et al., 2008a), empowering 

(Arnold, Arad, Rhoades, & Drasgow, 2000), servant (Ehrhart, 2004; Liden et al., 2008), and 

transformational (Bass & Avolio, 2000) leadership behaviors in future psychological capital 

research. Such integration may focus on exploring the interactions between these positive 

leadership perspectives and the psychological mechanisms underlying their effects. Future 

research may also begin to explore how the followers’ positivity influences the leader’s 

performance, just as we found here how the leader’s positivity influenced the followers through 

its interaction with follower psychological capital. 

Third, future work should delve deeper into understanding how or why leader 

psychological capital influences follower psychological capital. In this study, we argued that 

when followers observe leaders taking a positive approach to their work, they will model similar 

behaviors.  However, we did not have data that directly tested this assertion. Future work should 

examine whether role modeling is indeed the process through which leader psychological capital 

triggers follower psychological capital or whether there may be alternative explanations.  One 

possibility is that leaders who express positivity are simply better liked and their followers are 

willing to exert extra effort in their social exchange process. Another possible explanation is that 

followers interpret leaders’ positivity as their being confident, hopeful, optimistic, and resilient 

about their performance thereby increasing followers’ psychological capital. Future research 

should test these possibilities.  

Finally, whereas we considered only individual job performance in this study, future 

research might investigate the influence of psychological capital on other important work 

outcomes in crises or extreme contexts (Hannah, Uhl-Bien, Avolio, & Cavarretta, 2009), such as 

well-being and citizenship related behaviors as well as absenteeism, stress, turnover and 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  32

withdrawal behaviors at multiple levels of analysis. In addition, given the increasing interest in 

multilevel research, research in the area of psychological capital should go beyond the 

investigation of individual level performance to better understand the impact of positive 

leadership on group and organizational level performance. Such multilevel investigations would 

allow researchers to explain more variance than would be explained by single-level or 

homologous formulations, and thus increase our understanding of the complex relationship 

between psychological capital and important work-related outcomes. 

In sum, both the practitioner and academic leadership literatures are replete with 

discussions suggesting that leaders and followers should be optimistic and stay positive during 

stressful circumstances.  Given the on-going and growing stress associated with police work, and 

organizations in general, it is important that researchers continue to investigate how positive 

leadership can be developed and applied to address challenges confronting leaders and followers.  


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  33

REFERENCES 

Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions. 

Newbury Park, CA: Sage.  

Arnold, J. A., Arad, S., Rhoades, J. A., & Drasgow, F. (2000). The empowering leadership 

questionnaire: The construction and validation of a new scale for measuring leader 

behaviors. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 249-269.  

Avey, J. Avolio, B. J., & Luthans, F., & Peterson, S. J. (in press).  Experimentally analyzing the 

process and impact of leader positivity.  Human Resource Development Quarterly. 

Avey, J. B., Luthans, F., & Youssef, C. M. (2009). The additive value of positive psychological 

capital in predicting work attitudes and behaviors. Journal of Management. DOI: 

10.1177/0149206308329961.  

Avolio, B. J. (2007). Promoting more integrative strategies for leadership theory building. 

American Psychologist, 62, 25-33. 

Avolio, B. J., Gardner, W. L., Walumbwa, F. O., Luthans, F., & May, D. R. (2004). Unlocking 

the mask: A look at the process by which authentic leaders impact follower attitudes and 

behaviors. Leadership Quarterly, 15, 801-823. 

Avolio, B. J., & Luthans, F. (2006). The high impact leader:  Moments matter for accelerating  

authentic leadership development. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Avolio, B. J., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2006). Authentic leadership: Moving HR leaders to a higher 

level. In J. J. Martocchio (Ed.), Research in personnel and human resources management 

(vol. 25, 273-304). Amsterdam: Elsevier.  

Bandura, A.  (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.  

Psychological Review, 84, 191-215. 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  34

Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (2000). Multifactor leadership questionnaire: Manual leader form, 

rater, and scoring key for MLQ (Form 5x-Short). Redwood City, CA: Mind Garden. 

Bass, B. M., & Bass, R. (2008). The Bass Handbook of Leadership; Theory, research and 

managerial applications.  NY: Free Press. 

Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Academic Press. 

Bliese, P. D. (2000). Within-group agreement, non-independence, and reliability: Implications 

for data aggregation and analysis. In Klein, K. J., & Kozlowski, S. W. J. (Eds.), 

Multilevel theory, research and methods in organizations: Foundations, extensions, and 

new directions (pp. 349-381). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Bono, J. E., & Colbert, A. (2005). Understanding Responses to Multi-Source Feedback: The 

Role of Core Self-evaluations. Personnel Psychology, 58, 171-203. 

Bono, J. E., & Ilies, R. (2006). Charisma, positive emotions and mood contagion. Leadership 

Quarterly, 17, 317-334. 

Brown, M. E., Treviño, L. K., & Harrison, D. A. (2005). Ethical leadership: A social learning 

perspective for construct development and testing. Organizational Behavior and Human 

Decision Processes, 97, 117-134. 

Cameron, K.S., Dutton, J., & Quinn, R. (2003). Positive organizational scholarship:  

Foundations of a new discipline.  San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler  Publishers. 

Carmeli, A., Ben-Hador, B., Waldman, D. A., & Rupp, D. E. (2009). How leaders cultivate 

social capital and nurture employee vigor: Implications for job performance. Journal of 

Applied Psychology, 94, 1553-1561. 

Carr, J. Z., Schmidt, A. M., Ford, J. K., & DeShon, R. P. (2003). Climate perceptions matter: A 

meta-analytic path analysis relating molar climate, cognitive and affective states, and 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  35

individual level work outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 587 - 619. 

Chan, D. (1998). Functional relations among constructs in the same content domain at different 

levels of analysis: A typology of compositional models. Journal of Applied Psychology, 

83, 234-246. 

Ehrhart, M. G. (2004). Leadership and procedural justice climate as antecedents of unit-level 

organizational citizenship behavior. Personnel Psychology, 57, 61-94. 

Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The broaden-

and-build theory of positive emotions. American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.  

Fredrickson, B. L. (2009). Positivity. New York: Crown Publishers. 

Gardner, W. L., Avolio, B. J., Luthans, F., May, D. R., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2005). "Can you 

see the real me?" A self-based model of authentic leader and follower development. 

Leadership Quarterly, 16, 343-372. 

Hackman, R. ( 2009). Potential perils of POB. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 308-322. 

Hannah, S. T., Uhl-Bien, M., Avolio, B. J., & Cavarretta, F. L. (2009). A framework for 

examining leadership in extreme contexts. Leadership Quarterly, 20, 897-919. 

Hannah, S.T., Woolfolk, R. L., & Lord, R. G. (2009).  Leader self-structure:  A framework for 

positive leadership.  Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 269-290.   

Harrison, S. J. (1998). Police organizational culture: Using ingrained values to build positive 

organizational improvement. Article retrieved August 2, 2008, from 

http://www.pamij.com/harrison.html.  

Heilman, M. E., Block, C. J., & Lucas, J. A. (1992). Presumed incompetence? Stigmatization 

and affirmative action efforts. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 536-544. 

Hess, E. D., & Cameron, K. S. (2006).  Leading with values: Positivity, virtue, and high 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  36

performance.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   

Hobfoll, S. (2002). Social and psychological resources and adaptation.  Review of General 

Psychology, 6, 307-324. 

Hofmann, D. A., & Gavin, M. B. (1998). Centering decisions in hierarchical linear Models: 

Implications for research in organizations. Journal of Management, 24, 623-641.  

Hofmann, D. A., Morgeson, F. P., Gerras, S. J. (2003). Climate as a moderator of the relationship 

between leader-member exchange and content specific citizenship: Safety climate as an 

exemplar. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 170-178.  

Ibarra, H. (1999).  Provisional Selves: Experimenting with image and identity in professional 

adaptation.  Administrative Science Quarterly, 44, 764-791. 

Ilies, R., Morgeson, F. P., & Nahrgang, J. D. (2005). Authentic leadership and eudaemonic well-

being: Understanding leader-follower outcomes. Leadership Quarterly, 16, 373-394. 

James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolf, G. (1984).  Estimating within-group inter-rater reliability 

with and without response bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 69, 85-98.  

Judge, T. A., Bono, J. E., Ilies, R., & Werner, M. (2002). Personality and leadership: A 

qualitative and quantitative review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 765-780. 

Kacmar, K. M., Collins, B. J., Harris, K. J., & Judge, T. A. (2009). Core self-evaluations and job 

performance: The role of the perceived work environment. Journal of Applied 

Psychology, 94, 1572-1580. 

Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Bolger, N. (1998). Data analysis in social psychology. In D. 

Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 

233–265). New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Law, K. S., & Wong, C., & Mobley, W. H. (1998). Toward a taxonomy of multidimensional 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  37

constructs. Academy of Management Review, 23, 741-755.  

Liao, H., & Chuang, A. (2007). Transforming service employees and climate: a multilevel, 

multisource examination of transformational leadership in building long-term service 

relationships. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1006-1119. 

Liden, R. C., Wayne, S. J., Zhao, H., & Henderson, D. (2008). Servant leadership:  Development  

of a multidimensional measure and multi-level assessment.  Leadership Quarterly, 19, 

161-177. 

Luthans, F., & Avolio, B. J. (2003). Authentic leadership: A positive developmental  

approach. In K. S. Cameron & J. E. Dutton & R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive  

organizational scholarship (pp. 241-261). San Francisco: Barrett-Koehler. 

Luthans, F., Avolio, B. J., Avey, J. B., & Norman, S. M. (2007). Positive psychological capital: 

Measurement and relationship with performance and satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 

60, 541-572. 

Luthans, F., Avolio, B. J., Walumbwa, F.O., & Li, W. (2005). The psychological capital of 

Chinese workers: Exploring the relationship with performance. Management and 

Organization Review, 1, 247-269. 

O'Neill, J. W., Harrison, M. M, Cleveland, J., Almeida, D., Stawski, R., & Crouter, A. C. (2009). 

Work–family climate, organizational commitment, and turnover: Multilevel contagion 

effects of leaders. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 74, 18-29. 

Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. (2004). Character strengths and virtues.  New York: Oxford  

University Press. 

Peterson, S. J., Walumbwa, F. O., Byron, K., & Myrowitz, J. (2009). CEO positive psychological 

traits, transformational leadership, and firm performance in high technology start-up and 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  38

established firms. Journal of Management, 35, 348-368. 

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. C., Lee, J., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method biases 

in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. 

Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 879-903. 

Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data 

analysis methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Schneider, B. (1987). The people make the place. Personnel Psychology, 40, 437-454. 

Schneider, B., Ehrhart, M. G., Mayer, D. M., Saltz, J.L., & Niles-Jolly, K. (2005). Understanding 

organization-customer links in service settings. Academy of Management Journal, 48, 

1017-1032. 

Schneider, B., Salvaggio, A. N., & Subirats, M. (2002). Climate strength: A new direction for 

climate research. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 220-229. 

Schneider, B., White, S. S., & Paul, M. C. (1998). Linking service climate and customer 

perceptions of service quality: Test of a causal model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 

150-163. 

Sobel, M. E. (1982). Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in structural equation 

models. In S. Leinhardt (Ed.), Sociological methodology (pp. 290-312). Washington, DC. 

American Sociological Association. 

Stajkovic, A. D. (2006). Development of a core confidence – higher order construct. Journal of 

Applied Psychology, 91, 1208-1224. 

Sy, T., Côté, S., & Saavedra, R. (2005). The contagious leader: Impact of the leader’s mood on 

the mood of group members, group affective tone, and group processes. Journal of 

Applied Psychology, 90, 295-305.  


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  39

Walumbwa, F. O., Avolio, B. J., Gardner, W. L., Wernsing, T. S., & Peterson, S. J. (2008a). 

Authentic leadership: Development and validation of a theory-based measure. Journal of 

Management, 34, 89-126. 

Walumbwa, F. O., Avolio, B. J., & Zhu, W. (2008b). How transformational leadership weaves 

its influence on individual job performance:  The role of identification and efficacy 

beliefs. Personnel Psychology, 61, 793-825. 

Walumbwa, F. O., Hartnell, C. A., & Oke, A. (in press).  Servant leadership, procedural justice 

climate, service climate, employee attitudes, and organizational citizenship behavior: A 

cross-level investigation. Journal of Applied Psychology. 

Walumbwa, F. O., Luthans, F., Avey, J. B., & Oke, A. (2009). Authentically leading groups: The 

mediating role of positivity and trust. Journal of Organizational Behavior, DOI: 

10.1002/job.653. 

Wang, P., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2007). Family-friendly programs, organizational commitment, 

and work withdrawal: The moderating role of transformational leadership. Personnel 

Psychology, 60, 397-427. 

Yammarino, F. J., Dionne, S. D., Schriesheim, C. A., & Dansereau, F. (2008). Authentic 

leadership and positive organizational behavior: A meso, multi-level perspective. 

Leadership Quarterly, 19, 693-707. 

Zohar, D. (2000). A group-level model of safety climate: Testing the effect of group climate on 

microaccidents in manufacturing jobs. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 587-596. 

 

 

 

 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  40

TABLE 1 

Correlations among the Study Variables 

Variable 

1. Follower age  

2. Follower sex 

3. Follower tenure 

4. Leader Psychological capital 

5. Follower psychological capital 

6. Service climate 

7. Job performance 

 

M

SD

31.33

9.19

.85

5.60

2.92

2.97

3.23

3.34

.34

.80

.74

.50

.68

.90

1

 

.16*

2

 

 

.26**

.10

-

.07

.11

-.06

-

.04

.10

.08

3

 

 

 

.75

.09

.07

-.08

6

 

 

 

 

 

4 

5 

 

 

 

 

.88 

 

 

 

- 

- 

- 

- 

.25** 

.80

.31** 

.35**

.84

7

 

 

 

 

 

 

Note. n = 264. The leader psychological capital correlation is not reported in the table because it only 

reflected group-level data. The Cronbach’s alpha (α) coefficients are reported in diagonal.   

* p < .05 (2-tailed) 

** p < .01 (2-tailed) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  41

TABLE 2 

Hierarchical Linear Modeling Results: Effects of Psychological Capital on Individual Job Performance 

 

Follower PsyCap 

Performance

Performance 

Performance

Level and variable 

(Model 1) 

(Model 2) 

(Model 3) 

(Model 4) 

 

Intercept 

 

1.60 (.09)**

Leader psychological capital (L2) 

.52 (.10)**

 

Intercept 

Follower psychological capital (L1) 

 

Intercept 

Leader psychological capital (L2) 

 

Intercept 

Leader psychological capital (L2) 

Follower psychological capital (L1) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.55 (.12)**

.31 (.07)**

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.47 (.15)** 

.29 (.09)** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.68 (.17)**

.17 (.09)

.29 (.03)**

Note. L = Level; level 1 (n = 264); level 2 (n = 79); PsyCap = psychological capital. Entries 

corresponding to the predicting variables are estimations of the fixed effects, γs, with robust 

standard errors. 

** p < .01 (two-tailed tests). 

 

 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  42

TABLE 3 

Hierarchical Linear Modeling Results of Main and Interaction Effects of Follower Psychological 

Capital and Service Climate in Predicting Job Performance  

Level and variable 

Preliminary model  

Intercept 

Leader psychological capital (Level 2 control) 

Follower psychological capital (Level 1) 

Service climate (Level 2) 

R2 

Adjusted R2 

 

Hypothesis 4 

Intercept 

Leader psychological capital (Level 2) 

Follower psychological capital (Level 1) 

Service climate (Level 2) 

Follower psychological capital X service climate 

∆R2 

 

Performance 

 

2.29 (.03)** 

.27 (.10)** 

.32 (.10)** 

.42 (.08)** 

.31** 

.28 

 

 

2.29 (.03)** 

.14 (.15)** 

.28 (.11)** 

.37 (.07)** 

.33 (.10)** 

.04** 

Note. Level 1 (n = 264); level 2 (n = 79); Entries corresponding to the predicting variables are 

estimations of the fixed effects, γs, with robust standard errors. 

** p < .01 (two-tailed tests). 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  43

Service 
Climate

Group-level

Leader 

Psychological 

Capital

Individual-level

Follower 

Psychological 

Capital

Follower 

Job 

Performance

Figure 1: Hypothesized Relationships

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Leader and Follower Psychological Capital Effects  44

Low Service Climate 

High Service Climate 

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P
b
o
J

 

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1

Low Follower

Psychological Capital

High Follower

Psychological Capital

 

Figure 2a: Follower Psychological Capital X Service Climate effect on Job Performance 

Low Leader Psychological Capital

High Leader Psychological Capital

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P
b
o
J

 

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1

Low Follower

Psychological Capital

High Follower

Psychological Capital

Figure 2b: Follower X Leader Psychological Capital effects on Job Performance 

 

 

