The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 2013
Vol. 24, No. 16, 3163–3177, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2013.775033

Fostering innovative behaviour: the importance of employee

commitment and organisational citizenship behaviour

Matthew J. Xerri* and Yvonne Brunetto

Southern Cross Business School, Southern Cross University, Queensland, Australia

(OCB) and innovative behaviour

The intention of this study is to examine nurses’ organisational commitment,
organisational citizenship behaviour
in the
workplace. In particular, this research is framed applying social exchange theory as
a lens for examining the key argument that nursing employees, who are committed to
the organisation and who exhibit, will be more likely to be innovative in the workplace.
A quantitative approach was applied, with a sample of 210 nursing employees from one
public and two private hospitals located in Australia. The ﬁndings from a structural
equation modelling analysis reported positive and statistically signiﬁcant paths from
affective commitment to innovative behaviour, and from OCB with an individual focus
(OCBI) to innovative behaviour. The main contribution in this paper comes from new
knowledge about the relationship between OCB and innovative behaviour. In addition,
this study provides new research about the relationship between nursing employees’
affective commitment, OCB and innovative behaviour. This research also outlines new
implications for hospital management, particularly those seeking to develop an
environment that fosters efﬁciency and effectiveness through the facilitation of OCB
and innovative behaviour in the workplace.

Keywords: affective commitment; innovative behaviour; organisational citizenship
behaviour; perceived organisational support

Introduction

There is a shortage of nurses in numerous Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) countries (OECD 2006), and some research suggests that internal
processes are responsible for the high turnover of nursing employees (Chaboyer, Najman
and Dunn 2001; Doiron, Hall and Jones 2008). Nursing shortages coupled with high job
demands and an ageing nursing workforce (Creegan, Dufﬁeld and Forrester 2003) requires
nurses to do more with less, which may be affecting nurses’ attitudes, behaviour and work
outcomes. Fostering the innovative behaviour of nursing employees is one strategy for
addressing the issue of having to do more with less (A˚ mo 2006). Innovative behaviour is
considered as a process that involves employees identifying a problem, creating possible
solutions for the problem and creating support for the solutions (Carmeli, Meitar and
Weisberg 2006). A˚ mo outlines that innovative behaviour in a nursing context ‘can be
regarded as anything from altering routines or making use of new remedies, to simplifying
work, to improving the service provided to the end-user, or to being able to give the end-
user new offers’ (2006, pp. 231).

There is a growing body of literature about innovative behaviour and its importance in
the workplace, but very few studies have adequately examined the innovative behaviour of
nursing employees. Those few studies that do examine the innovative behaviour of nursing
employees examine only the impact of empowerment (A˚ mo 2006; Knol and van Linge

*Corresponding author. Email: matt.xerri@scu.edu.au

q 2013 Taylor & Francis


3164

M.J. Xerri and Y. Brunetto

2009), supervisor – nurse relationship, perceived organisational support (Xerri 2013) and
transformational leadership (Reuvers, van Engen, Vinkenburg and Wilson-Evered 2008)
upon innovative behaviour. Although research examining the innovative behaviour of
nursing employees is limited, it is clear that hospitals stand to gain from innovative
employees (Reuvers et al. 2008) because innovative nursing employees will contribute to
the attainment of organisational goals (improved performance and patient safety/care).
This highlights the importance and need for further research that examines the antecedents
of nursing employees’ innovative behaviour.

Organisational citizenship behaviour (OCB) is recognised as an individual-level factor
that may have a positive relationship with an organisation’s ability to successfully
implement organisational strategy, as well as gain a competitive advantage. OCB is
referred to as the extra discretionary advantageous, tangible and intangible activities and
behaviours that are a result of effective workplace relationships (Podsakoff, MacKenzie,
Paine and Bachrach 2000). Speciﬁcally, as relationships are formed within the workplace,
reciprocity is developed, which provides an environment that facilitates employees
helping one another and the organisation beyond their expected work duties. However,
there seems to be a void in the understanding as to whether the helping behaviour
associated with OCB inﬂuences innovative behaviour in the workplace.

Research examining employee perceptions and behaviour is important because OCB
and innovative behaviour often require employees to do extra work on top of their current
workload (Podsakoff, Whiting, Podsakoff, and Blume 2009; Chang and Chang 2010). An
intention by the organisation to successfully improve organisational performance should
include, amongst other things, an environment where nursing employees are committed to
the organisation. This is an important issue because the nursing work context requires
committed workers (Chang 2005) and commitment is known to inﬂuence innovative
behaviour (Jafri 2010). It is important to examine employees, including their commitment
to the organisation and OCB, if management are to gain a better understanding into some
of the factors that inﬂuence innovative behaviour in the workplace. As such, the impact of
the affective commitment and OCB of nursing employees on their innovative behaviour
will be examined.

This research will use social exchange theory (SET) as a lens for examining the
innovative behaviour and OCB of nursing employees. SET argues that when employees
and supervisors/managers develop good workplace relationships, a reciprocal arrange-
ment develops that not only beneﬁts the individuals involved but also beneﬁts the
organisation as a whole (Cole, Schaninger and Harris 2007). Using SET as a theoretical
lens, it is expected that under ideal conditions, the outcome of effective workplace
relationships will be that nurses feel supported and therefore they develop a desire to give
back to the organisation (affective commitment, OCB and innovative behaviour).
Cropanzano and Mitchell (2005) suggest that an environment that is ideal and manifests
high-quality workplace relationships will only be developed if members of the workplace
adhere to the rules and norms of exchange. In this case, the rules and norms are founded on
the notion of reciprocity. Hence, the greater a nurse’s relationship with his/her colleagues
and the organisation, the greater will be their propensity to reciprocate with OCB, and the
higher will be the nurse’s perception of engaging in innovative behaviour.

There is a lack of empirical research that examines the path between OCB and
innovative behaviour. This relationship is important because employees high in OCB will
often make decisions that add value to their organisation and colleagues at their own
expense (LePine, Erez and Johnson 2002). To provide an example, this may include
working longer hours, spending extra time developing innovative solutions to work-based


The International Journal of Human Resource Management

3165

problems and helping others to solve problems in the workplace (Chu and Hsu 2011).
A review of the extant literature about OCB and innovative behaviour found that there
were no studies that previously examined the relationship between OCB and innovative
behaviour.

Theory

Social exchange theory

Literature about SET in a sociological context can be traced back to the seminal work of
Blau (1964), who built on Gouldner’s (1960) theory about the norm of reciprocity. The
ideology of SET within an organisational environment postulates that employees may feel
obligated to a colleague, supervisor or their employing organisation if they have beneﬁted
from an exchange with the actor/organisation in question (Blau 1964). Social exchange
within an organisation can take place between two or more actors within the organisation
(Julian and Fiona 2005). If an employee perceives that others have beneﬁted from an
exchange and this beneﬁt is not reciprocated within an appropriate time, as perceived by
the employee who provided the beneﬁt, this may have a detrimental effect on the
development of the workplace relationship (Cropanzano and Mitchell 2005; Molm, Collett
and Schaefer 2007; Lin and Huang 2010). Such issues with workplace relationships have
manifested as major organisational issues because the rules governing social exchange are
quite ambiguous and dependent on the organisation’s culture and the perceptions of the
individuals involved in the exchange (De Clercq, Dimov and Thongpapanl 2009).
Speciﬁcally, every actor within a workplace social exchange network may have different
perceptions about what
reciprocation for a particular
beneﬁt/exchange and what is an appropriate amount of time in which to reciprocate the
beneﬁt (Dabos and Rousseau 2004).

is an appropriate level of

SET is used as the lens identifying the potential outcomes when ideal workplace
relationships are embedded in the workplace. As stated under ideal workplace conditions,
nurses would perceive high levels of support from the organisation, supervisors and
colleagues, and therefore would reciprocate by returning positive actions and thoughts
about the organisation (Brunetto, Farr-Wharton, Nelson and Shacklock 2008). This might
be evident in the form of high commitment to the organisation and/or undertaking
activities for patients that are in excess of what is expected based on the formal job
requirement. Such activities may be evident in the way nurses help other colleagues. Based
on SET, it is in an organisation’s best interest to embed effective workplace processes to
ensure that an environment develops which results in employees that are committed to the
organisation and use their commitment to help work colleagues and the organisation.

Affective commitment

Landry and Vandenberghe (2009) suggest that organisational commitment is a global
psychological state that deﬁnes the correlation between employees and the organisation.
A signiﬁcant amount of research has been conducted about the organisational commitment
of employees and how they become committed to the organisation (e.g. Allen and Meyer
1990; Herscovitch and Meyer 2002). Referring to past
literature, one facet of
organisational commitment
is affective commitment and can be described as an
emotional attachment to the organisation, which means that employees want to remain
with the organisation (Shore, Bommer and Shore 2008). Affective commitment will be
examined because there is a current body of literature suggesting that the organisational


3166

M.J. Xerri and Y. Brunetto

and social factors that will be examined may not impact on the costs associated with
leaving an organisation, yet may increase their emotional attachment to the organisation
(Allen and Meyer 1990; Rhoades, Eisenberger and Armeli 2001). Therefore, one aim of
this study is to provide insight into and add to the current body of knowledge about the
affective commitment of nursing employees.

Rhoades et al. (2001) suggest that employees who are affectively committed to their
organisation are considered to usually be dedicated and loyal to the organisation. A sense
of belonging is commonly associated with an employee’s emotional attachment to the
organisation, and such employees have a tendency to be involved in organisational
activities, are willing to work towards the attainment of organisational goals and feel they
should remain with the organisation. Employees who want to remain with the organisation
might also be more inclined than those who need to be with the organisation to maximise
their performance and to help others when required (Meyer, Allen and Gellatly 1990). In
summary, employees who are affectively committed to the organisation are inherently led
to be concerned about the organisation’s well-being. They are also more inclined to
support
the organisation’s strategic direction by exhibiting OCB and approaching
workplace problems innovatively.

Organisational citizenship behaviour

As previously mentioned, OCB refers to the activities and behaviour of employees that go
beyond the call of duty; such behaviour is often thought to be a result of effective
workplace relationships. OCB is exhibited at the employee’s discretion and is not
associated with formal organisational rules or rewards (Organ 1988). Seminal work about
OCB can be traced back to the work of Katz (1964), in which three categories of employee
behaviour were outlined as essential to overall organisational effectiveness. Individual
employees must remain employed and committed to the organisation, employees must
conduct themselves appropriately in order to fulﬁl speciﬁc job requirements (in-role
behaviours) and employees must engage in innovative and spontaneous organisational
activities that are beyond the bases of their job descriptions (extra-role behaviours). In
terms of SET, the theory argues that effective workplace relationships produce a belief of
support and consequently the conditions are ideal for promoting reciprocated behaviour
evident by the extra-role behaviours undertaken by nurses.

Extra-role behaviours include actions that protect the organisation and its property,
constructive suggestions for improving the organisation, self-training for additional
responsibility, creating a favourable climate for the organisation and its surrounding
environments, and cooperative activities (Katz 1964; Bolon 1997). The deﬁnition of OCB
stipulates that these extra-role behaviours are not linked to any formal reward system, but
the continual demonstration of OCB over a period of time is said to positively inﬂuence
the perception that colleagues and supervisors have about the employees who are
exhibiting OCB (Podsakoff et al. 2009). Marko´czy, Vora and Xin (2009) propose that it is
the organisational environment that inﬂuences what types of behaviour will be thought of
as discretionary within the organisation. In general, extra-role behaviours associated with
OCB ensure more efﬁcient use of resources, liberate some of management’s time, and
support and enhance the ability of colleagues to perform their daily tasks.

Past literature converges to suggest that OCB is a multi-dimensional construct
(Konovsky and Pugh 1994; Bolon 1997; Bowler and Brass 2006; Organ, Podsakoff and
MacKenzie 2006). However, some past studies have combined the OCB dimensions into a
uni-dimensional measure (Farh, Earley and Lin 1997; Wong, Wong and Ngo 2012).


The International Journal of Human Resource Management

3167

Regarding the ﬁrst dimension, OCB will beneﬁt the organisation as a whole and can be
considered as performing above and beyond expected role requirements. This dimension is
referred to in the literature as OCB with an organisational focus (OCBO). Regarding the
second dimension, OCB will beneﬁt directly individuals within the organisation and
indirectly beneﬁt the organisation. This dimension is referred to as OCB with an individual
focus (OCBI). To examine the dimensions of OCBI and OCBO, the path from OCBO and
OCBI to innovative behaviour will be examined. This analysis should provide new
knowledge about the OCB of nursing employees and how OCB inﬂuences the innovative
behaviour of nursing employees.

Innovative behaviour

Innovative behaviour in the past has been misunderstood and misrepresented and is often
considered only as the development of creative ideas. This is not to discredit the
perspective that creativity is a discernible part of innovative behaviour, but it is simply a
part of innovative behaviour (Martins and Treblanche 2003; Hoegl and Parboteeah 2007;
De Jong and Den Hartog 2010). In this study, we refer to innovative behaviour as a process
that should improve the efﬁciency and effectiveness of problem-solving in the workplace
(Scozzi, Carvelli and Crowston 2005). For example, it is considered that effective
facilitation of nursing employees’ innovative behaviour should contribute to improving
organisational outcomes and patient safety.

To explain, one example of innovative behaviour in a nursing context may include, as
mentioned, the changing of a routine. This may include nurses identifying that essential
clinical equipment is constantly located a long way from where it is required. A solution may
be to relocate the equipment to a more suitable area. While this is a simple example, it
indicates that innovative behaviour is a problem-solving process, which is constituted by a
nursing employee’s ability to identify and solve work-based problems innovatively, as well
as create support for the solution/s (Carmeli et al. 2006). The facilitation of innovative
behaviour in the workplace is thought to be reliant on the knowledge and resources possessed
by nursing employees (A˚ mo 2006), as well as their commitment to the organisation (Jafri
2010). In particular, an environment where nursing employees are committed to the
organisation and where they exhibit extra-role behaviour and help one another (sharing
information and knowledge) should contribute to fostering innovative behaviour.

Innovative behaviour is considered a risky process, so it is often practised only by
employees that are committed to the organisation. Thompson and Heron (2006) postulate
that an employee’s affective commitment
to the organisation will impact on their
propensity to share knowledge and be innovative. Based on past literature, it is expected
that innovative behaviour will require the commitment of employees. While there is a vast
body of literature that has examined both affective commitment and innovative behaviour,
there is a lack of empirical research that has examined the relationship between affective
commitment and innovative behaviour (Jafri 2010).

The development of OCB could also positively impact on the innovative behaviour of
nursing employees. For example, Podsakoff et al. (2009) suggest that OCB is positively
related to organisational effectiveness, which provides some support that OCB should be
related to innovative behaviour. If innovative behaviour is reliant on the knowledge
of employees and knowledge can be gained through training or through the transfer of
knowledge between employees (Carmeli and Spreitzer 2009), then it is important to
develop a process in which employees are assisting one another. Following a review of the
extant literature, no studies were located that have examined the relationship between


3168

M.J. Xerri and Y. Brunetto

OCB and innovative behaviour. This research, therefore, proposes that an environment
where employees are constantly helping one another and in turn sharing knowledge should
be positively related to innovative behaviour.

Using SET, it is expected that if nurses have experienced effective workplace
relationships, then they would have experienced support and consequently would be likely
to reciprocate that support back to the organisation and their colleagues, which would be
evident in high levels of commitment to the organisation. Consequently, it is likely that
nurses with high levels of commitment to the organisation will have a greater propensity to
be innovative in the workplace. The review of the literature provides foundation for
Hypotheses 1, 2 and 3.

Hypothesis 1:

Affective commitment will be positively related to the innovative
behaviour of nursing employees.

Hypothesis 2:

OCBI will be positively related to the innovative behaviour of nursing
employees.

Hypothesis 3:

OCBO will be positively related to the innovative behaviour of nursing
employees.

Methods

Sample and procedure

As previously mentioned, this study collected data from one public and two private
hospitals located in Australia, examining 210 nursing employees (response rate 21%). The
data is collected using a cross-sectional approach. A quantitative approach is used to
examine the proposed conceptual model. The survey was distributed to all nursing
employees along with a pre-paid envelope addressed to the principal researcher, this way
participant anonymity was maintained.

Measures

Four survey measures were used in this study. The survey consisted of two main sections –
demographic questions and questions/items examining the three variables to be tested. The
items examining the variables require participants to rate on a six-point Likert scale whether
they agree or disagree with the statements (1 ¼ strongly disagree to 6 ¼ strongly agree).
Affective commitment is examined using a validated measure developed by Allen and
Meyer (1990). This measure of affective commitment
is widely used and is also
considered to be a highly reliable instrument (Allen and Meyer 1990; Meyer et al. 1990;
Rhoades et al. 2001). The instrument contains six items that measure the level of an
employee’s emotional attachment to the organisation. The instrument developed by Allen
and Meyer has also been widely applied within nursing literature (e.g. Hackett, Bycio and
Hausdorf 1994; Laschinger, Finegan and Shamian 2001; Vandenberghe and Tremblay
2008; Brunetto, Farr Wharton and Shacklock 2010).

OCB is measured using Williams and Anderson’s (1991) two-dimensional instrument.
Williams and Anderson (1991) reported that the overall instrument was found to be
reliable. For example, the Cronbach’s awas 0.88 for OCBI and 0.75 for OCBO. The scale
examines OCBO and OCBI. Each dimension contained seven items, and the measure has
been applied (Gilbert, Laschinger and Leiter 2010; Chu and Hsu 2011) and validated
(Chang and Chang 2010) within a nursing context.


The International Journal of Human Resource Management

3169

An adapted version of Scott and Bruce’s (1994) measure of innovative behaviour is
used to measure the individual innovative behaviour of nursing employees. Scott and Bruce
(1994) found the instrument to be highly reliable (a¼ 0.89). The original six-item scale
was modiﬁed for use in this study, which required the restructuring of the survey questions
to ﬁt nursing employees. The original innovative behaviour instrument was designed to
survey supervisors about the innovative behaviour of subordinates. However, Carmeli et al.
(2006) used the instrument to survey both supervisors and subordinates, which included the
subordinate being asked to provide a rating of their own innovative behaviour. There are
several recent applications of the measure, all of which reported high levels of reliability
(e.g. Carmeli et al. 2006; Carmeli and Spreitzer 2009; Yuan and Woodman 2010).

Data analysis and model estimation

The survey data was analysed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS)
v.20 and Analysis of Moment Structures (AMOS) v.20 software. Using SPSS, an analysis
of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to determine if there was support for combining the
samples from the three hospitals examined. Using AMOS, latent variable structural
equation modelling (SEM) is undertaken to examine the proposed hypotheses. The SEM
procedure includes a conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and a path analysis (Hair, Black,
Babin and Anderson 2010). Regarding the sample size for SEM, Kline (2011) suggests
that SEM-based manuscripts with samples below 200 are often rejected. Other literature
suggests that a minimum of 100 participants may be adequate for SEM when using
maximum likelihood estimates (Anderson and Gerbing 1984; Hair et al. 2010). However,
the model being tested should have ﬁve constructs or less, more than three indicators
(observed variables) and communalities of 0.6 or above. This study was developed taking
into account the factors prescribed in the literature, and only four constructs were used and
each had six or more indicators. Additionally, the results from the CFA indicate that all of
the items had high communalities (. 0.6). Therefore, based on the prescriptions by Hair
et al. (2010), a sample of 210 nursing employees is an appropriate size.

SEM requires data that is normally distributed (Hair et al. 2010; Kline 2011). Overall
the data from all but one graphical test were considered to be normally distributed. To
ensure normal distribution, two outliers were removed from the data, reducing the number
of useable surveys from 212 to 210. There is also statistical support that the data is
normally distributed, with skewness ranging from 2 1.168 to 0.048 and kurtosis ranging
from 2 1.819 to 1.796.

Due to the cross-sectional nature of this study, it is important to ensure that the data
does not suffer from a common method variance. Harman’s ex post one-factor test was
used to determine if there was a common method bias; this test was conducted by entering
all of the variables into an unrotated factor analysis. The results from the principal
component factor analysis extracted nine components explaining 67.84% of the variance.
One component did not explain the majority of the variance, which indicates there were no
issues with common method variance.

Results

The study included 210 survey respondents: 23 (11%) males and 187 (89%) females. The
distribution of respondents was as follows: hospital A – 108 (51.4%) nursing employees;
hospital B – 62 (29.5%) nursing employees; and hospital C – 40 (19%) nursing
employees. Survey respondents were predominantly aged 45 years and above; for


3170

M.J. Xerri and Y. Brunetto

example, 12.9% were aged under 30 years, 33.3% were aged between 30 and 45 years and
53.8% were aged 45 years and above.

Conﬁrmatory factor analysis

A number of ﬁt indices were used to examine how well the model ﬁts the data, including
absolute and incremental indices. Absolute indices include the normed chi-square test
(Dx2) (x2/degrees of freedom), root mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA)
(Steiger 1989) and goodness-of-ﬁt index (GFI). Incremental ﬁt indices include the
comparative ﬁt index (CFI) (Bollen 1989) and the Tucker – Lewis index (TLI) (Tucker and
Lewis 1973). According to previous literature, there are several prescribed cut-off values
that can be used when undertaking a CFA. For example, Dx2 should be between 1 and 3
with a nonsigniﬁcant p-value (Hair et al. 2010). With this said, the x2 is more likely to
have a signiﬁcant p-value as sample size increases. To ensure an adequate examination of
model ﬁt and to overcome the issues associated with the x2, incremental indices should
also be used (Bentler 1990). RMSEA should be below 0.08 for a reasonable ﬁt or below
0.05 for a good ﬁt (Browne and Cudeck 1993). For the other indices, Byrne (2010)
suggests that a cut-off of 0.95 indicates a superior ﬁt and 0.90 indicates an adequate ﬁt.
The results from the SEM analysis indicate that there appeared to be no issues with
reliability or validity. For example, factor loadings exceeded 0.7 and no factor loadings
were greater than 1 (Kline 2011). The average variance extracted (AVE) and the
composite reliabilities were all above 0.5 and 0.7, respectively (Hair et al. 2010). Three
models were tested, with Model 3 providing the best ﬁt for the data (see Table 1), which
also provides support to the distinctiveness of the model. As depicted in Table 1, the initial
results from the CFA depict an adequate ﬁt of the model (Dx2 ¼ 1.67, p , 0.001,
RMSEA ¼ 0.057, GFI ¼ 0.936, CFI ¼ 0.915 and TLI ¼ 0.906).

Descriptive statistics and correlations

The means, standard deviations, Cronbach’s as and inter-correlations for all variables
including affective commitment, OCB and innovative behaviour are presented in Table 2.

ANOVA

Results from a one-way ANOVA outline that overall there were no sample-speciﬁc
differences between hospital A, B and C. First, the data is considered to be normally
distributed and the assumption of homogeneity of variance was not violated, that is, none of
the Levene statistics were signiﬁcant (see Table 3). Second, as depicted in Table 3, the F-ratio
and probability provide the depiction that there were no statistically signiﬁcant differences

Table 1. Conﬁrmatory factor analysis – examining goodness-of-ﬁt.

Model 1: Affective commitment – IB
Model 2:
OCBI – IB
OCBO—IB
Model 3: All paths

Note: IB, innovative behaviour.

Dx2

1.86
1.70

p

0.000
0.000

CFI

0.89
0.91

GFI

0.83
0.85

TLI

0.88
0.90

RMSEA

0.06
0.06

1.67

0.001

0.92

0.94

0.91

0.05


The International Journal of Human Resource Management

3171

Table 2. Means, standard deviations, composite reliability, AVE and correlations.

Variables

Mean

Innovative

behaviour

Affective

commitment

OCBI
OCBO

4.52

4.12

4.24
2.94

Standard
deviation

Composite
reliability

AVE

IB

AC

OCBI

OCBO

0.67

0.98

0.86
0.56

0.78

0.90

0.89
0.76

0.57

(0.76)

0.65

0.46**

(0.81)

0.63
0.56

0.19**
0.12

0.11*
0.18*

(0.79)
0.18**

(0.75)

Note: Diagonal elements in the parentheses are the square root of the average variance extracted (AVE).
**Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level (two-tailed).
*Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level (two-tailed).

Table 3. ANOVA results.

Hospitala

Hospitalb

Hospitalc

Variable

Meand

SD

Meand

4.49
4.08
4.18
3.01

Innovative behaviour
Affective commitment
OCBI
OCBO
a N ¼ 108.
b N ¼ 62.
c N ¼ 40.
d Mean: 1 ¼ strongly disagree to 6 ¼ strongly agree.

0.66
0.93
0.93
0.61

4.49
4.17
4.30
2.81

SD

0.64
0.97
0.83
0.56

Meand

4.62
4.12
4.29
2.94

SD

0.74
1.15
0.70
0.39

F

Sig.

0.600
0.177
0.427
2.63

0.550
0.838
0.653
0.074

between the samples. With the consideration that there were no sample-speciﬁc differences
between the three hospitals examined, this provides support about the beneﬁt in combining
the three samples. As a result, the three samples are combined to examine the hypotheses.

Testing the hypotheses

The results from the SEM analysis outline that the model tested explained 21.7% of the
variance of innovative behaviour. As outlined below, there is support to accept all
hypotheses, except for Hypothesis 3 (Figure 1).

Hypothesis 1 postulated that employees’ affective commitment would be positively
related to their innovative behaviour in the workplace. The results outline that affective
commitment
is positively and signiﬁcantly correlated with innovative behaviour
(b¼ 0.18, p , 0.01). Therefore, the results provide support that Hypothesis 1 should
be accepted.

Hypothesis 2 suggested that OCBI would be positively correlated with innovative
behaviour. On the other hand, Hypothesis 3 proposed that OCBO would be positively
correlated with innovative behaviour. The results provide support for the acceptance of
Hypothesis 2, reporting that OCBI was positively and signiﬁcantly correlated with
innovative behaviour (b¼ 0.24, p , 0.05). However, the results suggest that Hypothesis
3 should be rejected, reporting that OCBO was positively related to innovative behaviour
(b¼ 0.07), although this relationship was quite weak and not signiﬁcant ( p , 0.05).


3172

M.J. Xerri and Y. Brunetto

Organisational

citizenship
behaviour:
individual

Affective

commitment

H1
.18**

Organisational

citizenship
behaviour:
organisation

H2 

.24*

.07

H3

Innovative
behaviour

Figure 1. Model examining affective commitment, organisational citizenship behaviour and
innovative behaviour.

Discussion

The results from this examination provide information for human resource managers,
particularly for the management of nursing employees. In terms of SET, the paper argued
that under ideal circumstances, effective workplace relationships would provide support
for nurses and this would set up a dynamic that psychologically obliged employees to
reciprocate support, time, resources and energy back to the organisation. We captured this
reciprocity in the form of affective commitment and OCB, which can then be evident in
the behaviours associated with innovation.

Our interpretation of the ﬁndings from this paper using a SET framework is that those
nurses that reciprocated back to the organisation in the form of higher levels of OCB and
commitment to the organisation also had a greater intention to be innovative. This means
that the ﬁndings from this paper are consistent with what would be expected using a SET
framework. As such, the ﬁndings provide support for the importance of promoting and
embedding effective workplace relationships as a means of achieving higher levels of
affective commitment and higher levels of OCB from employees. The added beneﬁt is
that the organisation is likely to capture additional beneﬁts from the innovative behaviour
of employees, which is also likely to result in improved processes and in turn an
improvement in organisational effectiveness.

In practice, these ﬁndings suggest that if health care managers want to promote
commitment, then the ﬁrst step is to embed effective workplace relationships. The beneﬁt
of such actions is that such an environment promotes employees’ emotional attachment to
the organisation, which in turn increases their inclination to approach work-based
problems innovatively. Such knowledge provides insight
into the antecedents of
innovative behaviour of employees and addresses a concern by Jafri (2010) who argued
that there was a lack of empirical knowledge about the impact of affective commitment on
innovative behaviour.

Hence, the ﬁndings from this study add to the current body of knowledge about SET,
providing empirical support that OCBI is positively correlated with the innovative
behaviour of nursing employees. These ﬁndings support past literature about OCB, which
suggests that OCBI will directly beneﬁt individuals in the workplace and indirectly beneﬁt
the organisation (Organ et al. 2006; Podsakoff et al. 2009; Chang and Chang 2010). To
explain, the helping behaviour between nursing employees will not only directly beneﬁt
the nurses, but will also have an indirect impact on organisational outcomes, such as


The International Journal of Human Resource Management

3173

patient safety and organisational efﬁciency. These ﬁndings provide insight into SET,
reporting that affective commitment inﬂuences OCB and innovative behaviour.

While there is no research to empirically suggest a relationship between OCB that
directly beneﬁts the organisation and innovative behaviour, it is logical to theorise that
such a relationship may exist. This is because innovative behaviour provides a direct
beneﬁt for the organisation. An explanation for the absence of a signiﬁcant relationship
may be that innovative behaviour is a construct that measures an individual’s innovative
behaviour in the workplace (Scott and Bruce 1994; Janssen 2005; Carmeli and Freund
2009). As such, this may provide a reason as to why an increase in beneﬁts for the
organisation did not inﬂuence individual behaviour. For example, if an employee helps
another employee in the workplace, this is directly beneﬁting the individual who was
helped, but also provides an indirect beneﬁt to the organisation. These ﬁndings provide
support that future research should ﬁnd OCBI to be a better predictor of innovative
behaviour compared to OCBO.

The results from this study provide information for hospital and human resource
management aiming to develop and foster the innovative behaviour of nursing employees.
To explain, management are responsible for the messages they convey to employees, such
messages inﬂuence an employee’s commitment to the organisation and the level of
commitment relates to an employee’s willingness to help and to exhibit innovative
behaviour. The development of innovative behaviour has been found to provide a
foundation from which to improve employee problem-solving and as such increase
employee efﬁciency and productivity (Sanders, Moorkamp, Torka, Groeneveld and
Groeneveld 2010; Yuan and Woodman 2010). The improvement of nursing employee
efﬁciency and effectiveness should contribute to the enhancement of patient outcomes and
safety (Nieva and Sorra 2003). Thus, improving overall patient outcomes through the
development of nursing employee behaviour provides a strategic approach to human
resource management.

Conclusion

In summary, this study has provided insight into SET by contributing to the understanding
of the relationships between affective commitment, OCB and innovative behaviour. The
main contribution to SET was conducted by examining a path between OCB and
innovative behaviour. Empirical knowledge about innovative behaviour is imperative if a
better understanding is to be developed about the factors that impact on the productivity
and effectiveness of nursing employees. This study provides new knowledge, suggesting
that OCBI may be a better predictor of innovative behaviour when compared to OCBO.
However, it is important to note that affective commitment was a major predictor of
innovative behaviour proving a strong direct effect.

There were limitations associated with this study that require some consideration.
First, the data collection provided a cross-section of nursing employees’ perceptions,
which limited the ability to test for causation. A longitudinal approach should provide
more generalisable results that are also more appropriate for testing causation (Maxwell
and Cole 2007). Second,
the supervisor – subordinate relationship may also be an
important predictor of nursing employees’ affective commitment and, in turn, their OCB
and innovative behaviour. Therefore, the relationships examined within this study should
be tested within further research and should include other factors that are rooted within
SET. For example, the study could include the impact of leader – member exchange,


3174

M.J. Xerri and Y. Brunetto

procedural and interactional justice on the affective commitment, OCB and innovative
behaviour of nursing employees.

This research has implications for management because the development of innovative
behaviour is particularly important for hospital and human resource management practice.
This can be attributed to the fact that innovative behaviour, more than likely, positively
contributes to an employee’s ability to solve work-based problems (Janssen 2005; Carmeli
et al. 2006; Carmeli and Spreitzer 2009; De Jong and Den Hartog 2010). So, human
resource managers seeking to improve the innovative behaviour of employees will
develop a process that leads to an employee being more affectively committed to the
organisation and who are more likely to exhibit OCB and innovative behaviour. However,
the supervisor may also play an important role in developing employees that are
affectively committed to the organisation. As such, future research should examine the
relationship between a supervisor and their subordinates and measure the role that this
relationship plays in the path to innovative behaviour from the perspective of the
supervisor and the subordinate.

References
Allen, N.J., and Meyer, J.P. (1990), ‘The Measurement and Antecedents of Affective, Continuance
and Normative Commitment to the Organization,’ Journal of Occupational Psychology, 63,
1 – 18.

A˚ mo, B. (2006), ‘Employee Innovation Behaviour in Health Care: The Inﬂuence from Management

and Colleagues,’ International Nursing Review, 53, 231 – 237.

Anderson, J.C., and Gerbing, D.W. (1984), ‘The Effect of Sampling Error on Convergence,
Improper Solutions, and Goodness-of-Fit Indices for Maximum Likelihood Conﬁrmatory Factor
Analysis,’ Psychometrika, 49, 155 – 173.

Bentler, P.M. (1990), ‘Fit Indexes, Lagrange Multipliers, Constraint Changes and Incomplete Data

in Structural Models,’ Multivariate Behavioral Research, 25, 163 – 172.

Blau, P. (1964), ‘Justice in Social Exchange,’ Sociological Inquiry, 34, 193 – 206.
Bollen, K.A. (1989), Structural Equations with Latent Variables, New York: Wiley.
Bolon, D.

‘Organizational Citizenship Behavior among Hospital Employees: A
Multidimensional Analysis Involving Job Satisfaction and Organisational Commitment,’
Hospital and Health Services, 42, 221 – 241.

(1997),

Bowler, M., and Brass, D. (2006), ‘Relational Correlates of Interpersonal Citizenship Behavior: A

Social Network Perspective,’ Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 70 – 82.

Browne, M.W., and Cudeck, R. (1993), ‘Alternative Ways of Assessing Model Fit,’ in Testing
Structural Equation Models, eds. K.A. Bollen and J.S. Long, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage,
pp. 136 – 162.

Brunetto, Y., Farr-Wharton, R., Nelson, S., and Shacklock, K. (2008), ‘The Impact of LMX on
Nurses’ Perceptions of Wellbeing: A Social Exchange Theory Perspective,’ Proceedings of the
British Academy of Management Annual Meeting 2008, Harrogate, pp. 1 – 16.

Brunetto, Y., Farr Wharton, R., and Shacklock, K. (2010), ‘The Impact of Supervisor-Subordinate
Relationships on Morale: Implications for Public and Private Sector Nurses’ Commitment,’
Human Resource Management Journal, 20, 206 – 225.

Byrne, B.M. (2010), Structural Equation Modeling with AMOS: Basic Concepts, Applications, and

Programming, New York: Routledge.

Carmeli, A., and Freund, A. (2009), ‘Linking Perceived External Prestige and Intentions to Leave the
Organization: The Mediating Role of Job Satisfaction and Affective Commitment,’ Journal of
Social Service Research, 35, 236 – 250.

Carmeli, A., Meitar, R., and Weisberg, J. (2006), ‘Self-Leadership Skills and Innovative Behaviour

at Work,’ International Journal of Manpower, 27, 75 – 90.

Carmeli, A., and Spreitzer, G.M. (2009), ‘Trust, Connectivity, and Thriving: Implications for

Innovative Behaviors at Work,’ The Journal of Creative Behavior, 43, 169 – 191.

Chaboyer, W., Najman, J., and Dunn, S. (2001), ‘Cohesion among Nurses: A Comparison of Bedside
vs. Charge Nurses’ Perceptions in Australian Hospitals,’ Journal of Advanced Nursing, 35,
526 – 532.


The International Journal of Human Resource Management

3175

Chang, C.S., and Chang, H.C. (2010), ‘Motivating Nurses’ Organizational Citizenship Behaviors by
Customer Oriented Perception for Evidence Based Practice,’ Worldviews on Evidence Based
Nursing, 7, 214 – 225.

Chang, E. (2005), ‘Role Stress in Nurses: Review of Related Factors and Strategies for Moving

Forward,’ Nursing Health Science, 7, 57 – 65.

Chu, C.I., and Hsu, Y.F. (2011), ‘Hospital Nurse Job Attitudes and Performance: The Impact of

Employment Status,’ Journal of Nursing Research, 19, 53 – 60.

Cole, M., Schaninger, W., and Harris, S. (2007), ‘The Workplace Social Network Exchange: A

Multilevel, Conceptual Examination,’ Group & Organization Management, 27, 142 – 167.

Creegan, R., Dufﬁeld, C., and Forrester, K. (2003), ‘Casualisation of the Nursing Workforce in

Australia: Driving Forces and Implications,’ Australian Health Review, 26, 201 – 208.

Cropanzano, R., and Mitchell, M. (2005), ‘Social Exchange Theory: An Interdisciplinary Review,’

Journal of Management, 31, 874 – 900.

Dabos, G.E., and Rousseau, D.M. (2004), ‘Mutuality and Reciprocity in the Psychological Contracts

of Employees and Employers,’ Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 52 – 71.

De Clercq, D., Dimov, D., and Thongpapanl, N. (2009), ‘The Moderating Impact of Internal Social
Exchange Processes on the Entrepreneurial Orientation-Performance Relationship,’ Journal of
Business Venturing, 25, 87 – 103.

De Jong, J., and Den Hartog, D. (2010), ‘Measuring Innovative Work Behaviour,’ Creativity and

Innovation Management, 19, 23 – 36.

Doiron, D., Hall, J., and Jones, G. (2008), ‘Is There a Crisis in Nursing Retention in New South

Wales?’ Australia and New Zealand Health Policy, 5, 19 – 29.

Farh, J.L., Earley, P.C., and Lin, S.C. (1997), ‘Impetus for Action: A Cultural Analysis of Justice and
Organizational Citizenship Behavior in Chinese Society,’ Administrative Science Quarterly, 42,
3, 421 – 444.

Gilbert, S., Laschinger, H.K.S., and Leiter, M. (2010), ‘The Mediating Effect of Burnout on the
Relationship Between Structural Empowerment and Organizational Citizenship Behaviours,’
Journal of Nursing Management, 18, 339 – 348.

Gouldner, A. (1960), ‘The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement,’ American Sociological

Review, 25, 161 – 178.

Hackett, R.D., Bycio, P., and Hausdorf, P.A. (1994), ‘Further Assessments of Meyer and Allen’s
(1991) Three-Component Model of Organizational Commitment,’ Journal of Applied
Psychology, 79, 15 – 23.

Hair, J.F., Black, W.C., Babin, B.J., and Anderson, R.E. (2010), Multivariate Data Analysis: A

Global Perspective, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.

Herscovitch, L., and Meyer, J. (2002), ‘Commitment to Organizational Change: Extension of a

Three-Component Model,’ Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 474 – 487.

Hoegl, M., and Parboteeah, K.P. (2007), ‘Creativity in Innovative Projects: How Teamwork

Matters,’ Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 24, 148 – 166.

Jafri, M. (2010), ‘Organizational Commitment and Employee’s Innovative Behavior: A Study in

Retail Sector,’ Journal of Management Research, 10, 62 – 68.

Janssen, O. (2005), ‘The Impact of Perceived Inﬂuence and Supervisor Supportiveness on Employee
Innovative Behaviour,’ Journal of Occupational and Organisational Psychology, 78, 573 – 579.
Julian, G., and Fiona, D. (2005), ‘Using Social Exchange Theory to Predict the Effects of HRM

Practice on Employee Outcomes,’ Public Management Review, 7, 1 – 24.

Katz, D. (1964), ‘The Motivational Basis of Organisational Behavior,’ Behavioural Science, 9,

131 – 133.

Kline, R.B. (2011), Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling, New York: The

Guilford Press.

Knol, J., and van Linge, R. (2009), ‘Innovative Behaviour: The Effect of Structural and

Psychological Empowerment on Nurses,’ Journal of Advanced Nursing, 65, 359 – 370.

Konovsky, M., and Pugh, S. (1994), ‘Citizenship Behavior and Social Exchange,’ Academy of

Management Journal, 37, 656 – 669.

Landry, G., and Vandenberghe, C. (2009), ‘Role of Commitment to the Supervisor, Leader-Member
Exchange, and Supervisor-Based Self-Esteem in Employee-Supervisor Contract,’ Journal of
Social Psychology, 149, 5 – 28.


3176

M.J. Xerri and Y. Brunetto

Laschinger, H.K., Finegan, J., and Shamian, J. (2001), ‘The Impact of Workplace Empowerment,
Organizational Trust on Staff Nurses’ Work Satisfaction and Organizational Commitment,’
Health Care Management Review, 26, 7 – 23.

LePine, J.A., Erez, A., and Johnson, D.E. (2002), ‘The Nature and Dimensionality of Organizational
Citizenship Behavior: A Critical Review and Meta-Analysis,’ Journal of Applied Psychology,
87, 52 – 65.

Lin, T., and Huang, C. (2010), ‘Withholding Effort in Knowledge Contribution: The Role of Social
Exchange and Social Cognitive on Project Teams,’ Information & Management, 47, 188 – 196.
Marko´czy, L., Vora, D., and Xin, K. (2009), ‘Forbearance in Organizational Citizenship Behaviour,’

The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 20, 321 – 347.

Martins, E., and Treblanche, F. (2003), ‘Building Organisational Culture that Stimulates Creativity

and Innovation,’ European Journal of Innovation Management, 6, 64 – 74.

Maxwell, S.E., and Cole, D.A. (2007), ‘Bias in Cross-Sectional Analyses of Longitudinal

Mediation,’ Psychological Methods, 12, 23 – 44.

Meyer, J.P., Allen, N.J., and Gellatly, I.R. (1990), ‘Affective and Continuance Commitment to the
Organization: Evaluation of Measures and Analysis of Concurrent and Time-Lagged Relations,’
Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 710 – 720.

Molm, L., Collett, J., and Schaefer, D. (2007), ‘Building Solidarity Through Generalized Exchange:

A Theory of Reciprocity 1,’ American Journal of Sociology, 113, 205 – 242.

Nieva, V., and Sorra, J. (2003), ‘Safety Culture Assessment: A Tool for Improving Patient Safety in

Healthcare Organizations,’ Quality and Safety in Health Care, 12, 17 – 23.

OECD (2006), Live Longer, Work Longer, Paris: OECD.
Organ, D.W. (1988), Organizational Citizenship Behavior: The Good Soldier Syndrome, Lexington,

MA: Lexington Books.

Organ, D.W., Podsakoff, P., and MacKenzie, S. (2006), Organizational Citizenship Behavior: Its

Nature, Antecedents, and Consquences (10), Thousands Oaks, CA: Sage.

Podsakoff, N.P., Whiting, S.W., Podsakoff, P.M., and Blume, B.D. (2009), ‘Individual- and
Organizational-Level Consequences of Organizational Citizenship Behaviors: A Meta-
Analysis,’ Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 122 – 141.

Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S., Paine, J., and Bachrach, D. (2000), ‘Organizational Citizenship
Behaviors: A Critical Review of the Theoretical and Empirical Literature and Suggestions for
Future Research,’ Journal of Management, 26, 513 – 563.

Reuvers, M., van Engen, M., Vinkenburg, C., and Wilson-Evered, E. (2008), ‘Transformational
Leadership and Innovative Work Behaviour: Exploring the Relevance of Gender Differences,’
Creativity and Innovation Management, 17, 227 – 244.

Rhoades, L., Eisenberger, R., and Armeli, S. (2001), ‘Affective Commitment to the Organization:
The Contribution of Perceived Organizational Support,’ Journal of Applied Psychology, 86,
825 – 836.

Sanders, K., Moorkamp, M., Torka, N., Groeneveld, S., and Groeneveld, C. (2010), ‘How to Support
Innovative Behaviour? The Role of LMX and Satisfaction with HR Practices,’ Technology &
Investment, 1, 57 – 66.

Scott, S., and Bruce, R. (1994), ‘Determinants of Innovative Behaviour: A Path Model of Individual

Innovation in the Workplace,’ Academy of Management Journal, 37, 580 – 607.

Scozzi, M., Carvelli, C., and Crowston, K. (2005), ‘Methods for Modelling and Supporting

Innovation Processes in SMEs,’ European Journal of Innovation Management, 8, 120 – 137.

Shore, T., Bommer, W., and Shore, L. (2008), ‘An Integrative Model of Managerial Perceptions of
Employee Commitment: Antecedents and Inﬂuences on Employee Treatment,’ Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 29, 635 – 655.

Steiger, J.H. (1989), EzPATH: A Supplementary Module for SYSTAT and SYGRAPH, Evanston, IL:

Systat.

Thompson, M., and Heron, P. (2006), ‘Relational Quality and Innovative Performance in R&D

Based Science and Technology Firms,’ Human Resource Management Journal, 16, 28 – 47.

Tucker, L.R., and Lewis, C. (1973), ‘A Reliability Coefﬁcient for Maximum Likelihood Factor

Analysis,’ Psychometrika, 38, 1 – 10.

Vandenberghe, C., and Tremblay, M. (2008), ‘The Role of Pay Satisfaction and Organizational
in Turnover Intentions: A Two-Sample Study,’ Journal of Business and

Commitment
Psychology, 22, 275 – 286.


The International Journal of Human Resource Management

3177

Williams, L., and Anderson, S. (1991), ‘Job Satisfaction and Organizational Commitment as
Predictors of Organizational Citizenship and In-role Behaviors,’ Journal of Management, 17,
601 – 623.

Wong, Y.T., Wong, C.S., and Ngo, H.Y. (2012), ‘The Effects of Trust in Organisation and Perceived
Organisational Support on Organisational Citizenship Behaviour: A Test of Three Competing
Models,’ The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 23, 278 – 293.

Xerri, M. (2013), ‘Workplace Relationships and the Innovative Behaviour of Nursing Employees: A

Social Exchange Perspective,’ Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Human Resources, 51, 1, 103 – 123.

Yuan, F., and Woodman, R.W. (2010), ‘Innovative Behavior in the Workplace: The Role of
Performance and Image Outcome Expectations,’ Academy of Management Journal, 53, 323–342.


Copyright of International Journal of Human Resource Management is the property of
Routledge and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv
without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.

