Journal of Organizational Behavior, J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
Published online 6 December 2012 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/job.1844

Explaining task performance and creativity
from perceived organizational support theory:
Which mechanisms are more important?

CHONGXIN YU* AND STEPHEN J. FRENKEL
School of Management, Australian School of Business, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
A
r
t
i
c
e

l

Summary

Perceived organizational support (POS) theory speciﬁes three mechanisms—felt obligation, group identiﬁca-
tion, and outcome expectancy—to explain the effects of organizational support on employee work outcomes.
These mechanisms have usually been examined in isolation so that it is not possible to assess their relative
explanatory power. The present study aims to remedy this problem by examining the three mechanisms
simultaneously using structural equation modeling. On the basis of a sample of 206 bank employees in China,
we focus on two types of employee performance—task performance and creativity—as dependent variables.
Drawing on self-determination theory and characteristics of the research context, we propose that task
performance is more strongly predicted by felt obligation than by the other two mechanisms, whereas
identiﬁcation and expectancy more strongly predict creativity than felt obligation. We conclude by discussing
our contribution to POS and creativity research, and highlight some important implications of our ﬁndings.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Keywords: perceived organizational support; task performance; creativity

Introduction

Building a mutually beneﬁcial employment relationship requires employers to provide employees with valued
extrinsic and intrinsic rewards, which are reciprocated with enhanced performance and citizenship behavior (Meyer,
Stanley, Herscovitch, & Topolnytsky, 2002). Over time, employees develop beliefs about the extent to which they
are valued and cared for by the organization. This is referred to as perceived organizational support (POS; Eisenberger,
Huntington, Hutchison, & Sowa, 1986). Meta-analytic evidence (Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002) indicates that
beneﬁcial treatments (e.g., fairness, organizational rewards, and favorable job conditions) received by employees are
associated with POS. Further, POS leads to outcomes favorable to both employees (e.g., job satisfaction and positive
mood) and the organization (e.g., affective commitment, performance, and reduced withdrawal behavior).

Perceived organizational support research is nevertheless limited by a lack of speciﬁcity regarding three mechanisms
that have been used to explain the effects of POS (Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002). These mechanisms derive from
different theories: felt obligation from social exchange theory, group identiﬁcation from social identity theory, and
outcome expectancy from expectancy theory. It is unclear whether these mechanisms operate jointly and, if jointly,
which of these mechanisms is more powerful. The social exchange and identiﬁcation mechanisms have only been tested
in isolation, and the expectancy mechanism has yet to be tested empirically. We contend that the explanatory power of
each of these mechanisms depends on the type of outcome variable under consideration and characteristics of the
research context.

*Correspondence to: Chongxin Yu, School of Management, Australian School of Business, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
E-mail: yuchongxin@gmail.com

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received 13 November 2011
Revised 27 October 2012, Accepted 2 November 2012


1166

C. YU AND S. J. FRENKEL

Our paper contributes to the extant literature by demonstrating which of the three mechanisms proposed by POS
theory has greater explanatory power in relation to two important types of individual-level performance: task
performance and creativity. The current study was undertaken among employees at a large state-owned bank in China,
a distinctive yet important research context as Chinese banks constitute the main channel for converting savings into
investment and employ a large proportion of service sector employees (Zhao, Zhang, Zhao, & Poon, 2012). We use
self-determination theory (SDT; Deci, Connell, & Ryan, 1989; Deci & Ryan, 1985) to show that felt obligation to
the work unit (hereafter felt obligation) is a stronger predictor of task performance, whereas identiﬁcation with the work
unit (hereafter work unit identiﬁcation) and internal career success expectancy (hereafter success expectancy) are
superior predictors of creativity.

Theoretical Background and Hypotheses

Task performance refers to meeting formal job requirements including the following prescribed work procedures. It
is a type of non-discretionary, in-role behavior with efﬁciency as its focus. In the current study, participants’ jobs
involve mainly routine administrative and clerical work (see Method section). Creativity, in this and in similar
medium to low skill work role contexts, is an extra-role, discretionary behavior denoting the generation of novel and
useful ideas that contribute to innovation (Amabile, 1996; Oldham & Cummings, 1996).

Three mechanisms underpinning positive POS outcomes

Figure 1 outlines our theoretical framework showing how the three mechanisms link employees’ POS to task
performance and creativity.

The positive effect of POS on job performance and extra-role behavior is supported by empirical evidence in
western societies (Eisenberger, Armeli, Rexwinkel, Lynch, & Rhoades, 2001; Lavelle, McMahan, & Harris,
2009; Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002) and in Chinese contexts (Chen, Aryee, & Lee, 2005; Hui, Wong, & Tjosvold,
2007). Furthermore, perceived support in the form of emotional and cognitive resources has been shown to be
positively related to employee creativity (Madjar, Oldham, & Pratt, 2002; Oldham & Cummings, 1996). Support
by leaders and the organization is highly valued as creativity requires risk-taking that may be stressful (Staw, 1995).
The psychological processes underpinning POS’s positive outcomes as elaborated later focus on three potential
mechanisms: feelings of obligation to act appropriately, fulﬁllment of socio-emotional needs, and enhanced outcome
expectancies (Eisenberger et al., 1986).

POS (delivered

by middle
managers)

Felt 

obligation
H1a, H2a

Work unit

identification
H1b, H2b

with 

Career success 

expectancy
H1c, H2c

H3

H4

Task 

performance

Creativity

Figure 1. Three mechanisms explaining the relationships between perceived organizational support and employee outcomes.
Note: Regarding H3 and H4, the relationship denoted by the solid line, which links one mediator to one work outcome, is

hypothesized to be stronger than that denoted by the dashed line, which links another mediator to the work outcome

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


THREE MECHANISMS EXPLAINING TASK PERFORMANCE AND CREATIVITY

1167

First, on the basis of the reciprocity norm of social exchange (Gouldner, 1960), which obliges the return of favorable
treatment, POS is likely to engender a felt obligation to care about and assist the organization in attaining its goals.
Because management support is perceived as beneﬁcial treatment by the focal employee, a social exchange relationship
will develop between the organization and the employee, encouraging the employee to reciprocate in ways that
are valued by the organization. Most POS literature relies on this social exchange theory to predict work outcomes
(e.g., Eisenberger et al., 2001; Settoon, Bennett, & Liden, 1996; Wayne, Shore, & Liden, 1997).

Second, the caring, recognition, and respect implied by POS are likely to partially or wholly meet employees’ socio-
emotional needs, leading employees to incorporate organizational membership into their individual identity. Central to
social identity theory is the idea that part of individuals’ self-concept is deﬁned through group afﬁliation, that is, the
process of identiﬁcation (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). By increasing individuals’ sense of self-regard, organizational
support encourages employees to enhance the psychological linkage between the individual and the organization (Tyler
& Blader, 2003). High identifying employees are more likely to try and advance the organization’s goals. This mechanism
is also supported by empirical research (e.g., Edwards & Peccei, 2010; Frenkel & Yu, 2011).

Third, employees develop trust and self-perceived value when supported and cared for (Chen et al., 2005); therefore,
POS may strengthen employees’ beliefs that they will be appropriately recognized and compensated, that is, outcome
expectancy will be enhanced. In this study, expectancy is conceptualized as an expectation of achieving internal career
success, that is, meeting career goals, which may include promotion, recognition, and compensation in the current
organization (Heslin, 2005; Weng & McElroy, 2012). Career success depends not only on employees’ abilities but also
on management intention (Weng & McElroy, 2012). Employees infer relevant information from POS. Eisenberger,
Fasolo, and Davislamastro (1990) found that employees with high perceived support expressed greater effort–reward
expectancy, in terms of pay, promotion, approval, recognition, and inﬂuence. On the basis of expectancy theory, having
a high expectancy of internal success encourages employees to perform at superior levels. Greater effort–reward expec-
tancy has been found to be positively associated with overall performance and citizenship behavior (Kemery, Bedeian,
& Zacur, 1996; Van Eerde & Thierry, 1996). However, despite calls for research (Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002), we
were unable to ﬁnd any study examining outcome expectancy as a mediator between POS and work behavior.

Previous studies have shown that high-quality social exchange, group identiﬁcation, and high outcome expectancy
provide explanations for various work outcomes in both western and Chinese contexts (e.g., Baruch, Wheeler, & Zhao,
2004; Frenkel & Yu, 2011; Walumbwa et al., 2011). We propose the following hypotheses.

H1: The positive relationship between POS and task performance is mediated by felt obligation (H1a), work unit
identiﬁcation (H1b), and success expectancy (H1c).

H2: The positive relationship between POS and creativity is mediated by felt obligation (H2a), work unit
identiﬁcation (H2b), and success expectancy (H2c).

Relative explanatory power

The extant literature indicates no compelling theoretical reasons or empirical evidence to expect different relation-
ships between POS and the three mediators (felt obligation, identiﬁcation, and expectancy). The relative explanatory
power of each mechanism may be accounted for by different relationships between the mediators and the outcome
variables. We contend that understanding these relationships requires differentiating the outcomes in terms of task
complexity and examining the characteristics of research context.

Using SDT as an overarching framework, we explain later the relationships between different types of motivation
and work performance with different levels of task complexity. According to SDT, people have three fundamental
psychological needs for: autonomy, that is, volition and experience of integration and freedom; competence, that is, a
propensity to inﬂuence the immediate environment and feel effective in attaining valued outcomes; and relatedness,
that is, the desire to feel connected to others and to be a valued member of a group (Deci & Ryan, 2000; Ryan &

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


1168

C. YU AND S. J. FRENKEL

Deci, 2000). Where these needs are not met, individuals feel less self-determined and more subject to external
demands or contingencies. Where these needs (especially for autonomy) are satisﬁed, individuals develop an
autonomous motivation. Thus motivation can be located on a controlled-autonomous continuum with external
regulation at one end and internal regulation at the other (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Ryan & Deci, 2000).1 Supported
by empirical evidence, SDT theory predicts that autonomous motivation is positively associated with effective
performance of complex, cognitively ﬂexible, conceptual tasks such as creativity (Gagne & Deci, 2005; Meyer,
Becker, & Vandenberghe, 2004). However, experimental and ﬁeld study evidence from education and health care
suggest that autonomous motivation offers no advantage or is less effective than controlled motivation for routine
tasks (Benware & Deci, 1984; Gagne & Deci, 2005; McGraw, 1978). In the next section, we explain that felt
obligation reﬂects relative controlled motivation, which better explains employees’ routine task performance,
whereas identiﬁcation and expectancy reﬂect relative autonomous motivation, which better explains creativity.

Characteristics of the research context refer to aspects such as job requirements and relevant human resource (HR)
policies and practices. The distinction between task performance and creativity in terms of in-role and extra-role
activities may also inﬂuence the effectiveness of the three mediators. For example, motivation for creativity among
biotechnology and IT engineers in innovative ﬁrms are likely to differ from ﬁrst-line employees in commercial
banks and retailing ﬁrms. In innovative ﬁrms, creativity is formally rewarded and encouraged by HR policies and
practices, whereas in organizations where competition is based more on standardized service and price, as in our
research context, creativity is favored but exceeds employees’ range of perceived obligation. We also refer to other
characteristics of the context such as prevailing norms regarding obligation, Guanxi, and the priority accorded to
usefulness over novelty. These provide supplementary explanations for the relative effectiveness of particular
mechanism variables.

In sum, drawing on SDT and characteristics of the research context, we develop hypotheses discussed later that
assist in answering the question: Which mechanism is more strongly related to routine task performance and
extra-role creativity respectively?

Task performance and the three mechanisms

Felt obligation is an externally directed orientation to employer treatment and as such represents relatively controlled
motivation. By fulﬁlling obligations, employees anticipate continuity of the employment relationship, avoid guilt or
anxiety, and enhance their positive self-image (Cooper & Jayatilaka, 2006; Eisenberger et al., 2001). Thus employee
behavior is regulated externally. Because task performance forms the foundation of the employment relationship
(Baldamus, 1961), and most bank employees are long tenured (Table 1) and therefore capable of high performance,
improvement in performance of routine tasks is likely to arise from enhanced felt obligation. Regarding the inﬂuence
of context, fulﬁlling reciprocal obligations is a highly valued norm in the particular context under study. This norm
is rooted in the Confucian philosophy that guides key aspects of social and economic life (Jia, You, & Du, 2012).
Therefore, we expect the inﬂuence of felt obligation on routine task performance to be strongly positive.

In contrast, the inﬂuences of identiﬁcation and career expectancy on routine task performance are expected to
be weaker because group identiﬁcation and success expectancy reﬂect relative autonomous motivation. When
employees identify with a group, they are more likely to internalize the group values and experience the feeling
of “oneness” and belongingness (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). They may experience more ownership of their behavior
as their need for autonomy and relatedness is met, leading to the adoption of internal regulation. However, as noted

1According to SDT theory, between these two forms of motivation are various motivational combinations. These include partially internalized
extrinsic motivation (introjected regulation) and internalized extrinsic motivation (identiﬁed or integrated regulation). Introjected regulation refers
to processes that control behavior intended to avoid guilt or anxiety, or to enhance the ego. Identiﬁed regulation is based on a conscious valuing of
the action and its intended consequences, offering the individual stronger ownership of behavior. Integrated regulation occurs when values guiding
behavior are fully assimilated to the self, having been evaluated and brought into congruence with the individual’s other values and needs.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


THREE MECHANISMS EXPLAINING TASK PERFORMANCE AND CREATIVITY

1169

Table 1. Descriptive statistics, zero-order correlations, and reliability coefﬁcients.

Variable

Mean

SD

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1. POS
2. Felt obligation

3.25
4.04

0.68
0.64

(.90)
.40**

(.83)

to work unit

3. Work unit

identiﬁcation

4. Success

expectancy

5. Task

performance

6. Creativity
7. Gender
8. Tenure
9. Age
10. Education

3.75

0.68

.61**

.61**

(.91)

3.50

4.18

.57**

0.77
0.48  .04

.37**

.47**

(.87)

.17*

.08

.07

(.85)

0.82

3.46
.15*
0.40 Male  .07
 .15*
9.8
12.2
 .09
9.6
34.5
0.71  .02
2.52

.29**
.15*
 .05
 .02
 .10
.10
.17*  .08
 .03
.03

.42**
.29**
 .02
 .08
 .24**  .01
 .18**
.04
.21**
.17*

(.89)
.07
 .21**  .04
 .13
.08
.22**  .01  .22**  .17*

.84**

Note: Gender is coded as 0 = female, 1 = male. Education is coded as 1 = high school, 2 = college, 3 = bachelor, 4 = master, 5 = PhD.
*p < .05; **p < .01.

earlier, task performance of routine work may be less sensitive to autonomous motivation than controlled
motivation. In addition, high identiﬁers may engage enthusiastically in extra-role behavior such as helping
co-workers and participating in other types of OCB (Shalley, Zhou, & Oldham, 2004). Arising from these
endeavors, high identiﬁers may be less concerned with and/or have limited energy to focus on their in-role
performance (Bolino & Turnley, 2005). Walumbwa, Cropanzano, and Hartnell (2009) provided suggestive
evidence that compared with leader–member exchange, organizational
identiﬁcation was found to be less
strongly correlated with in-role job performance but more strongly correlated with learning behavior. The
authors concluded that in-role performance was of central concern to supervisors and therefore featured in the
social exchange relationship with employees, whereas learning was an activity aligned with the more generalized
orientation denoted by organizational identiﬁcation. Thus the relationship between identiﬁcation and task performance
may be moderate rather than strong.

We also expect a moderate positive relationship between internal career expectancy and task performance in
the current context. High success expectancy is likely to encourage internal regulation as employee needs for
competence and autonomy are more likely to be satisﬁed, leading to participation in more complex activities that are
perceived as intrinsically motivating rather than routine. Moreover, in an Eastern context where self-improvement
motivation is common (Heine et al., 2001), employees with low success expectancy may exert greater effort in
order to demonstrate their capacities and improve their expectancy. This is likely to enhance task performance.
In contrast, employees whose goals are more attainable may expend less effort on routine tasks. The positive
motivational inﬂuence of success expectancy on task performance may be further weakened when career success
is not entirely determined by task performance. One example is Guanxi or “social connections,” deﬁned as dyadic
relationships that are based implicitly on mutual interest and beneﬁt (usually with top management, government
ofﬁcials, or business partners; Yang, 1994). In China, particularly in state-owned companies, such network
resources are sometimes more important than task performance in achieving career outcomes (Li & Madsen,
2010; Wong & Slater, 2002). Other personal factors that may inﬂuence career success include seniority and
political orientation (Wu, Chen, & Leung, 2011).

Considering the different forms of regulation and the research context, we propose the following hypothesis.

H3: The inﬂuence of felt obligation on task performance is stronger than that of work unit identiﬁcation or
success expectancy.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


1170

C. YU AND S. J. FRENKEL

Creativity and the three mechanisms

Despite the possibility that creativity may contribute to future organizational effectiveness (Amabile, 1996), felt
obligation may not promote employees’ creative ideas. This is because creativity is likely to be discouraged via such
controlled motivation (Sheldon & Elliot, 1998). First, a strong felt obligation to perform as required may focus
employees on a narrow set of objectives and/or processes that have succeeded in the past (Cooper & Jayatilaka,
2006; Woodman, Sawyer, & Grifﬁn, 1993), thereby limiting new ideas (Goei, Lindsey, Boster, Skalski, & Bowman,
2003). Second, as creative activity requires additional attention and energy, employees may perceive creativity as a
risk that might impair current task performance—their core obligation (Staw, 1995). Third, employees may fear
being regarded by their manager as a non-conformist and liable to cause occasional (nevertheless unacceptable)
failures (Zhou & Shalley, 2003). Fourth, as creativity is not a formal role requirement in the current context, employees
may not gain any immediate beneﬁt from creative initiatives. Instead, employees may experience role overload and
emotional exhaustion arising from attempts to resolve problems by using uncertain and untested approaches (Hirst,
Van Dick, & Van Knippenberg, 2009). These may leave them more anxious and less effective in problem-solving
(Bolino & Turnley, 2005). Therefore, employees who feel highly obligated may hesitate before taking risks by
acting creatively.

In contrast, two recent studies indicate a positive relationship between group identiﬁcation and creativity. In a
survey-based study of 175 employee–leader dyads across different job types, Carmeli, Cohen-Meitar, and Elizur
(2007) found that individuals who identify with their organization and are therefore more group-oriented are more
likely to behave creatively. Similarly, Hirst et al. (2009) showed an indirect relationship between team identiﬁcation
and leader ratings of creativity mediated by creative effort. As noted earlier, group identiﬁcation reﬂects autonomous
motivation, which is associated with satisfaction of relatedness and autonomy needs (Siegel & Kaemmerer, 1978).
Because creativity is important for long-term survival of organizations (Amabile, 1996), identiﬁcation is conducive
to adaptive, problem-focused strategies that encourage individuals to view problem-solving as an important end in
itself (Carmeli et al., 2007; Deci & Ryan, 1985; George, 2007). Thus group identiﬁcation may be a powerful
energizing force encouraging effort and persistence (Hirst et al., 2009), promoting knowledge acquisition and deep
processing strategies that facilitate mastery of complex and uncertain tasks (Elliot & McGregor, 2001). Further,
identiﬁcation may encourage open discussion of different and possibly deviant ideas (Tjosvold & Yu, 2007) that
facilitate cognitive stimulation and elicit feedback leading to conceptual recombination, new insights, and idea
generation (Khazanchi & Masterson, 2011). Finally, in a Chinese state-owned bank context where utility is prioritized
over novelty, identiﬁcation is more likely to facilitate creativity. Identiﬁcation promotes compliance with contextual
norms, which may enhance the utility and relevance aspects of creativity (Erez & Nouri, 2010) rather than conformity
to the group’s existing procedures, which might be detrimental to creativity (e.g., Barron & Harrington, 1981; Goncalo
& Staw, 2006).

Regarding the expectancy mechanism, employees with low career success expectancy are likely to be externally
controlled, whereas employees with high success expectancy are likely to be autonomously motivated. The former
may feel more constrained to act creatively as they may be regulated by external motivation in the form of promotion
or recognition. In contrast, employees with high career expectancy believe that they are advantaged in the career
process and consequently perceive more latitude or autonomy to act creatively, which is likely to encourage intrinsic
satisfaction and further reinforce such behavior (self-determination; Deci & Ryan, 1985). Moreover, high success
expectancy reﬂects anticipated satisfaction of the need for competence, leading to high self-efﬁcacy (i.e., belief in
the ability to accomplish goals), which is positively related to creativity (Liao, Liu, & Loi, 2010; Redmond,
Mumford, & Teach, 1993) and work innovation (i.e., generation, selection, and implementation of creative ideas;
Hammond, Neff, Farr, Schwall, & Zhao, 2011). According to Deci and Ryan (1985), self-efﬁcacy is likely to block
the inhibitory inﬂuence of environmental conditions (e.g., concerns about conﬂicts and risks) while encouraging
intrinsic motivation. Furthermore, high success expectancy is likely to sustain positive mood, thereby fostering
cognitive or motivational processes that facilitate creativity and application of problem-solving skills (Hirt, Levine,
McDonald, Melton, & Martin, 1997; Madjar et al., 2002). Finally, in contexts where Guanxi is important, the

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


THREE MECHANISMS EXPLAINING TASK PERFORMANCE AND CREATIVITY

1171

positive relationship between success expectancy and creativity is likely to be conﬁrmed. This is contrary to its
inﬂuence on the relationship between expectancy and task performance. Employees with high expectancy may enjoy
important social network resources that can be mobilized in creative problem-solving and in providing the emotional
support that facilitates risk-taking (Burt, 2004).

On the basis of the aforementioned reasoning relating to the three mechanisms to creativity, we hypothesize

the following:

H4: The inﬂuences of work unit identiﬁcation and internal career success expectancy on creativity are stronger
than those of felt obligation.

Method

Research context, sample, and procedures

This study recruited respondents in mid-2011 from one of the largest state-owned banks in China. The bank had over
300 000 employees, providing a wide range of ﬁnancial products and services to many corporate clients and
individual customers across China. Respondents were employed in clerical and administrative roles that mainly
entailed data gathering, inputting, limited interpreting, and communicating. These employees worked in groups
involving risk management (internal control group and credit management group), business management
(personal ﬁnancial business and corporate business), and general management (accounting, information manage-
ment, and human resources management). Chinese economic reform encouraged state-owned enterprises to
adopt a hybrid of the old-style personnel management system of the Maoist era and western-style human
resource management practices. The former emphasizes loyalty and offers long-term employment and welfare
beneﬁts, whereas the latter is associated with increased management control, market competition, and merit-
based compensation (Warner, 2008; Wu et al., 2011). Regarding career development, most employees join
the bank shortly after graduation and climb job ladders comprising more than 15 steps. The bank invests in
employees’ development through training programs and job rotation. Regarding performance appraisal, middle
managers were responsible for branch performance, which is reﬂected in their bonus. Employees’ performance
evaluation is based on individual-level indicators, for example, quantity and quality of work (50 per cent
of evaluation score), and collective (i.e., work group) performance (30 per cent) and supervisor evaluation
(20 per cent). For instance, the business management groups were evaluated on cost, business volume, currency
account management, training plan and implementation for sub-branches, and cooperation with other groups.
Usually, between 35 and 45 per cent of total employee salary is related to performance.

Respondents’ work does not formally require creativity, but some latitude is provided to enable innovation.
Innovation was stated as a key corporate value—it is included on the introductory page of the bank’s website where
“product and service innovation” and “creativity” are mentioned nine times. Innovative employees who have
contributed to the bank’s reputation, efﬁciency, and proﬁtability are especially recognized as model employees
and rewarded annually. In this context, incrementally useful innovation is prioritized over novelty breakthroughs
(Morris & Leung, 2010).

We study employee attitudes toward work units, which are the banks’ branches. This is the most visible and
appropriate collective entity for employees working in a very large and geographically dispersed organization.
We refer to branch managers, who are responsible for several work groups, as middle managers. Middle managers
are the most appropriate target for employees’ POS evaluations because these managers follow orders, and convey
policy and procedure messages from senior management and are responsible for the operation of the work unit. They
are the key authoritative link in the chain connecting the higher and lower levels of the organization. These middle
managers exert authority over individual employees through policy interpretation, shaping the work unit’s culture,

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


1172

C. YU AND S. J. FRENKEL

and inﬂuencing supervisors (who directly manage employees in work groups). Relations with these managers,
although less common than with their supervisors, are important as they inﬂuence employee status and respect
within the work unit.

Management permission was obtained to administer a two-wave, online survey to employees in three work units.
The employees’ task performance and creativity were rated by their immediate supervisors who are knowledgeable
about their performance. This design avoids the drawback of single-wave survey data including common method
bias and the possibility of reverse causality (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003). Invitation emails
explaining the purpose of the survey and emphasizing conﬁdentiality and anonymity were sent to potential
respondents with a web link to the ﬁrst-wave, online survey, which sought information on demographics and
POS delivered by middle management. After 2 weeks, respondents received a second email containing the web link
to the second-wave online survey, which included three mediator measures: felt obligation, work unit identiﬁcation,
and internal career success expectancy. Meanwhile, supervisors were surveyed requesting them to assess the task
performance and creativity of individual subordinates.

Two hundred and six employees participated in the two survey waves (ﬁrst-wave response rate, 91.2 per cent;
ﬁnal response rate, 83.4 per cent). All 16 supervisors rated relevant employees’ task performance and creativity
(the number of subordinates ranged from 1 to 28). The employee sample consisted of 40 per cent male. The average
age of employees was 34.5 years (SD = 9.6), and average job tenure was 12.2 years (SD = 9.8).

Measures

All the measures used reliable multi-item scales. Participants responded to all items using 5-point Likert scales
(1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree). All the scales were translated into Mandarin and back translated into
English (Brislin, 1970) and showed satisfactory internal reliability.

POS delivered by middle management was measured with an adapted six-item scale from the Survey of Perceived
Organizational Support (Eisenberger et al., 1986; Eisenberger et al., 2001). Employees were requested to indicate
the extent to which they believe their contribution and well-being are acknowledged by middle managers.
Cronbach’s a for the scale was .90.

Felt obligation to work unit used a seven-item scale developed by Eisenberger et al. (2001). We substituted the
work unit name for the organization name in the original scale. Example items are “I have an obligation to the [work
unit] to ensure that I produce high quality work” and “I would feel guilty if I did not meet the performance
standards.” Cronbach’s a for the scale was .83.

Work unit identiﬁcation was measured with a six-item scale developed by Mael and Ashforth (1992), for example,
“when I talk about this [work unit], I usually say ‘we’ rather than ‘they’” and “I am proud of this [work unit].”
Cronbach’s a for the scale was .91.

Internal career success expectancy measure was adapted from a four-item scale developed by Kossek, Roberts,
Fisher, and Demarr (1998). Example items are “I am conﬁdent I can make my career plans work here” and “I feel
insecure about my chance to get where I want here” (reverse coded). Cronbach’s a for the scale was .87.

Supervisors rated each subordinate’s task performance by using a four-item scale (Eisenberger et al., 2001).
Examples are “this employee meets formal performance requirements of the job” and “this employee fulﬁlls
responsibilities speciﬁed in job description.” Cronbach’s a for the scale was .85. Creativity was measured using a
four-item measure used by Farmer, Tierney, and Kung-McIntyre (2003). For example, “this employee seeks new
ideas and ways to solve problems.” Cronbach’s a for the scale was .89.

Because previous research indicates that gender and age may account for differences in creative work involvement
(Carmeli & Schaubroeck, 2007), we controlled for these variables. Job tenure and educational level (Oldham &
Cummings, 1996; Tierney & Farmer, 2004) were also controlled because people with different educational and work
experiences may vary in competence, job performance, and creativity.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


THREE MECHANISMS EXPLAINING TASK PERFORMANCE AND CREATIVITY

1173

Results

Descriptive statistics, zero-order correlations, and reliability coefﬁcients are presented in Table 1. Correlation data
suggest preliminary support for our hypotheses. For example, POS is signiﬁcantly correlated with felt obligation,
work unit identiﬁcation, and success expectancy. Creativity is more strongly correlated with work unit identiﬁcation
and success expectancy than felt obligation, whereas task performance is correlated with felt obligation but not with
work unit identiﬁcation and success expectancy.

Because we collected data from three work units, we need to assess the source of variation of the variables.
Intraclass correlations (ICC1) of POS, felt obligation, identiﬁcation, and expectancy ranged from .02 to .04, suggesting
very limited between-work unit variance. We further conducted within and between analysis (WABA; Dansereau,

tests show that for all the study variables, the Es were practically signiﬁcant,
Alutto, & Yammarino, 1984). E-30
and F-tests show that there is no signiﬁcant between-work unit variance. As supervisors rated several employees,
another WABA test was conducted for the supervisor-rated task performance and creativity measures to assess
supervisor response biases. A nonsigniﬁcant result was obtained for the between-supervisor level effect, suggesting that
the study variables can be studied at the individual level.

Given the large number of parameters to be estimated, we reduced the number of items by creating item parcels
for all variables except task performance and creativity (Little, Cunningham, Shahar, & Widaman, 2002). The use of
a parceling approach results in a better variable-to-sample size ratio (Little et al., 2002). On the basis of our factor
analytic results, the items with the highest and lowest factor loadings of a construct were collapsed ﬁrst, followed by
the items with the next second highest and lowest factor loadings. Items of the constructs were allocated into three
parcels.

Following the two-step structural equation modeling procedure prescribed by Anderson and Gerbing (1988), we
ﬁrst established discriminant validity among the variables. The six-factor model shows the best model ﬁt:
w2(155) = 302.3, p < .001, CFI = 0.96, TLI = 0.95, RMSEA = 0.068.

We further tested our proposed structural model (Model 1) and compared it with competing models. As shown in
Table 2, the proposed model displays a good ﬁt with the data. However, three paths have insigniﬁcant coefﬁcients.
They are paths linking work unit identiﬁcation (b = .00, p = .98) and success expectancy (b = .05, p = .52) to task
performance, and the path linking felt obligation to creativity (b = .01, p = .48). To test our hypotheses regarding

Table 2. Structural models comparison.

Models

w2

df

CFI

TLI

RMSEA

M1. Proposed full structural model (all paths are free

308.49

157

0.954

0.944

0.068

Δw2(Δdf)

—

M4. Based on M2, free felt obligation to creativity

312.62

160

0.953

0.944

0.068

to estimate)

M2. Based on M1, constrain the paths linking 3 mediators to
task performance to be the same; paths linking 3 mediators
to creativity to be the same

M3. Based on M2, free felt obligation to task performance

M5. Based on M1, remove paths linking felt obligation to

creativity; work unit identiﬁcation and success expectancy
to task performance

M6. Based on M5, add direct paths linking POS to task

performance and creativity

M7. Based on M5, constrain the paths linking work unit
identiﬁcation and success expectancy to creativity to be
the same

M8. Based on M7, add control variables

320.38

161

0.951

0.942

0.069

M1–M2 p < .025

313.60

160

0.953

0.944

0.068

309.85

160

0.954

0.944

0.067

M1–M3 p > .05,
M2–M3 p < .01
M1–M4 p > .05,
M2–M4 p < .01
M1–M5 p > .05,
M2–M5 p < .01

304.34

158

0.955

0.946

0.067

M5–M6 p > .05

310.56

161

0.954

0.946

0.067

M1–M7 p > .05,
M5–M7 p > .05

351.58

198

0.952

0.944

0.062

—

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


1174

C. YU AND S. J. FRENKEL

the comparative strength of relationships between mediators and work outcomes, we ﬁrst constrain the coefﬁcients
of the paths linking the three mediators to task performance to be the same, and coefﬁcients of paths linking all the
mediators to creativity to be the same (M2). The results show a signiﬁcant worse model ﬁt: Δw2(4) = 11.9, p < .025.
Then, on the basis of M2, we free the path linking felt obligation to task performance (M3) and the path linking felt
obligation to creativity (M4) individually. The results indicate a signiﬁcantly better model ﬁt than M2 (Δw2(1) = 6.8
and 7.8, p < .01, respectively) and no signiﬁcant difference from M1 (Δw2(3) = 5.1 and 4.1, p > .05, respectively).
Therefore, the path linking felt obligation to task performance is stronger than the paths linking work unit identiﬁ-
cation and success expectancy to task performance. The former relationship is signiﬁcantly positive, whereas the
latter two relationships show nonsigniﬁcant coefﬁcients. In addition, the paths linking work unit identiﬁcation
and success expectancy to creativity are stronger than the path linking felt obligation to creativity. The former
two relationships are signiﬁcantly positive, whereas the latter relationship shows a nonsigniﬁcant coefﬁcient. In
M5, we remove the nonsigniﬁcant paths linking work unit
identiﬁcation and success expectancy to task
performance, and the path linking felt obligation to creativity (and free the other paths). The results show a smaller
chi-square than M3 and M4 but the same number of degrees of freedom. Thus M5 ﬁts the data better than M3 and
M4. In order to test whether direct effects exist (i.e., as in M6), we retain M5 and add two direct paths linking POS to
task performance and creativity. The direct relationships are nonsigniﬁcant, and there was no signiﬁcant improve-
ment of model ﬁt, whereas other relationships remain signiﬁcant: Δw2(2) = 5.5, p > .05. Therefore, no partial
mediation is found. On the basis of M5, we further constrain the paths linking work unit identiﬁcation and success
expectancy to creativity to be the same (M7). The model shows no signiﬁcant difference from M5 but with more
degrees of freedom: Δw2(1) = 0.7, p > .05. This suggests that the two paths linking work unit identiﬁcation and
success expectancy to creativity are not signiﬁcantly different.

We also examine the inﬂuences of demographic characteristics (gender, tenure, age, and education level) in M8. Only
education level was found to be positively associated with success expectancy (p < .01) and marginally with creativity
(p = .06). Age was positively associated with felt obligation (p < .01). Other signiﬁcant relationships in M7 continued to
be supported. In addition, as employee performance was rated by 16 supervisors, data from the same supervisor may be
correlated, and the standard errors of the parameter estimates are likely to be underestimated (Muthen & Satorra, 1995).
In order to check biases in parameter estimates, we included different supervisors’ groups as clusters and used the
complex data analysis function, which employs maximum likelihood robust estimation in the MPLUS 6.0 program. This
aggregated modeling is appropriate for it permits computation of the usual parameter estimates but adjusts standard
errors and goodness-of-ﬁt tests. This method attempts to “estimate the best overall model in a heterogeneous population,
with the aim of obtaining test statistics that are valid in repeated sampling” (Muthen & Satorra, 1995: 271). We also
compare the models as speciﬁed earlier with the help of the Satorra–Bentler scaled chi-square difference test (Muthen
& Satorra, 1995; Satorra, 2000). The results show similar ﬁndings: Adjusting for the standard errors, the coefﬁcients
remain the same under bootstrapping and complex conditions. However, this does not change the signiﬁcance level
of the coefﬁcients, suggesting that there is limited bias and that our analysis at the individual level is robust.

Table 3 presents the coefﬁcients of M1, M5, and M7; indirect effects; and bootstrapping conﬁdence intervals of M5
and M7. Felt obligation mediates the relationship between POS and task performance (H1a), whereas identiﬁcation
(H2b) and success expectancy (H2c) mediate the relationship between POS and creativity. Hypotheses H3 and H4
are also supported. However, hypotheses H1b, H2c, and H2a are not supported. Felt obligation cannot explain the
variance of creativity, whereas identiﬁcation and success expectancy cannot explain the variance of task performance.

Discussion and Conclusion

In summary, this study applies the three mechanisms proposed by POS theory to explain the inﬂuence of POS
delivered by middle managers on employee task performance and creativity. Drawing on SDT, we developed
hypotheses regarding the comparative explanatory power of the three mechanisms in the speciﬁc research context

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


Table 3. Coefﬁcients, standard errors, indirect effects, and bootstrapping conﬁdence intervals.

THREE MECHANISMS EXPLAINING TASK PERFORMANCE AND CREATIVITY

1175

M1

M5

M5:

Bootstrapping

95% CI

Direct relationships

POS ➔ Felt obligation
POS ➔ Work unit identiﬁcation
POS ➔ Success expectancy
Felt obligation ➔ Task performance
Work unit identiﬁcation ➔ Task performance
Success expectancy ➔ Task performance
Felt obligation ➔ Creativity
Work unit identiﬁcation ➔ Creativity
Success expectancy ➔ Creativity

POS ➔ Felt obligation ➔ Task performance
POS ➔ Work unit identiﬁcation ➔ Task
performance
POS ➔ Success expectancy ➔ Task performance
POS ➔ Felt obligation ➔ Creativity
POS ➔ Work unit identiﬁcation ➔ Creativity
POS ➔ Success expectancy ➔ Creativity

.32***
.44***
.59***
.12*
.00
 .05
 .01
.44*
.23*

.04*
 .02

.00
 .03
.19*
.14*

.32***
.44***
.59***
.11**
—
—
—
.39**
.23*

.03*
—

—
—
.17**
.13*

H3

H4

H1a
H1b

H1c
H2a
H2b
H2c

Indirect effects

(0.20, 0.45)
(0.32, 0.56)
(0.45, 0.73)
(0.02, 0.19)

—
—
—

(0.12, 0.66)
(0.05, 0.40)

(0.01, 0.07)

—

—
—

M7:

Bootstrapping

95% CI

(0.20, 0.44)
(0.33, 0.55)
(0.45, 0.74)
(0.02, 0.18)

—
—
—

(0.17, 0.42)
(0.17, 0.42)

(0.01, 0.07)

—

—
—

M7

.32***
.44***
.59***
.10**
—
—
—

.30***
.30***

.03*
—

—
—

(0.05, 0.32)
(0.03, 0.25)

.13***
.17***

(0.07, 0.21)
(0.10, 0.26)

Note: *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001.

described earlier. The results suggest that felt obligation explains the effect of POS provided by middle managers on
task performance better than the other two mechanisms, whereas the identiﬁcation and expectancy mechanisms
better explain how such support relates to creativity.

Although felt obligation was expected to be stronger than identiﬁcation and success expectancy in predicting task
performance, it is surprising that the latter two mechanisms have no signiﬁcant impact. Potential factors that might
mitigate the positive inﬂuences of work unit identiﬁcation and success expectancy on task performance may have
been stronger than anticipated. Identiﬁcation may predict performance of informally prescribed responsibilities
better than that of formal requirements. The relationship between identiﬁcation and task performance may be even
weaker regarding less complex work. The inﬂuence of internal career success expectancy may be very weak
regarding task performance where career expectancy is less strongly based on performance as in Chinese state
organizations in contrast to publicly listed U.S. and European companies. Although China has discarded the
egalitarian pay system where pay levels are similar for jobs that share a broad band of “responsibility,” job evalua-
tion tends to be rudimentary or non-existent (Wong & Slater, 2002, p. 353) particularly where Guanxi and other
personal factors remain legitimate. From another perspective, the nonsigniﬁcant result may indicate the presence
of employees’ self-improving motivation in anticipation of future recognition, that is, employees are likely to
increase rather than decrease their effort when success expectancy is low. However, this self-improving motivation
exerts less inﬂuence on creativity among low expectancy employees, because the controlled motivation that
encourages self-improvement tends to limit creativity and hence maintains the positive relationship between success
expectancy and creativity.

We found that felt obligation has no signiﬁcant relationship with creativity. The relationship might be suppressed
in our research context when compared with knowledge workers such as software designers or bioscientists
employed in privately owned start-ups, particularly in liberal market economies. These jobs formally required
creativity. A comprehensive review of creativity studies (Zhou & Shalley, 2003) indicates that setting goals for
creativity and including these in-role requirements may facilitate creativity. In this regard, felt obligation may be
more strongly linked to creativity when employees perceive creativity as a job requirement.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


1176

C. YU AND S. J. FRENKEL

This is the ﬁrst study that we know of that comprehensively tests the three mechanisms underlying the POS
theories—social
theory. Empirical evidence was found supporting the three inﬂuential social psychological
exchange theory, social identity theory, and expectancy theory—that explain particular outcomes of management
support. Most importantly, the three corresponding mechanisms—enhanced felt obligation, work unit identiﬁcation,
and internal career success expectancy—operate with different strengths in predicting task performance and creativity
respectively.

Our ﬁndings are consistent with SDT (Deci & Ryan, 1980, 1985), which argues that satisfying autonomy,
competence, and relatedness needs encourages autonomous motivation. In our study, work unit identiﬁcation reveals
satisfaction of needs for relatedness and autonomy, whereas success expectancy is mainly related to satisfaction of
needs for competence and autonomy. In contrast, felt obligation reﬂects the constraints of external forces, leading to
controlled motivation, which is more powerful in explaining employees’ performance of less complex jobs that
characterize work in the bank under study. In contrast, creativity is more likely when individuals strongly identify
with their work, typically when work is intrinsically satisfying. Creativity is limited when people believe they are
working for extrinsic rewards or because of social pressure, both of which encourage felt obligation (Sheldon &
Elliot, 1998).

The ﬁndings also relate to research (e.g., Shalley & Perry-Smith, 2001) examining the effects of work
environment characteristics in terms of controlling and informational aspects (e.g., feedback). Management
support may convey different messages. Potential controlling message such as duties and responsibilities
may lead to felt obligation, which inhibits creativity but beneﬁts task performance. Informational messages
that inspire employees to take initiatives and generate new ideas may be associated with work unit identiﬁca-
tion and success expectancy.

We also contribute to creativity research, which is especially relevant in emerging economies where competition
on innovation is becoming more important because of the non-sustainability of labor-intensive business models and
the need to meet increasingly high customer expectations. Hammond et al. (2011) have argued that contextual
factors such as leadership and job resources have shown promising results in explaining creativity; however, because
of the limited number of studies, detailed knowledge of their effects is lacking. Our study offers a deeper understanding
of middle management’s role by showing that expressing concern for employees and trying to meet their socio-
emotional needs facilitate creativity. Thus far, a direct relationship has been found between the work environment
and certain aspects of personality (e.g., openness to experience) and employees’ creative behavior (Carmeli et al.,
2007). We extend creativity research by demonstrating how the psychological mechanisms comprising felt obligation,
work unit identiﬁcation, and internal career success expectancy mediate the inﬂuence of POS on employees’ creativity.
In addition, only a few studies of employee creativity (e.g., Tjosvold & Yu, 2007; Zhang, Tsui, & Wang, 2011) have
been conducted in Chinese organizations (Phan, Zhou, & Abrahamson, 2010). Our study is located in a large Chinese,
state-controlled bank, which offers considerable job security, and appreciates product and service innovation. In order to
extend or modify our theory, future research should include wider samples drawn from different national, industrial,
occupational, and organizational contexts.

Management practice implications

The ﬁndings of this study point to managers needing to focus on policies and practices that employees perceive to be
supportive and hence lead to improvements in employee task performance and creativity. Management should
therefore encourage employee discussion on actual and possible practices, and respond accordingly. A critical
question is how to ensure that managers participate in providing support rather than restricting their attention to
task-related goals. In addition to developing and implementing supportive policies and role modeling related
practices such as showing care and recognizing employee contributions in an authentic way (Amabile, Schatzel,
Moneta, & Kramer, 2004), employee support could be included as a performance indicator in management perfor-
mance reviews, which in turn can be expected to inﬂuence merit assessments, salary determinations, and promotion

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


THREE MECHANISMS EXPLAINING TASK PERFORMANCE AND CREATIVITY

1177

opportunities. This would help to institutionalize support as an integral element in the organizational culture.
However, in order to implement effectively, managers designing and operating the performance appraisal system
need to be aware of the constraining effect of particular cultural characteristics such as face saving and Guanxi
(Bozionelos & Wang, 2007).

Our research enables managers to understand the mechanisms underlying the relationship between organizational
support and the two employee outcomes, task performance and creativity, including the relevance of each mechanism
for the outcomes. This is valuable because it goes beyond HR theory and related practices that routinely fail to
distinguish between performance and creativity. This distinction is essential because ﬁrms and departments vary in
the priority given to innovation, depending on their business strategy and core type of work, whereas large organizations
include both performance-oriented employees (routine white collar and para-professional jobs) and creativity-oriented,
knowledge workers. Therefore, HR policy needs to cater to these differences in the light of the different goals set by
management for the organization’s units and their respective workforces. Policies can be improved regarding different
dimensions of motivation—autonomous and controlled. More speciﬁcally, if a department emphasizes innovation
and concomitant employee creativity, management activities and HR systems may need to strengthen employees’
identiﬁcation, demonstrate recognition for creative work, and provide more opportunities for growth and informational
feedback about internal career prospects. On the other hand, if quality employee performance in executing prescribed
tasks is prioritized, policies linking controlled motivation—for example, employment security and favorable pay and
working conditions—are more relevant, providing a basis for encouraging employee feelings of reciprocal obligation.
Regardless of the practices that are implemented, these need to be supported by a communication and execution
strategy that emphasizes consistency between different policies and practices (e.g., recruitment,
training, and
promotion), which are widely and strongly supported at various levels by managers specializing in different functions
(Bowen & Ostroff, 2004).

Limitations and future research

The purpose of our study was to assess the efﬁcacy of three mechanisms posited by POS theory. We did so within a
particular context. In order to generalize our ﬁndings, larger and more representative samples are required. In
addition, our sample did not differentiate employees according to qualiﬁcation, skill levels, and other possible
moderators mentioned later. This would require deeper access than we were permitted.

Furthermore, we focused on middle management. It would be useful to examine the three proposed mechan-
isms in explaining senior and junior management, and HR managers and co-workers (Frenkel & Yu, 2011),
including the extent of alignment between these organizational agents in providing support. Communication
clarity, policy consistency, consensus among managers (Bowen & Ostroff, 2004), and co-worker cohesion
(Frenkel & Sanders, 2007) are likely to enhance the relationships between management support and the
mediators studied. However, it is also possible that the relationship with creativity is curvilinear such that
too much support enables social loaﬁng, thus stiﬂing creativity. Individual characteristics may also moderate
the relationships. For employees accepting high power distance (unequal distribution of power), the relation-
ship between perceived support and felt obligation may be weaker than those valuing low power distance,
because they are likely to be less reliant on management’s cues of social support to determine their obligations
(Farh, Hackett, & Liang, 2007).

We were unable to explore the role of collective norms in our study. A climate or culture of creativity as reported
to exist in particular organizations (Hunter, Bedell, & Mumford, 2007) may operate to strengthen the relationships
between the studied mediators and creativity. Conversely, where collective norms emphasize cost containment, the
relationships between the mediators and creativity are likely to be compromised. Of particular importance is the
extent of alignment between local work culture norms and those operating at higher organizational and societal
levels in reinforcing or inhibiting outcomes such as high performance and creativity.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


1178

C. YU AND S. J. FRENKEL

Future studies might also consider using objective measures of performance. For instance, task performance has
been measured by sales and productivity (Bommer, Johnson, Rich, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 1995), whereas
possible creativity measures include the number of patent disclosures and contributions to organizational suggestion
programs (e.g., Oldham & Cummings, 1996). Finally, some focal relationships in this study may be dynamic in
nature. For instance, previous task performance could lead to employees’ current expectancy, which, in turn, could
inﬂuence employees’ future task performance. A longitudinal design would help verify a dynamic process, and
clarify causal relationships.

Acknowledgements

We thank Pingwei Zhang for assistance in data collection, and Amirali Minbashian and Haodong Gu for helpful
comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. We also thank Kerrie Unsworth, and the reviewers for their
constructive suggestions.

Author biographies

Chongxin Yu is a ﬁnal-year PhD candidate of Organization and Management in the Australian School of Business,
UNSW. Her research interests include leadership, creativity and innovation, employee engagement and related var-
ious motivational states, and indigenous Chinese management.
Stephen Frenkel (PhD, Cambridge) is a Professor in the Australian School of Business, UNSW. He has authored
over 50 journal articles, and edited or authored 10 books. He is on the editorial board of Human Relations, Industrial
& Labor Relations Review, Organization Studies, and the International Journal of Human Resource Management.

References
Amabile, T. M. (1996). Creativity in context. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Amabile, T. M., Schatzel, E. A., Moneta, G. B., & Kramer, S. J. (2004). Leader behaviors and the work environment for

creativity: Perceived leader support. The Leadership Quarterly, 15(1), 5–32.

Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural equationmodeling in practice: A review and recommended two-step

approach. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 411–423.

Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. Academy of Management Review, 14(1), 20–39.
Baldamus, W. (1961). Efﬁciency and effort: An analysis of industrial administration. London: Tavistock Publications.
Barron, F., & Harrington, D. M. (1981). Creativity, intelligence and personality. Annual Review of Psychology, 32, 439–476.
Baruch, Y., Wheeler, K., & Zhao, X. (2004). Performance-related pay in Chinese professional sports. International Journal of

Human Resource Management, 15(1), 245–259.

Benware, C. A., & Deci, E. L. (1984). Quality of learning with an active versus passive motivational set. American Educational

Research Journal, 21(4), 755–765.

Bolino, M. C., & Turnley, W. H. (2005). The personal costs of citizenship behavior: The relationship between individual

initiative and role overload, job stress, and work-family conﬂict. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(4), 740–748.

Bommer, W. H., Johnson, J. L., Rich, G. A., Podsakoff, P. M., & Mackenzie, S. B. (1995). On the interchangeability of objective

and subjective measures of employee performance—A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 48(3), 587–605.

Bowen, D. E., & Ostroff, C. (2004). Understanding HRM–ﬁrm performance linkages: The role of the “strength” of the HRM

system. Academy of Management Review, 29(2), 203–221.

Bozionelos, N., & Wang, L. (2007). An investigation on the attitudes of Chinese workers towards individually based

performance-related reward systems. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 18(2), 284–302.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


THREE MECHANISMS EXPLAINING TASK PERFORMANCE AND CREATIVITY

1179

Brislin, R. W. (1970). Back-translation for cross-cultural research. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 1, 185–216.
Burt, R. S. (2004). Structural holes and good ideas. The American Journal of Sociology, 110(2), 349–399.
Carmeli, A., & Schaubroeck, J. (2007). The inﬂuence of leaders’ and other referents’ normative expectations on individual

involvement in creative work. The Leadership Quarterly, 18(1), 35–48.

Carmeli, A., Cohen-Meitar, R., & Elizur, D. (2007). The role of job challenge and organizational identiﬁcation in enhancing

creative behavior among employees in the workplace. Journal of Creative Behavior, 41(2), 75–90.

Chen, Z. X., Aryee, S., & Lee, C. (2005). Test of a mediation model of perceived organizational support. Journal of Vocational

Behavior, 66(3), 457–470.

Cooper, R. B., & Jayatilaka, B. (2006). Group creativity: The effects of extrinsic, intrinsic, and obligation motivations. Creativity

Research Journal, 18(2), 153–172.

Dansereau, F., Alutto, J. A., & Yammarino, F. J. (1984). Theory testing in organizational behavior: The variant approach.

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1980). The empirical exploration of intrinsic motivational processes. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances

in experimental social psychology (pp. 39–80). New York, NY: Academic Press.

Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. New York, NY: Plenum.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination of behavior.

Psychological Inquiry, 11(4), 227–268.

Deci, E. L., Connell, J. P., & Ryan, R. M. (1989). Self-determination in a work organization. Journal of Applied Psychology,

74(4), 580–590.

Edwards, M. R., & Peccei, R. (2010). Perceived organizational support, organizational identiﬁcation, and employee outcomes

testing a simultaneous multifoci model. Journal of Personnel Psychology, 9(1), 17–26.

Eisenberger, R., Armeli, S., Rexwinkel, B., Lynch, P. D., & Rhoades, L. (2001). Reciprocation of perceived organizational

support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 42–51.

Eisenberger, R., Fasolo, P., & Davislamastro, V. (1990). Perceived organizational support and employee diligence, commitment,

and innovation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75(1), 51–59.

Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchison, S., & Sowa, D. (1986). Perceived organizational support. Journal of Applied
Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 2 achievement goal framework. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80

Psychology, 71(3), 500–507.

Erez, M., & Nouri, R. (2010). Creativity: The inﬂuence of cultural, social, and work contexts. Management and Organization

(3), 501–519.

Review, 6(3), 351–370.

Farh, J.-L., Hackett, R. D., & Liang, J. (2007). Individual-level cultural values as moderators of perceived organizational
support–employee outcome relationships in China: Comparing the effects of power distance and traditionality. Academy
of Management Journal, 50(3), 715–729.

Farmer, S. M., Tierney, P., & Kung-McIntyre, K. (2003). Employee creativity in Taiwan: An application of role identity theory.

Academy of Management Journal, 46(5), 618–630.

Frenkel, S. J., & Sanders, K. (2007). Explaining variations in co-worker assistance in organizations. Organization Studies,

Frenkel, S. J., & Yu, C. (2011). Managing coworker assistance through organizational identiﬁcation. Human Performance,

Gagne, M., & Deci, E. L. (2005). Self-determination theory and work motivation. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26

George, J. M. (2007). Creativity in Organizations. Academy of Management Annals, 1, 439–477.
Goei, R., Lindsey, L. L. M., Boster, F. J., Skalski, P. D., & Bowman, J. M. (2003). The mediating roles of liking and obligation

on the relationship between favors and compliance. Communication Research, 30(2), 178–197.

Goncalo, J. A., & Staw, B. M. (2006). Individualism–collectivism and group creativity. Organizational Behavior and Human

Decision Processes, 100(1), 96–109.

Gouldner, A. W. (1960). The norm of reciprocity—A preliminary statement. American Sociological Review, 25(2), 161–178.
Hammond, M. M., Neff, N. L., Farr, J. L., Schwall, A. R., & Zhao, X. (2011). Predictors of individual-level innovation at work: A

meta-analysis. Psychology of Aesthetics Creativity and the Arts, 5(1), 90–105.

Heine, S. J., Kitayama, S., Lehman, D. R., Takata, T., Ide, E., Leung, C., & Matsumoto, H. (2001). Divergent consequences of
success and failure in Japan and North America: An investigation of self-improving motivations and malleable selves. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(4), 599–615.

Heslin, P. A. (2005). Conceptualizing and evaluating career success. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26(2), 113–136.
Hirst, G., Van Dick, R., & Van Knippenberg, D. (2009). A social identity perspective on leadership and employee creativity.

Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30(7), 963–982.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job

28(6), 797–823.

24(5), 387–404.

(4), 331–362.


1180

C. YU AND S. J. FRENKEL

Hirt, E. R., Levine, G. M., McDonald, H. E., Melton, R. J., & Martin, L. L. (1997). The role of mood in quantitative and qualitative

aspects of performance: Single or multiple mechanisms? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33(6), 602–629.

Hui, C., Wong, A., & Tjosvold, D. (2007). Turnover intention and performance in China: The role of positive affectivity, Chinese
values, perceived organizational support and constructive controversy. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology,
80, 735–751.

Hunter, S. T., Bedell, K. E., & Mumford, M. D. (2007). Climate for creativity: A quantitative review. Creativity Research

Journal, 19(1), 69–90.

Jia, L., You, S., & Du, Y. (2012). Chinese context and theoretical contributions to management and organization research: A

three-decade review. Management and Organization Review, 8(1), 173–209.

Kemery, E. R., Bedeian, A. G., & Zacur, S. R. (1996). Expectancy-based job cognitions and job affect as predictors of

organizational citizenship behaviors. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 26(7), 635–651.

Khazanchi, S., & Masterson, S. S. (2011). Who and what is fair matters: A multi-foci social exchange model of creativity. Journal

of Organizational Behavior, 32(1), 86–106.

Kossek, E. E., Roberts, K., Fisher, S., & Demarr, B. (1998). Career self-management: A quasiexperimental assessment of the

effects of a training intervention. Personnel Psychology, 51(4), 935–962.

Lavelle, J. J., McMahan, G. C., & Harris, C. M. (2009). Fairness in human resource management, social exchange relationships,
and citizenship behavior: Testing linkages of the target similarity model among nurses in the United States. International
Journal of Human Resource Management, 20(12), 2419–2434.

Li, J., & Madsen, J. (2010). Examining Chinese managers’ work-related values and attitudes. Chinese Management Studies, 4(1), 57–76.
Liao, H., Liu, D., & Loi, R. (2010). Looking at both sides of the social exchange coin: A social cognitive perspective on the joint

effects of relationship quality and differentiation on creativity. Academy of Management Journal, 53(5), 1090–1109.

Little, T. D., Cunningham, W. A., Shahar, G., & Widaman, K. F. (2002). To parcel or not to parcel: Exploring the question,

weighing the merits. Structural Equation Modeling, 9(2), 151–173.

Madjar, N., Oldham, G. R., & Pratt, M. G. (2002). There’s no place like home? The contributions of work and nonwork creativity

support to employees’ creative performance. Academy of Management Journal, 45(4), 757–767.

Mael, F., & Ashforth, B. E. (1992). Alumni and their alma-mater—A partial test of the reformulated model of organizational

identiﬁcation. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13(2), 103–123.

McGraw, K. O. (1978). The detrimental effects of reward on performance: A literature review and a prediction model. In

M. R. Lepper, D. Greene (Eds.), The hidden costs of reward (pp. 33–60). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Meyer, J. P., Becker, T. E., & Vandenberghe, C. (2004). Employee commitment and motivation: A conceptual analysis and

integrative model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(6), 991–1007.

Meyer, J. P., Stanley, D. J., Herscovitch, L., & Topolnytsky, L. (2002). Affective, continuance, and normative commitment to the

organization: A meta-analysis of antecedents, correlates, and consequences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61(1), 20–52.

Morris, M. W., & Leung, K. (2010). Creativity east and west: Perspectives and parallels. Management and Organization Review,

Muthen, B. O., & Satorra, A. (1995). Complex sample data in structural equation modeling. Sociological Methodology, 25, 267–316.
Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A. (1996). Employee creativity: Personal and contextual factors at work. Academy of Management

6(3), 313–327.

Journal, 39(3), 607–634.

Phan, P., Zhou, J., & Abrahamson, E. (2010). Creativity, innovation, and entrepreneurship in China. Management and

Organization Review, 6(2), 175–194.

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method biases in behavioral research: A

critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879–903.

Redmond, M. R., Mumford, M. D., & Teach, R. (1993). Putting creativity to work—Effects of leader–behavior on subordinate

creativity. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 55(1), 120–151.

Rhoades, L., & Eisenberger, R. (2002). Perceived organizational support: A review of the literature. Journal of Applied Psychology,

87(4), 698–714.

Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and

well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 68–78.

Satorra, A. (2000). Scaled and adjusted restricted tests in multi-sample analysis of moment structures. In R. D. H. Heijmans,
D. S. G. Pollock, A. Satorra (Eds.), Innovations in multivariate statistical analysis (pp. 233–247). London: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

Settoon, R. P., Bennett, N., & Liden, R. C. (1996). Social exchange in organizations: Perceived organizational support,

leader–member exchange, and employee reciprocity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81(3), 219–227.

Shalley, C. E., & Perry-Smith, J. E. (2001). Effects of social–psychological factors on creative performance: The role of
informational and controlling expected evaluation and modeling experience. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 84(1), 1–22.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job


THREE MECHANISMS EXPLAINING TASK PERFORMANCE AND CREATIVITY

1181

Shalley, C. E., Zhou, J., & Oldham, G. R. (2004). The effects of personal and contextual characteristics on creativity: Where

should we go from here? Journal of Management, 30(6), 933–958.

Sheldon, K. M., & Elliot, A. J. (1998). Not all personal goals are personal: Comparing autonomous and controlled reasons for

goals as predictors of effort and attainment. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24(5), 546–557.

Siegel, S. M., & Kaemmerer, W. F. (1978). Measuring perceived support for innovation in organizations. Journal of Applied

Psychology, 63(5), 553–562.

Staw, B. M. (1995). Why no one really wants creativity. In C. M. Ford, D. A. Gioia (Eds.), Creative action in organizations

(pp. 161–166). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Tierney, P., & Farmer, S. M. (2004). The Pygmalion process and employee creativity. Journal of Management, 30(3), 413–432.
Tjosvold, D., & Yu, Z. (2007). Group risk taking: The constructive role of controversy in China. Group & Organization

Management, 32(6), 653–674.

Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. (2003). The group engagement model: Procedural justice, social identity, and cooperative behavior.

Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7(4), 349–361.

Van Eerde, W., & Thierry, H. (1996). Vroom’s expectancy models and work-related criteria: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied

Psychology, 81(5), 575–586.

Walumbwa, F. O., Cropanzano, R., & Hartnell, C. A. (2009). Organizational justice, voluntary learning behavior, and job
performance: A test of the mediating effects of identiﬁcation and leader–member exchange. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 30(8), 1103–1126.

Walumbwa, F. O., Mayer, D. M., Wang, P., Wang, H., Workman, K., & Christensen, A. L. (2011). Linking ethical leadership to
employee performance: The roles of leader–member exchange, self-efﬁcacy, and organizational identiﬁcation. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 115(2), 204–213.

Warner, M. (2008). Reassessing human resource management ‘with Chinese characteristics’: An overview. International Journal

of Human Resource Management, 19(5), 771–801.

Wayne, S. J., Shore, L. M., & Liden, R. C. (1997). Perceived organizational support and leader–member exchange: A social

exchange perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 40(1), 82–111.

Weng, Q. X., & McElroy, J. C. (2012). Organizational career growth, affective occupational commitment and turnover intentions.

Journal of Vocational Behavior, 80(2), 256–265.

Wong, A. L. Y., & Slater, J. R. (2002). Executive development in China: Is there any in a Western sense? International Journal of

Woodman, R. W., Sawyer, J. E., & Grifﬁn, R. W. (1993). Toward a theory of organizational creativity. The Academy of

Human Resource Management, 13(2), 338–360.

Management Review, 18(2), 293–321.

Wu, P. G., Chen, T. T., & Leung, K. (2011). Toward performance-based compensation: A study of the gaps between
organizational practices and employee preferences with regard to compensation criteria in the state-owned sector in China.
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 22(9), 1986–2010.

Yang, M. M. (1994). Gifts, favors, and banquets: The art of social relationships in China. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Zhang, A. Y., Tsui, A. S., & Wang, D. X. (2011). Leadership behaviors and group creativity in Chinese organizations: The role of

group processes. The Leadership Quarterly, 22(5), 851–862.

Zhao, S. M., Zhang, J., Zhao, W., & Poon, T. S. C. (2012). Changing employment relations in China: A comparative study of the

auto and banking industries. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 23(10), 2051–2064.

Zhou, J., & Shalley, C. E. (2003). Research on employee creativity: A critical review and directions for future research. Research

in Personnel and Human Resources Management, 22, 165–217.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

J. Organiz. Behav. 34, 1165–1181 (2013)
DOI: 10.1002/job

