IJCHM
28,6

1204

Received 13 March 2014
Revised 12 August 2014
26 September 2014
Accepted 13 October 2014

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/0959-6119.htm

Building social entrepreneurship

for the hotel industry by
promoting environmental

education
Shih-Shuo Yeh

Kinmen, Taiwan

Tao Ma

China, and

Department of Tourism Management, National Quemoy University,

School of Management, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin,

College of Management, National Chiayi University, Chiayi, Taiwan

Tzung-Cheng Huan

Abstract
Purpose – Social entrepreneurship by hoteliers in “going green” promotes a better future for the
environment and arguably also for the human race. However, going green potentially increases costs for
both hoteliers and their guests. Environmental education (EE) is possibly a useful vehicle for the hotel
industry to gain support for greener operations. This research aims to investigate the potential impact
of EE on increasing customer uptake of green hotels.
Design/methodology/approach – A survey was conducted to collect data from three winners of a
green hotel competition. Six surveyors were dispatched, and 155 usable responses were obtained. Data
were analyzed with AMOS 16.0 to estimate an structural equation modeling (SEM) model of how EE
affects environmental motivation (EM) and how this relates to visitors’ intentions.
Findings – Model estimation shows that a moderating variable effect exists between EE and visitors’
intentions. The cause is approximately 40 per cent direct and 60 per cent mediated through EM. That
environmental education affects visit intention for green hotels both directly and through creating
environmental motivation is evidence that the hotel industry can expect to enhance the use of their
socially responsible green services by facilitating EE. In research terms, how best to invest in EE to
support the social entrepreneurship of hotels providing green services is a research area to pursue for
developing criteria to maximize benefits while supporting business viability.
Originality/value – This study shows that social entrepreneurs who provide green services can
expand their area of social responsibility and generate more potential customers by supporting EE. The
findings and applications of this study are useful both for academia and practitioners.
Keywords Tourism, Tourism management
Paper type Research paper

International Journal of
Contemporary Hospitality
Management
Vol. 28 No. 6, 2016
pp. 1204-1224
© Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0959-6119
DOI 10.1108/IJCHM-03-2014-0122

Introduction
As a tertiary and non-manufacturing industry, the hotel industry is often thought to be
associated with low pollution. However, the hotel industry generates an enormous
amount of waste and consumes a copious volume of energy, water and other natural

