Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597 – 611

Organizational citizenship behaviors and service quality as external

effectiveness of contact employees

Mahn Hee Yoona,1, Jaebeom Suhb,*

aDepartment of Business Administration, College of Economics and Business Administration, Taegu University, Jinryang, Kyungbuk 712-714, South Korea

bDepartment of Marketing, College of Business Administration, Kansas State University, 201 Calvin Hall, Manhattan, KS 66506-0506, USA

Received 14 June 2000; received in revised form 1 March 2001; accepted 2 May 2001

Abstract

The purpose of this study is to understand critical roles of contact employees’ organizational citizenship behaviors (OCBs) in customers’
evaluation of service quality. This paper examines the relationships of employees’ OCBs with job satisfaction, trust in manager, and
customer’s perceived service quality in travel agencies. The empirical results show that contact employees’ job satisfaction and trust in
manager are significantly related to OCB and that their active engagement in OCB has a positive relationship with the perception of service
quality. Although there exists a significant common method factor possibly influencing the strength of the relationship, this factor did not
affect the overall pattern of significant relationships. Another notable finding indicates that, unlike a global OCB measure, path estimates in
the relationships of job satisfaction and trust to OCB variables are not similar and suggests that the multiple facets of OCBs provide more
detailed information than a global OCB.
D 2003 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Organizational citizenship behavior; Service quality; Contact employee

1. Introduction

Customer-contact employees have received considerable
attention from both academics and practitioners. As bound-
ary spanners,
these employees’ attitudes and behaviors
toward customers have been argued to significantly influ-
ence customers’ perceived service quality and satisfaction as
well as employees’ performance (Bowen and Schneider,
1985; Pfeffer, 1994). For these reasons, services marketing
has focused on identifying the relationships between
employee behaviors and relevant organizational behavior
constructs, such as job satisfaction (Hartline and Ferrell,
1996; Schneider and Bowen, 1985; Schneider et al., 1980)
and organizational climate (Burke et al., 1992; Schneider
et al., 1988), which in turn influence customers’ perceptions
of service quality.

While these relationships provide valuable insights,
largely neglected is a particular set of customer-contact em-

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-785-532-6008;

fax: +1-785-532-

7024.

E-mail addresses: mhyoon@biho.taegu.ac.kr (M.H. Yoon),

jsuh@ksu.edu (J. Suh).

1 Tel.: +82-53-850-6237; fax: +82-53-850-6209/6239.

ployees’ behaviors in service encounter that can also sig-
nificantly influence customers’ perceptions of service
quality, specifically voluntary and/or discretionary behav-
iors that employees perform for both customers and organ-
izations. These behaviors, called organizational citizenship
behaviors (OCBs), are individual contributions in the work-
place that go beyond the specified role requirements and are
not directly or explicitly recognized by the formal reward
system (Organ, 1988; Organ and Ryan, 1995).

Over the past decade, a great deal has been done in the
fields of marketing and human resources management on
investigating relevant antecedents of OCBs, such as job
satisfaction (Bateman and Organ, 1983; MacKenzie et al.,
1998; Netemeyer et al., 1997), fairness perceptions (Farh
et al., 1990; Konovsky and Pugh, 1994; Moorman, 1991;
Netemeyer et al., 1997), organizational commitment (Mac-
Kenzie et al., 1998; O’Reilly and Chatman, 1986; Williams
and Anderson, 1991), and the impact of OCBs on manager’s
performance evaluation (MacKenzie et al., 1991, 1993;
MacKenzie et al., 2000; Posdakoff et al., 1997).

Despite abundant studies on OCBs, still much remains
unexplored about possible consequences of OCBs. Most of
the research on OCBs has focused on the effects of
employee-level variables such as attitudes, perceptions,

0148-2963/03/$ – see front matter D 2003 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0148-2963(01)00290-9


598

M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

and personal dispositions (Organ and Ryan, 1995) but
provided relatively little attention to possibly various effects
of OCBs, especially the relationship between OCBs and
service quality. In particular, most marketing studies limited
the effect of OCBs to managerial evaluation of subordinate
performance. Based on norms of reciprocity and fairness,
schema-triggered affect, and informational distinctiveness,
previous studies propose that salespeople’s OCBs in per-
sonal selling are useful predictors for managers’ evaluations
of salespeople’s performance (MacKenzie et al., 1993,
1998; Netemeyer et al., 1997; Posdakoff and MacKenzie,
1994). This focus, however, has tended to ignore the
relationship between OCBs and critical organizational out-
comes such as service quality.

OCBs refer to ‘‘discretionary behaviors that are not
directly or explicitly recognized by the formal reward system
and that, in the aggregate, promote the effective functioning
of the organization’’ (Organ, 1988, p. 4). Also, researchers
have suggested that OCBs facilitate organizational effective-
ness, efficiency, and success, because OCBs make for more
efficient use of resources, allow managers to devote more
time to productive activities, and improve the ability of
coworkers to perform their jobs (Organ, 1988; Posdakoff
and MacKenzie, 1994). In a sense, a main impetus to study
OCB lies in the assumption that OCB significantly enhances
organizational effectiveness (e.g., MacKenzie et al., 1991;
Organ, 1988). While the effective functioning of an organ-
ization is a desirable outcome, an important empirical ques-
tion still remains to be answered: ‘‘How are OCBs related to
customers’ perception of service quality?’’

Service is performance in its nature and thus, in contrast
to tangible goods, service quality depends heavily on how
contact employees work with customers, coworkers, and
their organization. In this light, in addition to role-prescribed
activities, extra-role activities such as OCBs could be
critical factors that determine the level of service quality.
For example, various OCBs, such as informal mentoring of
new or less skilled contact employees or assisting other
contact employees that are temporarily overburdened, may
be more likely to contribute to better service. Also, volun-
tary suggestions from contact employee as boundary span-
ner might improve service quality. Thus, it is important for
service companies to give more attention to discretionary
and voluntary behaviors of contact employees, which
should lead to the effective working of organizations and,
in turn, service excellence.

In this study, we investigate the relationship between
OCBs and customers’ evaluation of service quality. In
addition to job satisfaction, which has been well supported
in the literature (Organ and Ryan, 1995), we also include
trust
in manager because trust, on the basis of social
exchange theory, is likely to ensure that voluntary behaviors
like OCB will be reciprocated in the long run (Organ, 1990).
We develop and test a hypothetical model that specifies the
relationship of OCB with service quality, job satisfaction,
and trust. By using both employee and customer data in a

single study, we investigate whether employees’ OCBs are
related to service quality that customers as arbiters of
external effectiveness evaluate. We examine the relationship
among variables at the individual employee level rather than
at the organizational level. Focusing on employees and their
dyadic interactions with customers at the service encounter
level, this study examines employees’ service quality, as
perceived by customers. Particularly, we check whether
there exist similar path estimates in the relationships of
job satisfaction and trust to multiple facets of OCB (altru-
ism, sportsmanship, and civic virtue).

In the following sections, we first discuss the theoretical
background of OCBs. Next, we test the model using data
from both contact employees and their walk-in guests in
travel agencies and present structural equation results.
Finally, we conclude with a discussion, the limitations of
our study, and directions for future research.

2. Background and hypotheses

2.1. Organizational citizenship behaviors

While there are several alternative types of extra-role
behaviors that an employee may exhibit, such as prosocial
behavior (Brief and Motowidlo, 1986) and noncomplaint
behaviors (Puffer, 1987), Organ (1988) classifies OCBs into
five categories: altruism, conscientiousness, sportsmanship,
courtesy, and civic virtue. Altruism is a discretionary
behavior that helps other persons with respect to organiza-
tionally relevant tasks or problems (e.g., voluntarily helping
less skilled or new employees and assisting coworkers who
are overloaded or absent; Organ, 1988), Conscientiousness
is a discretionary behavior that employees carry out well
beyond the minimum required level (e.g., working long
days, voluntarily doing things besides duties, keeping the
organization rules, and never wasting work time). Sports-
manship consists of actions that employee refrain from
complaining, doing petty grievances, railing against real or
imagined slights, and making federal cases out of small
potatoes (Organ, 1988, p. 11). Courtesy consists of actions
that help prevent work-related problems with others or such
actions as ‘‘touching base’’ with those parties whose works
would be affected by one’s decisions or commitments
(MacKenzie et al., 1998, p. 89; Organ, 1988, p. 12). Civic
virtue reflects behaviors, in which an employee responsibly
engages,
that show concern for the organization and
employee initiative in recommending how the organization
can improve its operations (Netemeyer et al., 1997). How-
ever, according to Organ (1988), courtesy is not easily
distinguishable from altruism. The distinction between the
two behaviors can be made when one distinguishes between
coming to the aid of someone who already has a problem
and helping someone prevent a problem from occurring.
Also, pointing out the difficulty of recognizing some of
these five distinctions, recent research (MacKenzie et al.,


M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

599

1991, 1993; Posdakoff and MacKenzie, 1994; Posdakoff
et al., 1997) combines several behaviors into a single global
behavior or ignores certain behaviors.

2.2. OCBs and service quality

Service quality has been one of the most meaningful
constructs for explaining customers’ future behavioral inten-
tions (Zeithmal et al., 1993) and impacts on a firm’s
financial outcomes (Rust et al., 1995). Reichheld and Sasser
(1990) even argue that delivering quality service is one of
the fundamental strategies for a firm’s survival. Given the
importance of service quality, it is no surprise that many
researchers have devoted themselves to understanding the
underlying dimensions and antecedents of service quality
(e.g., Parasuraman et al., 1985, 1988). Numerous discus-
sions have focused on the conceptual and operational
definition of Parasuraman et al.’s (1988) SERVQUAL scale
that has been widely used in various service industries (for a
summary, see Buttle, 1996).

As indicated earlier, our study focuses on employee
behaviors at the service encounter and their relationships
with service quality. In the service encounter, employees
are performers rather than workers, and their behavioral
performance is a major part of service quality that custom-
ers perceive. In the relationship marketing perspective,
employees’ interactions with customers are also important.
Dwyer et al. (1987) and Morgan and Hunt (1994), recog-
nizing the importance of social contents such as trust and
commitment, suggested that one should be able to apply
their relationship marketing concept
to the interpersonal
services marketing context. In particular, Paulin et al.
(1999, 2000), emphasizing the customer – firm relationship
for long-term profitability, argue that in service relation-
ships, customers’ evaluation of service is dependent largely
on the specialized skills,
techniques, and experience of
customer-contact employees interacting with customers
(Paulin et al., 2000). In the service organization, employ-
ees’ behaviors toward customers may influence the future
of customer relationships. Also, in the high-contact service
encounter, customers physically participate in the service
delivery process as coproducers and thus are much more
likely to be exposed to employees’ voluntary behaviors for
coworkers and the organization. Furthermore, these volun-
tary behaviors, which customers can observe during phys-
ical and social interactions with employees, may affect the
customers’ evaluation of the service provided.

There are several reasons why employees’ OCBs could
be expected to relate to the customers’ perceptions of service.
The first reason relates to internal marketing perspective in
service business. Based on the internal marketing perspect-
ive, each of these behaviors in service encounter can be a
meaningful relationship with service excellence, especially
for the customer – employee interaction dimension of service
quality. The internal marketing perspective suggests that for
successful encounter and exchanges with customers, effect-

ive internal exchanges among employees and between
employees and service firm must occur first. Only after
effective internal exchanges have occurred, can successful
external exchanges between employees and customers take
place (George, 1991; Kelley and Hoffman, 1997).

The second reason is based on the fact

that service
quality, especially the external customers’ evaluation of
service quality, is a major element of organization effective-
ness. Much of the interest in OCB has been based on the
assumption that OCBs lead to greater overall organizational
effectiveness (MacKenzie et al., 1991, 1993; Organ, 1988;
Posdakoff et al., 1997; Walz and Niehoff, 1996). While
organizational effectiveness can be conceptualized in a
variety of perspectives, recent studies suggest that service
quality in service organization is a major indicator of a
firm’s external effectiveness (Paulin et al., 1997, 2000) and
external efficiency (Gronross, 1992). Especially in cus-
tomer-oriented management, service quality is a key deter-
minant for successful firm – customer relationships and
comprises a major part of external effectiveness (Paulin
et al., 1999). As Paulin et al. (1999, 2000) and others
suggested, it should be noted that external customers are
the final judges of the effectiveness.

Third, the spillover effect of employees’ OCB on the
service quality is expected to take place through the socia-
lization process. Socialization research suggests that one
type of helping behavior is more likely to facilitate other
types of helping behaviors due to the personal value
acquired through the socialization process (Grusec, 1991;
Kelley and Hoffman, 1997). According to Clary and
Snyder (1991), altruism-oriented persons tend to be more
willing to perform other types of prosocial behaviors. This
socialization process can also be applied to the spillover of
OCBs on the social
interactions between customer and
employee. In the high-contact service business, the cus-
tomer is a coproducer or a partial employee for creating a
quality service. Thus, in this light, employees who exhibit
higher OCBs for coworkers or their organization will be
more active in the fulfillment of customer needs in the
customers’ best interest, which will be reflected in custom-
ers’ evaluation of service quality.

Based on previous studies, three OCBs (altruism, civic
virtue, and sportsmanship) are used for explaining the hypo-
thetical relationships of OCBs with service quality. These
three categories of behavior reflect most of employees’
discretionary behaviors that can influence the customer –
employee interaction facet of quality service. Below are
specific, behavioral reasons for ensuring the relationships
between each of these OCBs and customers’ perception of
service quality.

Altruism is critical for ensuring customer service quality
(George and Bettenhausen, 1990; Gronross, 1985). Service
quality is enhanced to the extent that employees view each
other as customers and thus willingly help each other so that
the external customer is better served (Albrecht and Zemke,
1985). For example, if an employee helps another contact


600

M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

employee who is temporarily overburdened or absent,
customers will receive quality service without long-time
waiting or concern about poor service. Second, as Posdakoff
et al. (1997) stated, when an experienced contact employee
helps less skilled or new employees solve service-related
problems and finds more efficient ways of performing their
service, it is likely to improve customers’ perceived service
quality. For example, if an experienced employee at a travel
agency helps a new employee with a complex transaction,
the new staff can better serve their own customers. Thus,
when a skilled employee provides information and teaches
various ‘‘tricks of the trade’’ to new or unskilled employees,
the latter’s service performance for customers will be greatly
enhanced. Third, altruism has been shown to create a
positive, group-cohesive climate among employees, which,
in turn, spills over into their interactions with external
customers (Schneider and Bowen, 1992).

Civic virtue refers to behaviors employees exhibit where
they demonstrate a responsible participation in the firm and
a sincere concern about
the life of the company (e.g.,
attending meetings or functions that are not required but
that help the company; MacKenzie et al., 1998; Organ,
1988). While this behavior is often neglected in empirical
research on OCBs (George and Brief, 1992; Van Dyne et al.,
1994), it is one of most important behaviors for service
organizations. In particular, it can affect service quality in
several indirect ways. First, civic virtue involves making
constructive suggestions about service improvement and
organizational effectiveness. Contact employees are bound-
ary spanners who interact with external customers on an
ongoing basis. Thus, suggestions these employees make
may be the basis for developing new services, controlling
services, and improving service quality. Second, another
form of civic virtue, voluntary participation in meetings,
may help coordinate activities among employees and create
a ‘‘team’’ spirit. In a sense, service quality is an outcome of
how employees and customers perform in the delivery of
service. Thus, civic virtue, in the form of attending and
actively participating in meetings, may provide opportun-
ities for employees to acquire various experiences of other
employees during service encounters, to identify their own
problems in providing service, to learn ‘‘how’’ for improved
customer service, and to share fellowship.

Sportsmanship may also ensure service quality. An
employee with a high level of sportsmanship has a positive
attitude and avoids unnecessary complaining. In fact,
research suggests that customers tend to experience greater
service quality when this behavior is exhibited (Morrison,
1996). Sportsmanship behavior creates a positive climate
among employees that is likely to be transferred to their
interactions with customers (Schneider and Bowen, 1992).
In other words, if employees are ‘‘good sports’’ or cooper-
ative with each other, they will be more cooperative in the
delivery process of service. In fact, one cannot expect that
an employee who often complains within an organization
will exhibit customer-oriented behaviors for excellent ser-

vice to external customers. Second, a positive work climate
among employees may have an indirect effect on service
quality by creating an overall environment that customers
find more pleasant. A lack of sportsmanship is likely to have
harmful effects on group cohesiveness and leave the organ-
izational atmosphere less attractive to coworkers (Posdakoff
et al., 1997). More important, this negative work envir-
onment can also be uncovered during the delivery process of
service. Based on the above discussions,
the following
hypothesis is developed.

Hypothesis 1: Customers’ perceptions of service quality are
positively related to OCBs: (a) altruism, (b) civic virtue, and
(c) sportsmanship.

2.3. Job satisfaction, trust, and OCBs

According to Blau (1964), there exist two types of
exchange relationships between employees and organiza-
tions: economic and social relationships. Economic exchange
is contractual in nature. Obligations of the parties involved
are clearly defined and highly specific (Morrison, 1996), and
exchange occurs on a transactional basis. However, social
exchange refers to relationships that entail unspecified future
obligations. Like economic exchange, social exchange gen-
erates an expectation of some future return for contributions,
but the exact nature and timing of that return is unspecified
(Konovsky and Pugh, 1994). Organ (1990) has argued that
social exchange is a prerequisite for OCB, and there is
indirect evidence that OCB is more frequently displayed
under the context of social exchange than an economic one
(Konovsky and Pugh, 1994). In this light, from the social
exchange perspective, we propose job satisfaction and trust in
managers as the main antecedents of OCBs.

2.3.1. Job satisfaction and OCBs

Job satisfaction is defined as the pleasurable emotional
state resulting from the appraisal of one’s job as achieving or
facilitating the achievement of one’s job values (Locke,
1969). According to Churchill et al. (1974), job satisfaction
has a broad conceptual domain, because it includes all
characteristics of the job itself or the work environment that
an employee finds rewarding, fulfilling, satisfying, frustrat-
ing, and unsatisfying. Organizational behaviorists have
shown a positive relationship between job satisfaction and
OCBs in numerous studies (e.g., Organ 1988; Organ and
Konovsky, 1989; Organ and Ryan, 1995; Smith et al., 1983).
Organ and Ryan’s (1995) metaanalysis also supports this
relationship. Organ (1977) argues that employees’ voluntary,
spontaneous behaviors result from their
job satisfaction.
Employees who are satisfied with their jobs are more likely
to engage in OCBs out of gratitude to the organization or a
desire to reciprocate the feeling of satisfaction that they
experience (MacKenzie et al., 1998). This relationship can
be explained by the norm of re-ciprocity of social exchange
theory. That is, employees satisfied with their jobs are more


M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

601

likely to engage in OCBs as a means of reciprocity for the
organization that has benefited them (Netemeyer et al.,
1997). Several previous studies suggest the effects of job
satisfaction on the various dimensions of OCBs are similar
(e.g., Netemeyer et al., 1997; Organ and Ryan, 1995). Thus,
the following hypothesis is suggested.

Hypothesis 2: Job satisfaction is positively related to the
OCBs. Specifically, job satisfaction is positively related to
(a) altruism, (b) civic virtue, and (c) sportsmanship.

2.3.2. Trust in manager

Trust provides the basis for social exchange relationship
(Blau, 1964; Clark and Mills, 1979; Rousseau and Parks,
1993). Trust characterizes confidence and beliefs about their
exchange partners. Social exchange in an organization
implies an informal contract between an employee and an
organization, and in this contract, the employee’s manager
largely represents the organization to the employee (Konov-
sky and Pugh, 1994). In this situation, an employee’s rela-
tionship with his/her manager is a personalized form of social
exchange. Also, this personalized social exchange relation-
ship is based on employee’s trust that the exchange partner
(i.e., manager) would discharge his/her obligations in the
long run. Therefore, if an employee has strong beliefs about
manager, his/her trust ensures that voluntary behaviors like
OCBs will be reciprocated in the long run (Organ, 1990).
Thus, the employee will be more inclined to exhibit OCBs
even though they will not receive immediate compensation.
Also, when employees have much trust in their social
exchange relationship, they are more likely to define many
types of their OCBs as part of their job requirements, because
employees’ obligations within social exchange relationships
are not well defined and are open-ended (Konovsky and
Pugh, 1994; Morrison, 1996). This, in turn, will increase the
possibility of performing OCBs. The empirical support for
this rationale was illustrated by Morrison’s (1994) research in
which hospital employees who defined their job responsibil-
ities more broadly were engaged in more OCBs.

According to as Dansereau and Graen’s (1975) vertical
dyad model of leadership, relational exchange between
manager and employees leads employees to expend much
time and energy on tasks, to be innovative in completing
tasks, and to accept responsibilities in addition to those
specified in their employment contracts. Relational contracts
thus encourage employees to work in ways that are not
strictly mandated by their organizations (Rousseau and
Parks, 1993) and are directed toward serving the organiza-
tional collectivity (Graham, 1991). Thus, as trust is a core
concept for social exchange relationship and social
exchange leads to OCBs, trust in manager will encourage
employees to exhibit more discretionary behaviors.

Hypothesis 3: Trust in manager is positively related to the
OCBs. Specifically, trust in manager is positively related to
(a) altruism, (b) civic virtue, and (c) sportsmanship.

3. Research method

3.1. Sample

The data for the current study came from a sample of
contact employees working for travel agencies and their
customers in the three largest metropolitan areas in Korea.
The market for Korean travel agencies largely consists of
three segments with each having its unique characteristics.
The first segment can be characterized as a market for
domestic or international airline ticket sales. The travel
agencies provide a simple process of services for their
customers. Also, customers purchase tickets under routine
problem-solving processing and they are usually interested
only in lower airfare. Both customers and contact employ-
ees communicate with each other by phone with limited
face-to-face interaction. The second segment is the ‘‘pack-
age tour’’ market for international and domestic traveling.
Customers are involved in purchasing the tour packages and
their decision-making process can be extensive depending
on the costs of the package. Because these services are
uniformly packaged in terms of service attributes, they are
not flexible or individualized enough to satisfy the personal
needs of customers. These customers are very sensitive to
the trade-off between price and benefits, and they usually
communicate with agency employees by phone or with
personal visit
to the travel agencies. The third segment
consists of customers who require an extensive range of
services (e.g., in international travel case, passport, visa
application, airline, hotel, car rent, and others) or individu-
alized services tailored to their specific needs. These cus-
tomers are highly involved in purchasing the travel plan and
they usually follow an extended decision-making process.
These customers tend to visit a travel agency for face-to-
face discussion. They tend to choose a specific travel
agency based on their previous experience and reference
group’s recommendations, because travel services are intan-
gible, consist of experience attributes, and are typically
quite complicated. Walk-in customers first explain what
they need or want and then ask the contact employee to
set up an ideal solution for them. During this high inter-
action process, both parties spend considerable time discus-
sing and sharing a variety of tour informations and deriving
an optimal solution.

Our study selected travel agency services for walk-in
customers for several reasons. First,
these agencies are
relatively small in size but very competitive among them-
selves. As a result, they emphasize a high level of service
quality for customers and are very concerned about contact
employees’ voluntary behaviors and customers’ evaluations
of service quality. Second, contact employees in these
agencies are involved in direct and close interactions with
customers during the service encounter. Thus, customers
can easily evaluate the quality of the services provided. In
previous research of OCBs (e.g., MacKenzie et al., 1993),
managers made overall evaluation of agents in insurance


602

M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

settings or salespeople in personal selling. However, our
study asked customers to make an evaluation of the
employee – customer interactive nature of service quality.
Third, in most Korean travel agencies, customer service
for walk-in guests is provided in an open-space envir-
onment. Thus, most of the behaviors among employees
can easily be observed by the customers during the service
delivery process.

Ninety-five agencies were contacted and asked to par-
ticipate in the study. Approximately 96% (91 out of 95) of
the agencies participated and returned their questionnaires,
while 567 of the 660 customer surveys were returned
(85.9% response rate); 201 out of the 220 contact employee
questionnaires distributed (91.4% response rate) were
returned. Sixty-six percent of the contact employee sample
was female. Forty-seven percent of the sample was 25 – 29
years old in age. The education level ranged from less than
high school to graduate school, with 93% of the sample
having some college or a college degree. Seventy-nine
percent of the respondents were not married. The customer
sample consisted of 45% male and 55% female. Eighty-two
percent of the customers had some college experience, and
60% were less than 29 years old and not married.

3.2. Data collection procedure

Data collection involved two steps. First, we contacted a
total of 95 agencies for cooperation and arranged a special
instruction session for agency employees from participating
agencies. In this session, we provided agency representa-
tives with the details of the survey process, stressing the
importance of carefully observing all elements of the survey.
Second, they each received two or three employee ques-
tionnaires and three customer questionnaires per employee.
The agency representatives were asked to recruit two or
three customer-contact employees to be participants in this
survey upon their return to their agencies. Employee par-
ticipants were asked to complete the survey on the day they
received it and were given time off to do so. Specifically,
contact employees were asked to respond to the level of job
satisfaction, trust in manager, and OCBs. These question-
naires were then enclosed in a sealed envelope and returned
to the agency representative. During this same day, the
agency representative asked each employee to select a
random start time for the survey and, in order to avoid
selection bias, to assign the first three customers to the
employee. The survey questions for the customers were in
reference to the employee they had just encountered. Cus-
tomers were asked to take the questionnaire to a table in the
lobby area where they could comfortably complete it. After
sealing it in an envelope, they turned it into the agency
representative. All envelopes were coded to aid in ascertain-
ing the agency and in matching the employee with his or her
customers. After the agency representative collected all the
sealed envelopes, he/she placed them in a large postage-paid
envelope and returned them to the researcher.

3.3. Unit of analysis and aggregation

This study focuses on the contact employee as the unit of
analysis. Customer responses of service quality were aggre-
gated and matched with the employee responses before
evaluating the psychometric properties of the measures.
While job satisfaction, trust, and the three OCB constructs
are measured by employees, service quality is an aggregate
of individual customer responses to match each employee’s
perception. Thus,
individual customers evaluated the
employee they had just encountered based on the employ-
ees’ service behavior, and their responses were then agg-
regated (averaged) to the encounter (employee) level of
analysis. Through this aggregating/matching process, 2.8
customers, on average, were matched to each employee that
distributed and collected their questionnaires. After deleting
unusable ones, the effective matched sample size for this
analysis was 196.

Our aggregation is consistent with previous suggest-
ions (George and Bettenhausen, 1990; Schneider, 1983;
Schneider and Bowen, 1985) that data should be collected
at the level of analysis at which it will be aggregated. For
this reason, we asked individual customers to rate the
employee’s service behavior during their encounter. This
is important because this measure needs to be aggregated
to be at
job
satisfaction, and trust in order to examine the relationship
of the latter variables with the former. Further, since our
study focuses on employees’ behavior and their inter-
action with customers at
is
reasonable to measure service quality perceptions from
the customer perspective.

the same level as the predictors, OCBs,

the service encounter,

it

it

However, as Schneider (1975) and Schneider and Bowen
(1985) suggest,
is necessary to insure that customer
ratings are reasonably stable within each service encounter
set. To test consistency or agreement across customer
responses on service performance within employees, we
estimated within-group interrater reliability for each mul-
tiple-item scale (James et al., 1985). This reliability is
interpreted similar to other reliability coefficients. A value
of 0.70 or higher is suggested to be a good level of within-
group interrater agreement (George and Bettenhausen,
1990). In our study, the average within-group interrater
agreement was 0.953, and standard deviation 0.052, indic-
ating a high level of agreement. All except three employees
showed agreement coefficients greater than 0.80. Also, a
one-way ANOVA was used to identify the level of variabil-
ity of service quality across employees. This value indicates
that
there was significantly greater variance between
employees than within employee – customer sets for aver-
aged service quality measure ( P < .001) and that
the
employee – customer sets explained 55.5% of the variance
in the service quality variable. Therefore, based on these
conceptual and empirical reasons, we believe that it was
appropriate to aggregate responses from individual custom-
ers on the employee’s service quality.


M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

603

3.4. Measures

The measures used in this study were drawn from
previous studies of marketing and organizational behavior.
Those items were translated into Korean and then reviewed
by employees and experts in travel agencies and several
marketing scholars. Some items were restated to be com-
patible with travel agency services and some others were
deleted during the preliminary scale purification process. A
complete list of the items used is exhibited in Appendix A.

3.4.1. Job satisfaction

We measured employee’s job satisfaction with 20 items
taken from Churchill et al’s (1976) scale. The scale assessed
major facets of job satisfaction that include pay, opportunity,
work, recognition, coworker, and supervisor. All 20 items
were rated on five-point scales ranging from ‘‘very sat-
isfied’’ to ‘‘very dissatisfied’’ and were aggregated (aver-
aged) according to the facets.

3.4.2. Trust

Nine items from Nyhan and Marlowe’s (1993) scale
were used to measure employee’s trust in supervisor on a
Likert five-point scale ranging from ‘‘strongly disagree’’ to
‘‘strongly agree.’’

3.4.3. Organizational citizenship behaviors

We measured three OCBs with 14 items taken from
various sources (e.g., MacKenzie et al., 1991, 1993; Nete-
meyer et al., 1997; Posdakoff et al., 1997; Posdakoff and
MacKenzie, 1994), which included altruism (five item),
sportsmanship (four item), and civic virtue (five item).

Unlike most previous research, the OCB measures were
acquired from contact employees rather than from their
supervisors. According to Netemeyer et al. (1997), self-
report measures in sales performance context have been
consistent with manager’s assessments and also could
suggest a richer perspective of various behaviors of which
managers are typically unaware. In this study, contact
employees responded to 14 items using five-point Likert
scale ranging from ‘‘strongly disagree’’ to ‘‘strongly agree.’’
A factor analysis of the OCB items with principal axis
extraction and varimax rotation showed a clear factor
pattern for three behaviors. As shown in Appendix A, one
item for each behavior scale was dropped, because it was
detrimental to the reliability and unidimensionality of the
scales. While most previous research treats each OCB
dimension as a separate behavior or variable, several studies
(e.g., Konovsky and Pugh, 1994; Netemeyer et al., 1997;
MacKenzie et al., 1998) model the OCB dimensions as
composite indicators of a global (second-order) construct.
We take the former approach because effects of job sat-
isfaction and trust on the three OCB measures (altruism,
sportsmanship, and civic virtue) are likely different in terms
of magnitude, and consequently, the three OCB measures

would have inconsistent influence on the customers’ per-
ception of service quality.

3.4.4. Service quality

For measuring customer’s perception of service quality,
we used a service quality scale that LeBlanc (1992)
developed specifically for travel agency services. Custom-
ers’ perceived service quality has usually been measured by
the SERVQUAL scale, which is based on the gap score
between customer expectations and perceptions of service
that Parasuraman et al. (1988, 1991) proposed. However,
the SERVQUAL scale has been criticized for the gap
scores used and for its lack of general application. This
study used LeBlanc’s (1992) scale with two major mod-
ifications. First, we took nine customer – employee inter-
active items from his scale, since this study is interested
only in the customer – employee interactions during the
service encounter. Thus, the items we drew from this scale
represent employee behavioral attributes that might be
involved in a service encounter. Our items were found to
represent a unidimensional construct (C2 = 77.26, df = 27;
RMR = 0.04; GFI = 0.92; AGFI = 0.86; CFI = 0.95). Sec-
ond, following the suggestions by Brown et al. (1993) and
Peter et al. (1993), we asked customer respondents to do
comparative evaluations of actual performance to expect-
ations for each service quality item by using a five-point
scale ranging from ‘‘much less than expected’’ to ‘‘much
more than expected.’’

4. Analysis and results

4.1. Measurement results

Following Anderson and Gerbing’s (1988) two-step
approach, we estimated a measurement model prior to
the structural model. We specified a six-construct meas-
urement model as was shown in Appendix A, including
six composite indicators of job satisfaction, nine items of
trust, four items for altruism, three items for civic virtue,
three items for sportsmanship, and nine items for service
quality scale. We estimated the measurement model using
LISREL 8.13.

Despite the relatively large number of indicators, the
results for the measurement model were fairly adequate
(C 2 = 816.83, df = 512; GFI = 0.80; AGFI = 0.77; CFI =
0.89). As exhibited in Appendix A, all measures were found
to be reasonably reliable with coefficient A greater than .70,
except for sportsmanship (.52). Specifically, construct reli-
abilities ranged from 0.92 (customer’s perceived service
quality) to 0.55 (sportsmanship). All indicator loadings for
constructs were significant ( P < .01), and their standardized
estimates ranged from 0.54 to 0.76 for job satisfaction, from
0.52 to 0.77 for trust, from 0.54 to 0.72 for altruism, from
0.61 to 0.71 for civic virtue, from 0.38 to 0.69 for sports-
manship, and from 0.69 to 0.82 for customer’s perceived


604

M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

service quality. Accordingly, based on the significant load-
ing estimates and high construct reliabilities, we found
support for convergent validity (Anderson and Gerbing,
1988; Bagozzi and Yi, 1988).

Discriminant validity exists when the proportion of
variance extracted in each construct (AVE) exceeds the
square of the coefficient (%) representing its correlation
with other constructs (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). In
comparing the correlations among the latent constructs
and AVE, although the squared correlations in the three
pairs (job satisfaction and trust, job satisfaction and sports-
manship, and trust and sportsmanship) were higher than
AVE in both or either construct, the differences were not
significant (see both Table 1 and Appendix A). As another
criterion for discriminant validity, two-standard error inter-
val estimate of each coefficient (%) was calculated in order
to examine whether one (1) is within the interval. As
shown in Table 1, interval estimates for any coefficients
did not
include 1, providing evidence for discriminant
validity as well.

4.2. Structural model results

In Table 2, we present the structural model results for the
model with the OCB constructs, as depicted in Fig. 1. In
estimating the structural relationships, we used item indica-
tors for altruism, civic virtue, and sportsmanship and com-
posite indicators for job satisfaction. In this model, however,
nine items were averaged for customers’ perceived service
quality scale. Then, the scale’s factor loading (L) was fixed
at the square root of construct reliability and measurement
error (QD) at (1-construct reliability). While this was done to
resolve identification problems, correction for measurement
error had no serious effect on the statistical significance of
the estimates and standardized estimates.

The overall fit of the structural model was reasonable:
C 2 = 655.21, df = 291; GFI = 0.81; AGFI = 0.77; CFI = 0.80.
Five of the nine hypothetical relationships, Hypotheses 1(c),
2(b and c), and 3(a and c), were significant at .05 level, and
one hypothesis, Hypothesis 1(a) was significant at .10 level.
We found that both job satisfaction and trust explained
almost half (46%) of the variance of sportsmanship behav-

ior, 21% civic virtue, and 12% altruism, while 9% of
variance of service quality was explained by OCBs.

4.3. Controlling the effects of common method factor

In our study, the data for OCBs, job satisfaction, and trust
were obtained from the same source (employee). Thus, the
OCBs are likely to share common method (source) variance
with their antecedents (i.e., job satisfaction and trust), which
may have inflated or deflated the strength of the observed
relationships among these employee variables. On the other
hand, service quality does not share this common method
variance because it was reported by customers. To control-
ling for the effects of method bias on the structural relation-
ships, we reestimated the proposed model by adding a
‘‘common-source,’’ first-order factor to the indicators of
all employee constructs (MacKenzie et al., 1991, 1993;
Posdakoff et al., 1990), called ‘‘common method model’’
(Netemeyer et al., 1997).

As shown in Table 2, when the effect of common method
factor was controlled, the fit
index of the hypothesized
model is C 2 = 578.77, df = 271, P < .01; GFI = 0.83; AGFI =
0.77; CFI = 0.83. The difference in fit between this model
and the previous model was significant (#C 2 = 76.44,
#df = 20, P < .01), which indicates that a common source
factor was evident. Fifteen factor loadings on the common
source factor were significant at the .05 level. The stand-
ardized parameter estimates for structural paths are shown in
the last two column of Table 2.

Table 2 shows several interesting findings. First, despite
significance in model comparisons, we found that the over-
all pattern of significant relationships was not affected by
common method variance. All of the paths that were sig-
nificant when the common method factor was not controlled
remained significant at .05 level even when the effects of
common method variance were controlled. Second, the
inclusion of the same-source factor in the model changed
the path estimates. As expected, there was almost no change
in the magnitudes of standardized estimates of OCBs on
service quality. However, we found little change in para-
meter estimates of relationships among employee variables.
Nevertheless, they did not affect the overall pattern of

Table 1
Measure correlations, means, and standard deviations

Measure

Mean

S.D.

Correlations among latent constructsa

Job satisfaction

Trust

Altruism

Civic virtue

Sportsmanship

Service quality

Job satisfaction
Trust
Altruism
Civic virtue
Sportsmanship
Service quality

2.98
3.44
3.67
3.46
3.27
3.15

0.56
0.60
0.45
0.56
0.57
0.42

1.00
.74
.22
.44
.65
.32

1.00
.37
.28
.69
.27

1.00
.50
.33
.22

1.00
.48
.14*

1.00
.22

1.00

a Correlation coefficients are F estimates from LISREL. All of two-standard error interval estimates did not include 1. Measurement model fit:

c2 = 816.83, df = 512; GFI = 0.80; AGFI = 0.77; CFI = 0.89.

* P > .10, all except this correlation were significant at .01 level.


M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

605

Table 2
Hypothesized model results of OCBsa: standardized structural parameter estimates (n = 196)

Path

Not controlling for common method factor

Controlling for common method factorb

Job satisfaction! Altruism
Job satisfaction! Civic virtue
Job satisfaction! Sportsmanship
Trust! Altruism
Trust! Civic virtue
Trust! Sportsmanship
Altruism! Service quality
Civic virtue! Service quality
Sportsmanship! Service quality
r2 (Altruism)
r2 (Civic virtue)
r2 (Sportsmanship)
r2 (Service quality)
Goodness-of-fit statistics:

Model comparison [Dc2 (Ddf)]c:
Equality constraintsd
Job satisfaction! OCBs
Trust! OCBs
Job satisfaction and Trust! OCBs
OCBs! Service quality
Job satisfaction and Trust! OCBs, OCBs! Service quality

Coefficient

t value

0.43
4.26
3.34
3.60
0.27
3.98
1.70
0.22
2.13

0.04
0.45
0.43
0.35
0.02
0.52
0.15
0.02
0.23
.12
.21
.46
.09
c2(291) = 655.21, GFI = 0.81,
CFI = 0.80, PNFI = 0.62
76.44 (20), P = .000

t value
  0.54
3.41
3.42
3.22
0.87
4.18
1.58
0.15
2.39

Coefficient
  0.05
0.36
0.46
0.31
0.08
0.58
0.14
0.01
0.25
.10
.14
.55
.09

c2(271) = 578.77, GFI = 0.83,
CFI = 0.83, PNFI = 0.61

12.14(2) = 0.00
5.26(2) = 0.07
16.16(4) = 0.00
3.50(2) = 0.17
22.93(6) = 0.00

a Service quality used summed-item scale. Factor loading of scale was fixed at the square root of construct reliability and measurement error (qd) at

(1-construct reliability).

b ‘‘Same-source (employee)’’ factor was controlled.
c Hypothesized model that controls common method (source) variance was compared with the model that does not.
d Paths were constrained to having equal estimates. The constrained models were estimated and then compared to the unconstrained (freely estimated)

model in terms of c2 difference [Dc2 (Ddf )].

significant relationships in the model that did not partial out
the effect of common method variance. Third, the introduc-
tion of the same-source factor did not change the proportion
of variance of service quality accounted for by OCB variables
(9%); it caused altruism and civic virtue to drop (12 ! 10%
and 21! 14%, respectively) but sportsmanship to increase
(46 ! 55%). The proportion of variance accounted for in
sportsmanship was still substantial.

4.4. Testing equality of path estimates

We examined whether there are similarities in path
estimates of job satisfaction and/or trust to OCBs and path

Fig. 1. Hypothesized model of OCBs and related variables.

trust ! OCBs,

job satisfaction ! OCBs,

estimates of OCBs to service quality. The model
that
controlled common method factor was used to make more
exact comparisons. First, we estimated five constrained
models by imposing equality constraints on the path esti-
mates:
job sat-
isfaction and trust! OCBs, and OCBs ! service quality.
Then, using C2 differences, we compared each of these
constrained models with the unconstrained/hypothetical
model, computing the difference in fit between the two
models. As shown in Table 2, the differences between the
constrained model and the unconstrained model were
significant at the .01 level in the path estimates of job
satisfaction to OCBs but not significant at .05 level in the
path of trust to OCBs. That is, while the path estimates
from trust to OCBs were equal to one another, paths from
job satisfaction to OCBs were not equal. However, when
both job satisfaction and trust were considered simultane-
ously, the equality for path estimates was not supported at
.01 level. Meanwhile, we found that there existed equality
in the paths of OCB variables to service quality, because the
difference between the constrained and the unconstrained
models was not significant at .05 level ( P =.17). Finally, we
found no support for coefficient equality when we consid-
ered simultaneously the relationship of both satisfaction and
trust on OCBs and the relationship OCBs and service
quality ( P < .01).


606

M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

5. Discussion

Much research in organizational behavior and marketing
emphasizes the importance of OCB in managers’ evaluations
of salesperson performances. Also, considerable effort has
focused on identifying relevant organizational elements that
may stimulate OCBs from employees. The purpose of our
research was to improve our understanding of the antecedents
and consequence of OCB in highly interactive travel agency
services for walk-in guests. We proposed that, from a social
exchange perspective, job satisfaction and trust in manager
would have significant effects on employees’ voluntary
behaviors. Also, we extended the domain of organizational
effectiveness to behavior-based performance, i.e., service
quality, and then examined its relationship with OCBs by
using both employee and customer data simultaneously.

We found that contact employees, satisfied with multiple
facets of their jobs, engaged in more OCB as reciprocation
of those who have benefited them, empirically supporting
the norm of reciprocity. At the same time, we found that as
employees have more trust in their managers and have more
belief about them in relational exchange, employees behave
more in ways that are not strictly mandated by their super-
visors. This finding empirically supports an important role
of trust in social exchange that generates voluntary behav-
iors. Contact employees’ OCBs appear to be powerful
mediating variables between both job satisfaction and trust
derived from social exchange and the customer’s perception
of service quality. Strong bonding relationships were found
between the two antecedents and OCBs, as well as between
OCBs and service quality.

Specifically, as shown in Table 2, the proposed model was
reasonable, and the majority of hypothetical relationships
were supported. Both job satisfaction and trust had significant
relationships with the three OCBs, accounting for about half
(46% in the model that did not control method factor, 55% in
the model that controlled method factor) of the variance of
sportsmanship behavior while explaining more than 10% of
the variances of altruism and civic virtue. Job satisfaction had
strong, positive relationships with both civic virtue and
sportsmanship behavior. The implications are that contact
employees who are satisfied with their jobs are very active in
showing concern for their organization and in recommending
the improvement of service operations. Moreover, these
satisfied employees exhibit good sportsmanship behaviors
by taking positive attitudes and avoiding unnecessary com-
plaints during their service delivery. Also, employees’ trust in
managers was positively related to altruism and sportsman-
ship. It can be said that when employees believe their
managers are trustworthy, employees tend to spend more
time and energy on helping other contact employees (e.g.,
unskilled or new employees or temporarily overburdened
ones) and on good sportsman-like behaviors.

Meanwhile, sportsmanship was positively related to cus-
tomers’ perceived service quality, while altruism was margin-
ally significant. Employees’ sportsmanship can enhance the

quality of service both directly and indirectly. Good sports-
manship behavior creates a positive, cooperative organiza-
tional climate that can indirectly spill over onto the customer.
However, if employees often focus on the negative side of
their organizations or jobs and tend to find fault with other
employees and trivial things, it may undermine work motiva-
tion that may impair services for customers. Also, when
employees are low in sportsmanship, they may be less
customer-oriented and lack the capability for delivering
quality services, since they spend their time and energy on
complaining about trivial issues. Even if the empirical results
were not so strong, it can be suggested that contact employees
engaging in active altruism, such as assisting other employees
who have work-related problems (new or overloaded employ-
ees), sharing their expertise with others, and trying to prevent
problems, greatly contribute to effective service operations,
which, in turn, leads to quality service for external customers.
Our study supported the majority of the relationships
hypothesized in the proposed model. However, we also found
several unexpected discrepancies between our findings and
the hypothetical relationships. First, our model failed to
present evidence for positive relationships between job
satisfaction and altruism and between trust and civic virtue.
While there are several possible reasons for these discrep-
ancies, the lack of significance here may be mainly due to the
high correlation between the job satisfaction and trust con-
struct (% = .74). Our literature review indicates theoretical
and empirical support for both satisfaction and trust as
antecedents of OCBs. However, most of the previous studies
used either of them, rather than both variables, as a predictor
of OCBs. With only one of these variables, we also obtained
statistical significance of these variables’ relationships with
OCBs. In particular, when only job satisfaction as an ante-
cedent of OCB was included in the model, its relationship
with altruism was significant (.27, t = 2.72). Also, in the trust-
only model, trust had a very significant relationship with civic
virtue (.32, t = 3.44). However, as Williams and Anderson
(1991) pointed out, the obtained significant findings of either
of these variables may be spurious, because the other was not
included in the model. In a sense, the previous studies that
included only job satisfaction in relationship with OCB(s)
(Bateman and Organ, 1983; Organ and Konovsky, 1989;
Smith et al., 1983) might find a significant relationship of job
satisfaction with OCB, because it shared variance with trust,
which is correlated with OCB. It may be that our model,
which includes both variables, addressed their exact relative
effects on OCBs. Also, when we compared this model to the
models with either of the two variables, C2 tests showed
significant differences (for the satisfaction-only model:
#C 2 = 439.38, #df = 177, P < .01; for the trust-only model:
#C 2 = 340.50, #df = 126, P < .01). This finding suggests
that, despite these two nonsignificant findings, our proposed
model is superior to a model using only one of the two
variables as predictors of OCBs.

Another unexpected finding pertained to the relationship
between civic virtue and service quality. A positive rela-


M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

607

tionship was hypothesized but was not obtained. This result
may be due to the nature of civic virtue. Although employ-
ees are high on civic virtue behavior,
including active
participation in their company or department meeting or
constructive suggestion for better service, their behavior
cannot have an immediate effect on service quality. Perhaps,
it will take considerable time to convert their civic virtue
behaviors into quality service for external customers.

In this study, we found that the hypothesized model has
common method factor, because the model that controlled
the method factor was superior and 15 method-factor load-
ings were significant. However, even after controlling for
that proportion of variance in the indicators that is attrib-
utable to obtaining the measures from the same source
(employee), we did not find any changes in the overall
pattern of significant relationships in the proposed model.

the .01 level, but

In testing the equality constraints of either job satisfac-
tion or trust or both, we found that each had varying
relationships with the three OCBs. The relationships of
job satisfaction with the OCBs were significantly different
in the magnitude at
trust was not
significant at the .05 level. But when both variables were
considered simultaneously, they were significantly different
across three OCBs even at the .01 level. These findings
imply that previous arguments for similar relationship may
be no longer valid when multiple antecedents of OCBs are
used. Furthermore, when we reduced the model with mul-
tiple OCBs to the global OCB by extending the equality
constraints to all the structural relationships, we found that
the model with multiple OCBs was superior to the global
OCB model in terms of C2 differences. This result indicates
that one can establish higher explanatory power if one treats
multiple OCBs as separate variables.

5.1. Managerial implications

The results show that customers’ perceived service
quality is significantly influenced by employees’ OCBs.
This finding suggests that the effects of OCBs go beyond
the superior economics of organizational effectiveness;
managers should pay attention to the impact of OCBs on
customers’ perception of service quality and customers’
behavioral intentions. Furthermore, OCBs may exert sig-
nificant influence on firms’ financial performance such as
market share and profitability.

However, during the service encounter, customers may
not have the opportunity or the time to observe employees’
OCBs. Similarly, service contact employees may not have
opportunities to display OCBs in front of customers during
service encounters. In the short run, a strategic implication
is to make sure service contact employees are ready to
display OCBs whenever possible during service encounters
so that customers can benefit from these behaviors. In the
long run, OCBs can become a source of organizational
culture, which will be favorably perceived by stakeholders
such as customers. In other words, OCBs are a possible

source of sustainable competitive advantage because they
are related to organizational culture, which is difficult for
other competitors to imitate. Given that the effect of trust in
manager is as im-portant as that of job satisfaction on
OCBs, managers should be aware of the importance of
social contents such as trust and commitment as well as
economic content such as promotion and salary, which is
consistent with relationship marketing literature (see Dwyer
et al., 1987; Morgan and Hunt, 1994). Thus, OCBs with an
emphasis on the social content of relationships should spill
over to a customer’s perceptions, and consequently, a firm
with a higher level of OCBs should have increased cus-
tomer retention and profitability over time.

5.2. Limitations and future research

Our study suggests that both contact employees’ job
satisfaction and trust in manager influence OCB and finds
that employees who actively engage in OCB contribute
greatly to customers’ perceived service quality. Also, we
provide an understanding of the relative advantage of
multiple OCBs over a global OCB construct in terms of
explanatory power. Nevertheless,
the findings must be
tempered by several limitations. First of all, this study was
conducted in the context of travel agency services in Korea.
Therefore, as often shown in this kind of research, there may
be problems related to cross-national or cultural research.
Although great effort was made in the translation of scale
items, it cannot be completely guaranteed that there is exact
linguistic equivalence between the original scales and trans-
lated ones. Also, while we were careful to avoid selection
bias in the data collection process, there still exists the
possibility of response biases occurring, including social
desirability, acquiescence, and leniency effects.

Moreover, our study uses cross-sectional data. Although
our model was based on logic and previous findings, it does
not mean causality among constructs studied. Experimental
research is required to ascertain the temporal ordering of
variables. This is especially true in examining the relation-
ship of civic virtue with trust and service quality.

We find that a common source factor is evident, but it
does not affect the overall pattern of significant relation-
ships. Nevertheless, some relationships were inflated and
others were deflated in the magnitudes of standardized
parameter estimates by controlling for the common method
factor. There exists the possibility that the common method
factor might influence the strength of the relationships in a
nonlinear manner rather than in a linear or additive one.
Alternative models (e.g., multiplicative method factor
model) may be appropriate for better capturing various
forms of method effects. Also, future research needs to
overcome the common source bias by asking different
raters to respond. For example, contact employees could
be asked to respond to antecedent variables of OCB,
customers-to-customer’s perceived service quality, and
managers to OCB(s).


608

M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

Potential problems were found in the measurement of
sportsmanship. Even though the scale was measured con-
sistently with conceptual definitions,
it did not seem to
necessarily reflect
the specific aspects of travel agency
services. Thus, future researchers need to develop scales
directed specifically at the service encounter. As Posdakoff
et al. (1997) propose, a helping behavior construct needs to
be considered, which includes altruism, courtesy, and cheer-
leading, as well as peacekeeping behaviors.

Finally, it is also important for future research to invest-
igate additional possible consequences of OCBs. Recently,
Walz and Niehoff (1996) found significant relationships
between OCBs and several consequences such as overall

operating efficiency, resource procurement, customer sa-
tisfaction, and customer complaints in a limited-menu
restaurant setting. Additional research especially in high-
contact services will provide more practical and theoretical
implications for service organizations.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank Diane Johnson, George
Franke, and Jai Hyun Seo for their helpful comments and
acknowledge the support provided by the Taegu University
Grant to the first author.

Appendix A. Measurement properties of constructs

Constructs/items

Job satisfactiona

Pay (a = .84)

The extent to which I am fairly

paid for what I contribute

The amount of compensation I receive

The kind of benefit plans that go with my job

Opportunities (a = .78)

The opportunity for acquiring higher skills

The opportunity in my job to achieve

excellence in my work

Standardized

loading

0.54

t

value

7.48

Construct

reliability

AVE

Cronbach’s
a

0.83

0.45

.83

0.74

11.23

The chance of future of promotion I have in my job

Work (a = .71)

0.70

10.44

The working conditions at my job

The nature of work I do in my job

The kind of company policies/practices

that govern my job
Recognition (a = .89)

The amount of recognition/respect that
I receive for my job

The respect I receive for my work

The extent, which I am recognized for my work

The degree to which my work is perceived

to be important to the company

Supervisor (a = .88)

The technical competence of my

immediate supervisor

The considerate/sympathetic nature of

immediate supervisor

My supervisor’s ability to lead me and my colleagues

The way my supervisor helps me achieve my goals

Coworkers (a = .82)

The attitude of my fellow workers toward me

The supportive attitude of my colleagues at work

The opportunity I have in my job to work with

people I like

Trusta

0.70

10.44

0.76

11.61

0.54

7.56

I have confidence that my supervisor is technically

confident at the critical elements of his/her job.

0.77

12.02

0.88

0.45

.88


M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

609

Appendix A (continued)

I have confidence that my supervisor will

make well-thought decisions about his/her job.

My supervisor follows through on assignments.

When my supervisor tells me something,

I can rely on what s/he tells me.

My supervisor does his/her job without causing conflicts.

My supervisor will back me up in a pinch.

I feel that I can tell my supervisor anything about my job.

If I do a good job, my supervisor will support and

reward me.

I have confidence that my supervisor always treat

me fairly.

Altruisma

I help orient new staffs even though it is not required.

I help other staffs who have heavy workload.

I willingly help other staffs who have work-related

problems.

I am always ready to help or lend a helping hand

to other staffs around me.

I help others who have been absent. (D)

Civic virtuea

I attend functions that are not required but help

my company image.

I read and keep up with my company’s announcements,

memos, and so on.

I try to keep abreast of changes in my company.

I attend and participate in meetings that are not
mandatory but are considered important. (D)

Sportsmanshipa

I do not find fault with fellow workers or my company.

I focus on what is wrong rather than the positive

side. (R)

I do not consume time on complaining trivial matters.

I tend to make ‘‘mountains out of molehills.’’ (D)

Service qualityb

0.68

0.69

0.72

0.66

0.74

0.52

0.59

0.65

0.56

0.72

0.68

0.54

0.70

0.71

0.61

0.52

0.38

0.69

10.26

10.42

11.02

9.83

11.41

7.36

8.53

9.59

7.22

9.56

8.98

6.89

9.17

9.36

7.90

6.42

4.52

8.30

0.72

0.40

.70

0.71

0.45

.71

0.55

0.30

.52

0.92

0.55

.92

Rate the actual level of employee service that you just received on each of the following items. Please note that the employee’s

actual service performance should be compared with your expectation of excellence service performance.

In-depth knowledge of variable products

Offering brochures on different destinations

Informing customers of new products and services

Having direct and immediate access to information

Speed of service

Competent staff

Friendly and courteous staff

Special attention given by staff

Being greeted on arrival

0.76

0.82

0.78

0.75

0.77

0.72

0.69

0.70

0.70

11.99

13.40

12.48

11.80

12.11

11.00

10.43

10.72

10.64

(D) deleted item, (R) reverse-scored item.

aEmployee data (n = 196).
bCustomer data (n = 548), which were aggregated by the employees.

References

Bagozzi RP, Yi Y. On the evaluation of structural equation models. J Acad

Mark Sci 1988;16:74 – 94 (Spring).

Albrecht K, Zemke R. Service America: doing business in the new econ-

omy. Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1985.

Anderson JC, Gerbing DW. Structural equation modeling in practice: a re-
view and recommended two-step approach. Psychol Bull 1988;103(3):
411 – 23.

Bateman TS, Organ DW. Job satisfaction and the good soldier: the relation-
ship between affect and employee citizenship. Acad Manage J 1983;
26(4):586 – 95.

Blau P. Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley, 1964.
Bowen DE, Schneider B. Boundary-spanning role employees and the serv-


610

M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

ice encounter: some guidelines for management and research. In: Cze-
piel JA, Solomon MR, Surprenant CF, editors. The service encounter.
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1985. p. 127 – 47.

Brief AP, Motowidlo SJ. Prosocial organizational behaviors. Acad Manage

Rev 1986;11(4):710 – 25.

Brown TJ, Churchill GA, Peter JP. Improving the measurement of service

quality. J Retailing 1993;69(1):127 – 39.

Burke JM, Borucki CC, Hurley AE. Reconceptualizing psychological cli-
mate in a retail service environment: a multiple-stakeholder perspective.
J Appl Psychol 1992;77(5):717 – 29.

Buttle F. SERVQUAL: review, critique, research agenda. Eur J Mark 1996;

30(1):8 – 32.

izenship behavior on evaluations of salesperson performance. J Mark
1993;57:70 – 80 (February).

MacKenzie SB, Posdakoff PM, Ahearne M. Some possible antecedents and
consequences of in-role and extra-role salesperson performance. J Mark
1998;62:87 – 98 (July).

MacKenzie SB, Posdakoff PM, Paine JB. Do citizenship behaviors matter
more for managers than for salespeople? J Acad Mark Sci 2000;27(4):
396 – 410.

Moorman RH. Organizational justice and organizational citizenship behav-
iors: do fairness perceptions influence employee citizenship? J Appl
Psychol 1991;76:845 – 55 (December).

Morgan RM, Hunt SD. The commitment-trust theory of relationship mar-

Churchill GA, Ford NM, Walker OC. Measuring the job satisfaction of

keting. J Mark 1994;58:20 – 38 (July).

industrial salesmen. J Mark Res 1974;11:254 – 60 (August).

Churchill GA, Ford NM, Walker OC. Organizational climate and job sat-

isfaction. J Mark Res 1976;13:323 – 32 (November).

Clark MS, Mills J. Interpersonal attraction in exchange and communal

relationships. J Pers Soc Psychol 1979;37:12 – 24.

Clary EG, Snyder M. A functional analysis of altruism and prosocial be-
havior: the case of volunteerism. In: Clark MS, editor. Prosocial behav-
ior. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1991. p. 119 – 48.

Dansereau F, Graen G. A vertical dyad linkage approach to leadership within

formal organizations. Organ Behav Hum Perform 1975;13:46 – 78.

Dwyer RF, Schurr PH, Oh S. Developing buyer – seller relationship. J Mark

1987;51:11 – 27 (April).

Farh JL, Posdakoff PM, Organ DW. Accounting for organizational citi-
zenship behavior: leader fairness and task scope versus satisfaction.
J Manage 1990;16:705 – 21 (December).

Fornell C, Larcker DF. Evaluating structural models with unobservable var-

iables and measurement error. J Mark Res 1981;18:39 – 50 (February).

Morrison EW. Role definitions and organizational citizenship behavior: the
importance of the employee’s perspective. Acad Manage J 1994;37(6):
1543 – 67.

Morrison EW. Organizational citizenship behavior as a critical link between
HRM practices and service quality. Hum Resour Manage 1996;35:
493 – 512 (Winter).

Netemeyer RG, Boles JS, McKee DO, McMurrian R. An investigation into
the antecedents of organizational citizenship behaviors in a personal
selling context. J Mark 1997;61:85 – 98 (July).

Nyhan RC, Marlowe HA. Organizational effectiveness enhancement under
total quality management (TQM) in a non-manufacturing. In: Sumanth
DJ, Poupart R, Sink DS, editors. Productivity and quality management
frontiers. Norcross: G.A. Industrial Engineering and Management Press,
1993. p. 294 – 303.

O’Reilly CA, Chatman J. Organizational commitment and psychological
attachment: the effects of compliance, identification, and internalization
on prosocial behavior. J Appl Psychol 1986;71:492 – 9.

George JM. Sate or trait: effects of positive mood on prosocial behaviors at

Organ DW. A reappraisal and reinterpretation of the satisfaction-causes-

work. J Appl Psychol 1991;76(2):299 – 307.

George JM, Bettenhausen K. Understanding prosocial behavior, sales per-
formance, and turnover: a group-level analysis in a service context.
J Appl Psychol 1990;75(6):698 – 709.

George JM, Brief AP. Feeling good – doing good: a conceptual analysis of
the mood at work – organizational spontaneity relationship. J Appl Psy-
chol 1992;112(2):310 – 29.

Graham J. An essay on organizational citizenship behavior. Employ Re-

sponsib Rights J 1991;4:249 – 70.

Gronross C. Internal marketing: theory and practice. In: Block TM, Upah
GD, Zeithmal VA, editors. Services marketing in a changing environ-
ment. Chicago, IL: American Marketing Association, 1985. p. 41 – 7.

Gronross C. Service management: a management focus for service com-
petition. In: Lovelock CH, editor. Managing services: marketing,
operations and human resources. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-
tice-Hall, 1992. p. 9 – 16.

performance hypothesis. Acad Manage Rev 1977;2(1):46 – 53.

Organ DW. Organizational citizenship behavior: the good soldier syndrome.

Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1988.

Organ DW. The motivational basis of organizational citizenship behavior.
In: Staw BM, Cummings LL, editors. Research in organizational be-
havior, vol. 12. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1990. p. 43 – 72.

Organ DW, Konovsky M. Cognitive versus affective determinants of or-
ganizational citizenship behavior. J Appl Psychol 1989;74(1):157 – 64.
Organ DW, Ryan K. A meta-analytic review of attitudinal and dispositional
predictors of organizational citizenship behavior. Pers Psychol 1995;48:
775 – 802.

Parasuraman A, Zeithmal VA, Berry LL. A conceptual model of service
quality and its implications for future research. J Mark 1985;49(4):41 – 50.
Parasuraman A, Zeithmal VA, Berry LL. SERVQUAL: a multiple-item scale
for measuring consumer perceptions of service quality. J Retailing
1988;64(1):12 – 40.

Grusec JE. The socialization of altruism. In: Clark MS, editor. Prosocial

Parasuraman A, Berry LL, Zeithmal VA. Refinement and reassessment of

behavior. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1991. p. 9 – 33.

the SERVQUAL scale. J Retailing 1991;67(4):12 – 40.

Hartline MD, Ferrell OC. The management of customer-contact service em-
ployees: an empirical investigation. J Mark 1996;60:52 – 70 (October).
James LR, Demaree RG, Wolf G. Estimating within-group interrater reli-
ability with and without response bias. J Appl Psychol 1985;69:85 – 98.
Kelley SW, Hoffman KD. An investigation of positive affect, prosocial

behaviors and service quality. J Retailing 1997;73(3):407 – 27.

Konovsky MA, Pugh SD. Citizenship behavior and social exchange. Acad

Manage J 1994;37(3):656 – 69.

LeBlanc G. Factors affecting customer evaluation of service quality in travel
agencies: an investigation of customer perceptions. J Travel Res 1992;
32(4):13 – 9.

Paulin M, Perrien J, Ferguson RJ. Relational contract norms and the
effectiveness of commercial banking. Int J Serv Ind Manage 1997;8(5):
435 – 52.

Paulin M, Ferguson RJ, Alvarez-Salazar AM. External effectiveness of
service management: a study of business-to-business relationships in
Mexico, Canada, and USA. Int J Serv Ind Manage 1999;10(5):
409 – 29.

Paulin M, Ferguson RJ, Payaud M. Business effectiveness and professional
service personnel: relational or transactional managers? Eur J Mark
2000;34(3/4):453 – 71.

Peter JP, Churchill GA, Brown TJ. Caution in the use of difference scores in

Locke EA. What is job satisfaction? Organ Behav Hum Perform 1969;

consumer research. J Consum Res 1993;19:655 – 62 (March).

4:309 – 36.

MacKenzie SB, Posdakoff PM, Fetter R. Organizational citizenship behavior
and objective productivity as determinants of managerial evaluations of
salesperson’s performance. Organ Behav Hum Decis Processes 1991;50:
123 – 50.

MacKenzie SB, Posdakoff PM, Fetter R. The impact of organizational cit-

Pfeffer J. Competitive advantage through people: unleashing the power of

the work force. Boston, MA: Harvard School Press, 1994.

Posdakoff PM, MacKenzie SB. Organizational citizenship behaviors and

sales unit effectiveness. J Mark Res 1994;31:351 – 63 (August).

Posdakoff PM, MacKenzie SB, Moorman RH, Fetter R. Transformational
leader behaviors and their effects on followers’ trust in leader, satisfac-


M.H. Yoon, J. Suh / Journal of Business Research 56 (2003) 597–611

611

tion, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Leadership Q 1990;1(2):
1097 – 142.

Posdakoff PM, Ahearne M, MacKenzie SB. Organizational citizenship
behavior and the quality of work group performance. J Appl Psychol
1997;82(2):262 – 70.

Puffer SM. Prosocial behavior, noncompliant behavior, and work perform-
ance among commission salespeople. J Appl Psychol 1987;72(4):
615 – 21.

service sector. In: Ferrus GR, Rowland KM, editors. Research in per-
sonnel and human resources management, vol. 10. Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press, 1992. p. 1 – 30.

Schneider B, Parkington JJ, Buxton VM. Employee and customer percep-

tions of services in banks. Adm Sci Q 1980;25:252 – 66.

Schneider B, White SS, Paul MC. Linking service climate and customer
perceptions of service quality: test of a causal model. J Appl Psychol
1988;83(2):150 – 63.

Reichheld F, Sasser WE. Zero defections: quality comes to services. Harv

Smith CA, Organ DW, Near JP. Organizational citizenship behavior: its

Bus Rev 1990;68:105 – 11 (September/October).

nature and antecedents. J Appl Psychol 1983;68(4):653 – 63.

Rousseau DM, Parks JM. The contracts of individuals and organizations.
In: Staw BM, Cummings LL, editors. Research in organizational be-
havior, vol. 15. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1993. p. 1 – 43.

Rust RT, Zahorik AJ, Keiningham TL. Return on quality (ROQ): making
service quality financially accountable. J Mark 1995;59:58 – 70 (April).
Schneider B. Organizational climate: an essay. Pers Psychol 1975;28:

447 – 79.

Schneider B. Work climates: an interactionist perspective. In: Feimer NW,
Geller ES, editors. Environment psychology: directions and perspec-
tives. New York: Praeger, 1983. p. 106 – 28.

Schneider B, Bowen DE. Employee and customer perceptions of services in
banks: replication and extension. J Appl Psychol 1985;70(3):423 – 33.
Schneider B, Bowen DE. Personnel/human resource management in the

Van Dyne L, Graham JW, Dienesch RM. Organizational citizenship behav-
ior: construct redefinition, measurement, and validation. Acad Manage J
1994;37(4):765 – 802.

Walz S, Niehoff BP. Organizational citizenship behaviors and their effect on
organizational effectiveness in limited-menu restaurants. In: Keyes JB,
Dosier LN, editors. Academy of management best papers proceedings.
Madison, WI: Omnipress, 1996. p. 307 – 11.

Williams LJ, Anderson SE. Job satisfaction and organizational commitment
as predictors of organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors. J Man-
age 1991;17(3):601 – 17.

Zeithmal VA, Berry LL, Parasuraman A. The nature and determinants of
customer expectations of service. J Acad Mark Sci 1993;21(1):1 – 12.

