 
 
Human Resource Configurations, Intellectual Capital, and Organizational Performance
Author(s): Mark A. Youndt and  Scott A. Snell
Source: Journal of Managerial Issues, Vol. 16, No. 3 (Fall 2004), pp. 337-360
Published by: Pittsburg State University
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40604485
Accessed: 14-02-2017 02:51 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40604485?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted

digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about

JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at

http://about.jstor.org/terms

Pittsburg State University is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal
of Managerial Issues

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES

 Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004: 337-360

 Human Resource Configurations, Intellectual Capital,

 and Organizational Performance

 Mark A. Youndt

 Assistant Professor of Management

 Skidmore College

 Scott A. Snell

 Professor and Director of Executive Education

 Cornell University

 Throughout the past fifteen years

 researchers have examined the link
 between human resource (HR) activ-
 ities and organizational-level per-
 formance. Many of the early studies
 in this area simply looked at the per-
 formance impacts of individual HR
 practices such as staffing, training,
 and compensation in isolation. More
 recent HR studies have tended to
 take a more holistic approach to HR
 by focusing on the performance im-
 pacts of systems or configurations of
 multiple HR activities (e.g., Huselid,
 1995; MacDuffie, 1995; Youndt et al,
 1996). While both of these lines of re-
 search have demonstrated that HR
 activities can have a positive influence
 on organizational value creation and
 performance, neither approach has
 given us a very clear understanding as
 to how this value-creating process ac-
 tually occurs. As Becker and his col-
 leagues noted, "To date there is very
 little research that . . . describes

 the processes through which HRM
 systems influence the principal inter-
 mediate variables that ultimately af-
 fect firm performance" (1997: 40-
 41). In short, we know very little
 about the black box between a firm's
 HR activities and its bottom line.

 Accordingly, the purpose of this
 study is to introduce intellectual capi-
 tal as a mediating construct between
 HR configurations and organizational
 performance, thereby combining re-
 search streams in HR and strategic
 management. Although, academic
 and business strategists have acknowl-
 edged that HR plays a role in devel-
 oping and managing strategic re-
 sources and core competencies,
 theoretical development and empiri-
 cal research have been slow to follow.
 By introducing intellectual capital as
 a mediating construct, we hope to
 better frame how HR systems drive or-
 ganizational performance. In es-
 sence, this article suggests HR activi-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

 (337)

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 338 Youndt and Snell

 ties do not directly increase
 organizational-level performance;
 radier they help increase employees'
 knowledge and skills (i.e., human
 capital), facilitate group interaction
 and knowledge sharing (i.e., social
 capital), and enable organizations to
 store knowledge in systems, routines,
 processes, and cultures (i.e., organi-
 zational capital), which, in turn, drive
 organizational performance.

 In what follows, we begin by outlin-
 ing a conceptualization of the various
 aspects on intellectual capital. Next,
 we examine how different HR config-
 urations might facilitate the develop-
 ment of these various aspects of in-
 tellectual capital and how intellectual
 capital might enhance organizational
 performance. Then, we test the me-
 diating role of intellectual capital be-
 tween HR configurations and organ-
 izational performance. To conclude,
 we discuss the implications of our
 findings and briefly outline several
 limitations of the present study as well
 as suggest potential future research
 directions.

 THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

 AND HYPOTHESES

 Spender and Grant noted in their

 introduction to Strategic Management
 Journal's special issue on knowledge
 and the firm that strategy researchers
 are facing a "growing realization that
 the variables which are most theoret-
 ically interesting are those which are
 least identifiable and measurable"
 (1997: 8). Intellectual capital is one
 such variable. Several writers have
 presented frameworks, however, to
 help us conceptualize the construct
 and make it easier to operationalize
 for research. Edvinsson and Malone
 (1997), for example, view intellectual
 capital as being comprised of two pri-

 mary components: human capital (i.e.,
 the knowledge skills and experience
 of employees) and structural capital
 (i.e., the embodiment, empower-
 ment, and supportive infrastructure
 of human capital). The authors then
 sub-divide structural capital into two
 smaller components: organizational
 capital (i.e., the systems, tools, and op-
 erating philosophy that speed the
 flow of knowledge through the organ-
 ization) and customer capital (i.e., re-
 lationships a company has with its
 customers) .

 Stewart (1997) similarly conceives
 of intellectual capital as composed of
 human capital and structural capital,
 but places customer capital on equal
 footing with structural capital (rather
 than as a subcategory) . He also sub-
 sumes organizational capital into
 structural capital. Bonus (1996), on
 the other hand, introduces the no-
 tion of relational capital as an ex-
 panded version of customer capital
 that includes the value of all relation-
 ships, including those of customers.
 Bonus' concept of relational capital is
 virtually identical to what sociologists
 and organization theorists refer to as
 social capital (Adler and Kwon, 2002).
 Synthesizing the above discussions,
 we conceptualize intellectual capital
 as three distinct categories: human,
 social, and organizational. Whereas
 human capital simply refers to individ-
 ual employee's knowledge, skills, and
 expertise, organizational capital repre-
 sents institutionalized knowledge and
 codified experience stored in data-
 bases, routines, patents, manuals,
 structures, and the like. While some
 may be apt to refer to this latter
 knowledge as structural capital (Stew-
 art, 1997), we would argue organiza-
 tional capital is more fitting because
 this is capital the organization actu-
 ally owns (human capital can only be

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 339

 rented/borrowed). The third type of
 intellectual capital, social capital, re-
 sides neither at the individual nor the
 organizational level. Rather, social
 capital is an intermediary form of in-
 tellectual capital consisting of knowl-
 edge resources embedded within,
 available through, and derived from
 networks of relationships (Adler and
 Kwon, 2002; Nahapiet and Ghoshal,
 1998).

 HR Configurations and Intellectual
 Capital

 There is a good deal of consensus
 in the strategic HR literature that
 combinations, or configurations, of
 HR practices are more likely to lead
 organizational-level outcomes such as
 productivity, profitability, and market
 value than individual practices used
 in isolation (e.g., Youndt et ai, 1996).
 More controversial is whether a single
 set of "best practices" leads to higher
 performance or whether the appro-
 priateness of HR configurations is
 contingent on strategy, technology,
 and the like (Pfeffer, 1994). In this
 study, we adopt a contingent config-
 urational perspective and hypothe-
 size that the performance impact of
 HR configurations depends on
 whether the mediating variable is hu-
 man, social, or organizational capital.
 As the dimensions of intellectual cap-
 ital (and their connections to per-
 formance) are conceptually distinct,
 we believe it is reasonable to suspect
 that HR configurations will vary ac-
 cordingly.

 HR and Human Capital. As human
 capital refers to individual employee's
 knowledge, skills, and expertise, the
 concept is paramount in any discus-
 sion of intellectual capital. The litera-
 ture on organizational learning, for ex-
 ample, points out organizations, in

 and of themselves, do not create
 knowledge, people do (Argyris and
 Schon, 1978). As individuals learn
 (i.e., increase their human capital),
 they create knowledge that poten-
 tially forms a foundation for organi-
 zational-level learning and knowl-
 edge accumulation. Human capital
 theorists have typically argued that
 organizations can increase their hu-
 man capital by internally developing
 the knowledge and skills of their cur-
 rent employees and/or by attracting
 individuals with high knowledge and
 skill levels from the external labor
 market. That is, organizations can try
 to make and/or buy human capital.

 Buying Human Capital: Acquisition
 HR Configuration. Selective staffing
 practices are often championed as
 the foundation of an HR strategy fo-
 cused on acquiring human capital.
 Operationally, selective staffing can
 be thought of as two distinct search
 processes: extensive search and inten-
 sive search. Extensive search expands
 the applicant pool by using a wide va-
 riety of recruiting sources (e.g., em-
 ployee referrals, search firms, univer-
 sities, employment agencies) and
 increasing the number of candidates
 screened per hire. Intensive search, on
 the other hand, increases the amount
 of information gathered about each
 applicant (via interviews, tests, bio-
 graphical information, etc.). As Koch
 and McGrath reason, "assuming a
 sufficiently well-populated labor mar-
 ket from which to choose, firms that
 take more care in their search, by in-
 creasing information at both the ex-
 tensive and intensive margins, are
 more likely to be able to access high-
 quality new employees" (1996: 339).

 Although an acquisition configu-
 ration primarily builds on staffing
 practices, it is likely to be comple-
 mented by compensation and reward

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 340 YOUNDT AND SNELL

 systems. To attract the best candi-
 While training tends to be a focal
 dates, companies frequently pay high
 point in discussions concerning the
 development of human capital,
 wages relative to competitors in order
 to ensure that they meet or exceed
 Becker (1964) originally pointed out
 market equity. In addition, stock own-
 that under norms of rationality or-
 ership is also espoused to help attract
 ganizations would prefer programs
 and retain the best and brightest
 that produce firm-specific skills that
 are non-transferable to other com-
 workers. Stewart (1997), for example,
 pointed out that employee stock own-
 panies. In order to capitalize on such
 ership programs appear to be increas-
 training investments, as well as en-
 ing in popularity, especially in knowl-
 courage employees to develop firm-
 edge-intensive companies. Many of
 specific skills, many theorists suggest
 these go public not to raise money for
 that organizations should utilize pro-
 capital expenditures, but rather to
 motion-from-within, or internal labor
 markets. In Koch and McGrath's
 share ownership with their most val-
 uable assets - employees.
 words, "A firm that pays for training
 and that subsequently fails to pro-
 mote from within is arguably failing
 to capitalize on its investment"
 (1996: 340).

 Hypothesis 1: An acquisition HR configuration
 (comprised of selective staffing, external pay eq-
 uity, and employee ownership) mill be positively
 related to an organization's level of human cap-
 ital

 Broadening this HR configuration
 further, supportive performance feed-
 back is also espoused to facilitate em-
 ployee development Although per-
 formance appraisal can focus on
 administrative as well as development
 functions, it is the developmental as-
 pect that is most expected to influence
 learning and skill enhancement. Com-
 pensation systems, particularly those
 associated with skill/knowledge-based
 pay, are also likely to play a significant
 role in motivating employees to in-
 crease their human capital. When
 companies link pay to the knowledge,
 skills, and abilities of their workers,
 they hope to direct the attention of
 their employees to developmental op-
 portunities and to encourage skill-
 seeking behavior (Murray and Ger-
 hart, 1998).

 Making Human Capital: Developmental
 HR Configuration. As an alternative to
 (or in conjunction with) an acquisi-
 tion configuration, organizations can
 enhance their human capital pool
 through a developmental configura-
 tion based on training and education.
 Training and education have long
 been the primary focus of human
 capital theory. More recently, re-
 searchers have noted the central role
 of comprehensive training in firms at-
 tempting to transform their workfor-
 ces from touch labor to knowledge
 work (Snell and Dean, 1992). Train-
 ing comprehensiveness encompasses
 both intensity and scope. Training in-
 tensity focuses on the depth of inter-
 vention, the duration of the pro-
 grams, and the degree to which they
 are continuously updated. In con-
 trast, training scope focuses on the
 breadth of training, the different
 types of training opportunities of-
 fered to employees, the utilization of
 cross-training, and the like.

 Hypothesis 2. A developmental HR configu-
 ration (comprised of comprehensive train-
 ing practices, promotion-from-within, de-
 velopmental performance appraisal
 processes, and skill-based pay) will be posi-
 tively related to an organization's level of
 human capital.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 341

 HR and Social Capital. The impor-
 tance of human capital notwithstand-
 ing, discussions of intellectual capital
 and performance transcend knowl-
 edge contained within individual em-
 ployees. From a competitive stand-
 point, theorists are quick to point out
 that organizations do not own human
 capital, employees do. And since
 those employees are free, within lim-
 its, to leave the firm, there is signifi-
 cant risk organizations may incur a
 capital loss unless individual knowl-
 edge is transferred, shared, trans-
 formed, and institutionalized. This
 highlights the need for social (and or-
 ganizational) capital to protect the in-
 vestments of organizations in knowl-
 edge-based sources of advantage.

 There is a growing consensus
 among researchers that building social
 capital requires a collaborative organ-
 izational environment in which knowl-
 edge and information can flow freely.
 However, there are natural barriers to
 knowledge exchange, most of which
 center around power relationships.
 Szulanski (1996), for example, found
 that one of the biggest obstacles to the
 transfer of best practices in organiza-
 tions is due to poor relationships be-
 tween the source and recipient of in-
 formation. Breaking down these
 vertical (i.e., hierarchical) and hori-
 zontal (i.e., cross-functional) barriers
 requires the cultivation of an open and
 trusting culture.

 Eliminating Vertical Barriers to Social
 Capital: Egalitanan HR Configuration.
 In its purist form, an egalitarian or-
 ganization is a classless organization
 with minimal power distances be-
 tween employees. And while no or-
 ganization can truly function in a
 purely classless manner, numerous
 HR activities may help move organi-
 zations in this direction. Such HR ac-
 tivities broadly fall into five catego-

 ries: eliminating status symbols,
 creating flatter organizations, mini-
 mizing job classifications, empower-
 ing employees, and utilizing flat pay
 structures (Pfeffer, 1994).

 Status symbols such as executive

 dining rooms, reserved parking
 spaces, and corner offices create
 physical barriers to communication
 as well as social subdivisions. Accord-
 ingly, eliminating status symbols
 should promote cross-level interac-
 tions by breaking down barriers be-
 tween people. In a like manner, many
 hierarchical levels can also foster an
 environment of great power distances
 which create communication barri-
 ers. Therefore, flatter organizational
 structures (i.e., ones with fewer levels
 of hierarchy) should increase an or-
 ganization's capacity to quickly share
 and leverage knowledge.

 The minimization of job classifica-
 tions, sometimes referred to as broad-
 banding, should also create a more
 egalitarian environment where peo-
 ple move about and communicate
 much more freely. Likewise, flat pay
 structures de-emphasize pay in organ-
 izations and should facilitate quality
 information exchanges by reducing
 interpersonal competition and poli-
 tics. Lastly, by giving employees au-
 tonomy and decision-making author-
 ity, organizations increase employee
 involvement in organizational activi-
 ties which, in turn, should lead to a
 greater willingness to share and trans-
 fer knowledge and information.

 Hypothesis 3: An egalitanan HR configura-
 tion (focused on eliminating status symbols,
 reducing hierarchical levels, minimizing
 job classifications, flattening wages, and em-
 powering employees) will be positively re-
 lated to an organization's level of social cap-
 ital.

 Eliminating Horizontal Barriers to So-

 cial Capital: Collaborative HR Configu-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 342 Youndt and Snell

 Hypothesis 4: A collaborative HR configura-
 tion (focused on permeable and network
 intimate work structures, team develop-
 ment, and group incentives) will be posi-
 tively related to an organization's level of
 social capital.

 ing, and gainsharing may help ensure
 that employees interact and
 exchange ideas with others as their
 compensation depends on the per-
 formance of one another.

 ration, McGill and Slocum (1994) ar-
 gue that work structures in
 knowledge-based organizations need
 to be characterized by permeability
 and network intimacy. That is, the
 lines between functional depart-
 ments, between employees and cus-
 tomers, and between the company
 and its vendors need to be blurred
 (permeability), and employees need
 to be kept close together and close to
 key business processes (network inti-
 macy). Perhaps one of the best ways
 to bring permeability and network in-
 timacy to life is through organizing
 around teams and networks, espe-
 cially cross-functional and joint em-
 ployee-customer problem-solving
 ones. To develop the capacity for
 teamwork and collaboration, organi-
 zations may begin by reorienting
 staffing criteria to focus more on in-
 terpersonal skills, and complement
 this with team training and other
 cross-functional interactions that fa-
 cilitate broader knowledge networks.
 In addition, performance feedback
 from peers, customers, team mem-
 bers, and even subordinates is likely
 to facilitate knowledge sharing.

 HR and Organizational Capital.
 While human capital embodies the
 knowledge in individuals and social
 capital describes the collective
 exchange of knowledge among peo-
 ple (and systems), organizational cap-
 ital refers to institutionalized knowl-
 edge and codified experience stored
 in systems, processes, databases, rou-
 tines, patents, manuals, structures,
 and the like. Organizational capital is
 extremely important to organiza-
 tions, as it is the only type of intellec-
 tual capital the organization actually
 owns.

 Each of these initiatives is likely to

 increase the capacity and opportu-
 nity for knowledge exchange and
 combination, but does not guaran-
 tee that motivation to do so. Major
 changes in incentives and culture
 may be required to motivate knowl-
 edge exchange. In many organiza-
 tions, sharing knowledge dilutes an
 individual's power base; as such,
 strong incentives need to be put in
 place to engender collective
 exchange. Even in the best of circum-
 stances, a "market for knowledge"
 exists and there are cost-benefit
 trade-offs in any person's decision to
 participate in that market. Group in-
 centives such as bonuses, profit shar-

 HR's primary responsibilities in de-
 veloping organizational capital cen-
 ter on creating and/or filling knowl-
 edge storage devices or bins. Storage
 bins can take many forms. For exam-
 ple, an organization's physical assets,
 such as information systems and in-
 ternal libraries, can hold vast
 amounts of knowledge in the form of
 patents, databases, manuals, etc. Or-
 ganizational capital is also embedded
 in standard operating procedures,
 business processes, rules, routines,
 and informal "ways of doing busi-
 ness." As Davenport and Prusak
 noted:

 Any manufacturing process, whether auto-
 mated or formalized in a set of procedures,
 is constructed from what was once the
 knowledge of individuals. In theory, this
 embedded knowledge is independent of
 those who developed it and therefore has
 some organizational stability - an individual

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 343

 expert can disappear without bringing the
 process to a halt or reducing the company's
 stock of embedded knowledge (1998: 83).

 Institutionalizing Organizational Cap-
 ital: Documentation HR Configuration.
 Institutionalizing knowledge in data-
 bases, manuals, and standard operat-
 ing procedures most likely requires
 HR's involvement in knowledge cod-
 ification. For example, encouraging
 employees to write * 'lessons learned"
 reports after learning experiences
 (e.g., sabbaticals, employee exchange
 programs, projects) should facilitate
 the development of organizational
 capital. Likewise, encouraging em-
 ployees to continuously update elec-
 tronic resumes, knowledge "yellow
 pages," and other knowledge-map-
 ping devices, as well as supporting the
 formal documentation of customer
 suggestions, complaints, preferences,
 etc., are also likely to help build bet-
 ter organizational capital.

 Beyond these methods for codify-
 ing explicit knowledge, HR systems
 can also play a role in helping to in-
 stitutionalize tacit knowledge that is
 more informal and difficult to artic-
 ulate. For example, empowering em-
 ployees to initiate the redesign of
 their work may be a useful method
 for capturing organizational capital.
 As employees redesign work systems
 and structures, their knowledge can
 become institutionalized in organi-
 zational routines, procedures, and
 the like. Similarly, employee sugges-
 tion systems may help expose the en-
 tire organization to what was previ-
 ously individual knowledge.

 Interfacing with Organizational Capi-
 tal: Information Technology HR Config-
 uration. It is very difficult to develop
 high levels of organizational capital
 without creating or providing an un-
 derlying infrastructure that supports
 knowledge management and codifi-
 cation. In today's world, such an in-
 frastructure inevitably revolves
 around information technology. Sim-
 ply put, information technology has
 now become the cornerstone of
 knowledge documentation and codi-
 fication processes in many of our
 most successful organizations. As
 Stewart noted, the emergence of
 these technologies has spawned "am-
 bitious attempts to pull scattered in-
 formation and wisdom together to
 convert it into organizational knowl-
 edge. Cheap and powerful informa-
 tion technology has given new impe-
 tus to the dream of creating what
 amount to living libraries containing
 an entire stock of corporate knowl-
 edge" (1997:113).

 Such information systems tend to
 be catalysts for developing organiza-
 tional capital because they are easily
 accessible, provide a user-friendly in-
 terface, and bring together what were
 once disparate knowledge reposito-
 ries into an integrated whole. An or-
 ganization can encourage employees
 to document their knowledge, skills,
 and expertise, but unless they use in-
 formation technology to make the
 process somewhat effortless and
 seamless, knowledge documentation
 initiatives will most likely have limited
 success.

 Hypothesis 5: A documentation HR config-
 uration (focused on knowledge documen-
 tation, employee work redesign, and em-
 ployee suggestion systems) will be positively
 related to a firm's level of organizational
 capital.

 Hypothesis 6: An information technology
 HR configuration (focused on accessible,
 user-friendly, and integrated information
 systems) will be positively related to a firm's
 level of organizational capital.

 Having discussed how differing HR

 systems facilitate the development of

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 344 Youndt and Snell

 Intellectual Capital and
 Organizational Performance

 strategies. When knowledgeable
 human, social, and organizational
 workers improve production and
 capital, we now turn to examining the
 service delivery processes, they not
 intellectual capital-performance link-
 only reduce costs, but they also in-
 age.
 crease product reliability and cus-
 tomer satisfaction. Similarly, people,
 as opposed to machines, tend to allow
 organizations to be more flexible
 (Upton, 1995). Such flexibility in-
 Varied literatures and perspectives
 creases customer benefits by quickly
 providing an array of different prod-
 ucts and services when and where cus-
 tomers want them. Lastly, creative
 people are the heart and soul behind
 product and service innovations that
 may increase customer value by bet-
 ter meeting their needs.

 (e.g., human capital theory, organi-
 zational learning theory, information
 processing theory, resource-based
 theory) suggest intellectual capital
 can create value and enhance organ-
 izational performance by lowering
 costs, increasing customer benefits,
 or doing some combination of the
 two.

 Human Capital and Performance. As

 stated at the outset, people, or hu-
 man capital, form the basis of com-
 petitive advantage in many of today's
 organizations and industries. Smarter
 workers (i.e., ones with more human
 capital) possess the ability to poten-
 tially improve organizational per-
 formance by both increasing cus-
 tomer benefits and decreasing
 production and service delivery costs
 in a myriad of ways. For example, hu-
 man capital can help lower produc-
 tion/service delivery costs by devel-
 oping new process innovations that
 eliminate costly steps, reduce inputs,
 increase utilization, and so on. Like-
 wise, better human capital should
 also lead to better planning, trouble-
 shooting, problem solving, etc., all of
 which most likely increase produc-
 tion and service delivery efficiencies
 and, thereby, reduce organizational
 costs.

 Human capital may also be instru-
 mental in improving customer bene-
 fits. Total quality management theo-
 rists (e.g., Deming, 1986) have
 argued for years that people form the
 foundation of quality improvement

 Hypothesis 7: An organization's level of hu-
 man capital will be positively related to or-
 ganizational performance.

 Social Capital and Performance. So-
 cial capital may reduce organiza-
 tional costs in many of the same ways
 human capital does. Similar to hu-
 man capital, the knowledge tied up in
 relationships among employees, cus-
 tomers, suppliers, alliance partners,
 and the like may lead to process in-
 novations, better problem solving,
 and so on, each of which tends to in-
 crease production and service deliv-
 ery efficiencies. Additionally, how-
 ever, social capital should reduce
 organizational costs by increasing an
 organization's information processing
 capacity. As Galbraith noted (1973),
 the creation of lateral relations such as
 task forces and teams (i.e., social capi-
 tal) facilitates information flows
 among participants in interdependent
 departments, thereby eliminating or
 reducing costly information flows up
 and down hierarchical channels. Fur-
 thermore, the transfer of knowledge
 through social capital allows organi-
 zations to coordinate diverse produc-
 tion skills and integrate multiple

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 345

 streams of technology as well as lev-
 erage knowledge from one part of the
 organization to another. All of these
 activities enable organizations to
 more efficiently utilize their knowl-
 edge-base by leveraging it across the
 entire organization. Stated differ-
 ently, social capital should help re-
 duce redundancies and effort dupli-
 cation in multiple parts of
 organizations.

 Again, social capital's improve-
 ment of customer benefits parallels
 many of the notions discussed with re-
 gard to human capital and customer
 benefits above. Just like human capi-
 tal, social capital most likely drives
 customer benefits by helping to in-
 crease quality, reliability, and flexibil-
 ity through production and service
 delivery process innovations. How-
 ever, we would anticipate that social
 capital may even have more of an im-
 pact on customer benefits than hu-
 man capital as teams and networks of
 people should have increased prob-
 lem-solving capabilities. Likewise,
 teams and networks of employees,
 customers, suppliers, and the like
 should be able to better identify as
 well as satisfy customer needs. That is,
 social capital between organizations
 and their customers aids in identify-
 ing idiosyncratic customer needs as
 well as facilitates the development of
 novel solutions to address those
 needs.

 Hypothesis & An organization's level of so-
 cial capital will be positively related to or-
 ganizational performance.

 Organizational Capital and Perform-
 ance. Organizational capital can play
 a significant role in reducing organi-
 zational costs as well. According to
 Dixon (1992), these cost reductions
 result from three primary forces.
 First, when failure leads to learning it

 can be the ultimate teacher. Thus, in-
 stitutionalized experience and knowl-
 edge (i.e., organizational capital) can
 prevent organizations from repeating
 mistakes, thereby reducing their op-
 erating costs. Second, organizational
 capital can be retrieved and brought
 to bear on new situations. Whether
 this institutionalized knowledge is
 used "wholesale" in its current form,
 or transformed to meet existing
 needs, it should help reduce costs by
 eliminating the need to "reinvent the
 wheel." Lastly, organizational capital
 embedded in routines, procedures,
 information systems, and the like can
 help filter information as well as di-
 rect and simplify information proc-
 essing and organizational sensemak-
 ing, all of which should diminish
 organizational costs.

 The three forces (i.e., minimizing
 repeat mistakes, increasing knowl-
 edge utilization, and facilitating bet-
 ter information processing/sense-
 making) that enable organizational
 capital to reduce organizational costs
 most likely also help organizations ex-
 tend customer benefits. For example,
 minimizing mistakes helps organiza-
 tions increase their speed to market
 with new products and services. Like-
 wise, when stored knowledge can be
 accessed by those organizational
 members directly in contact with cusr
 tomers, they can use their entire com-
 pany's knowledge-base to quickly and
 accurately address customer issues.
 Additionally, storing important cus-
 tomer information in organizational
 memory devices enables companies
 to better keep track of their custom-
 ers' preferences, needs, behaviors,
 etc., thereby increasing customer
 alignment and, hopefully, customer
 benefits and satisfaction. Many serv-
 ice organizations such as Jiffy Lube,
 for example, keep detailed customer

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 346 Youndt and Snell

 records which allow them to quickly
 service your car with the exact prod-
 ucts you favor. In short, organiza-
 tional capital can assist organizations
 in giving customers what they want,
 when they want it, and how they want
 it.

 A broad group of organizations

 Sample

 METHODS

 Hypothesis 9: An organization's level of or-
 ganizational capital will be positively related
 to organizational performance.

 The Mediating Role of Intellectual
 Capital Between HR and
 Performance

 As stated at the onset, there has

 been very little empirical research ex-
 amining intermediating variables
 through which HR systems may ulti-
 mately affect firm performance. Re-
 cently, however, scholars (Becker et
 al, 1997) have suggested that intel-
 lectual capital may play a key medi-
 ating role in the HR-performance re-
 lationship. That is, HR systems may
 drive human, social, and organiza-
 tional capital, which, in turn, may
 drive organizational performance.
 And while the underlying relation-
 ships have been detailed in Hypoth-
 eses 1-9, Hypotheses 10-12 integrate
 the above arguments to formally test
 intellectual capital's mediating role
 in the HR-performance linkage.

 Hypothesis 10: Human capital will mediate
 the relationships between the acquisition
 and development HR configurations and
 organizational performance.
 Hypothesis 11: Social capital will mediate the
 relationships between the egalitarian and
 collaborative HR configurations and organ-
 izational performance.
 Hypothesis 12: Organizational capital will
 mediate the relationships between the doc-
 umentation and information systems HR
 configurations and organizational perform-
 ance.

 and industries was included in the
 study to maximize variation of the in-
 dependent variables as well as to in-
 crease the generalizability of the find-
 ings. However, only public, single
 business unit organizations with more
 than one hundred employees were
 included in the study for the follow-
 ing reasons. First, the study required
 comprehensive organizational-level
 performance data. Second, as HR
 practices and competitive strategies
 may differ across autonomous busi-
 ness units, we decided to exclude
 multidivisional organizations. Lastly,
 only organizations with more than
 one hundred full-time employees
 were selected in an effort to increase
 the likelihood that participating or-
 ganizations utilized a somewhat for-
 malized HR system. We selected the
 919 organizations meeting these cri-
 teria from the Directory of Corporate Af-
 filiations.

 Data Collection Procedures and
 Variables

 A cover letter and questionnaire
 were mailed directly to the two high-
 est ranking executives (usually the
 CEO and president) as well as the
 vice-president of HR in each of the
 919 organizations. Executives from
 208 of the organizations returned us-
 able questionnaires, representing an
 organizational response rate of 23
 percent. The 208 organizations rep-
 resented 134 different four-digit SIC
 codes, had an average of 4,019 full-
 time employees, and had mean an-
 nual revenues of $771 million. Of the
 208 participating firms, 71 had two or
 three respondents. For these 71 firms

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 347

 we calculated interrater agreements
 for each of our HR indices and intel-
 lectual capital constructs according
 to the R^ procedures prescribed by
 James, Demaree, and Wolf (1993).
 The resulting R^ for each of the var-
 iables ranged from .87 to .94. These
 results support the aggregation of
 data to the firm level (i.e., we can av-
 erage the responses of multiple re-
 spondents from one firm for our
 analysis). Additionally, by indicating
 that multiple top-level executives
 from the same firm provided very
 similar responses, there is evidence to
 suggest that whether we had re-
 sponses from one or numerous ex-
 ecutives from each firm our results
 would be similar. Thus, the potential
 problem of using a single respondent
 for some of our firms is diminished.

 edge in physical organizational-level
 repositories such as databases, man-
 uals, and patents (Davenport and
 Prusak, 1998; Edvinsson and Malone,
 1997) as well as in less tangible rou-
 tines, processes, cultures, and ways of
 doing business (Stewart, 1997; Walsh
 and Ungson, 1991). Lastly, the five
 items measuring social capital (alpha
 = .88) draw upon the core ideas of
 the social structure literature (Adler
 and Kwon, 2002; Nahapiet and
 Goshal, 1998), as well as the more
 specific knowledge management lit-
 erature (Nonaka, 1994), and assess
 an organization's overall ability to
 share and leverage knowledge among
 and between networks of employees,
 customers, suppliers, alliance part-
 ners, and the like.

 Intellectual Capital. As few pub-

 lished empirical research efforts exist
 pertaining to intellectual capital, we
 reviewed theoretical discussions sur-
 rounding human capital, intangible
 assets, organizational learning, and
 the like to develop multi-item scales
 of the three subcategories of intellec-
 tual capital. Additionally, as our study
 spanned more than 100 industries, it
 required the use of generalizable
 metrics and wording in crafting the
 specific human, social, and organiza-
 tional capital items. The five items as-
 sessing human capital (alpha = .81)
 were based on original discussions
 surrounding human capital (Becker,
 1964; Schultz, 1961), as well as con-
 temporary strategic human resource
 management studies (e.g., Snell and
 Dean, 1992), and reflect the overall
 skill, expertise, and knowledge levels
 of an organization's employees. Like-
 wise, organizational capital (alpha =
 .62) was measured by a four-item
 scale assessing an organization's abil-
 ity to appropriate and store knowl-

 To test the convergent and discri-
 minant validity of the multiple-item
 scales of human, social, and organi-
 zational capital, we performed con-
 firmatory maximum likelihood factor
 analysis. The intellectual capital
 model confirmed the three distinct
 aspects of intellectual capital (hu-
 man, social, and organizational) by
 replicating their designed scales. The
 resulting three factors explained 51%
 of the total variance, had eigenvalues
 of 1.77, 4.96, and 1.54, and had av-
 erage communality of .67. Addition-
 ally, no item cross-loaded on another
 dimension at a level higher than .33.
 See Appendix A for the results of the
 intellectual capital factor analysis and
 a detailed listing of all the intellectual
 capital items.

 Human Resource Configurations. The

 study utilized six distinct HR
 configurations focused on building
 intellectual capital: 1) Acquisition con-
 figuration, 2) Developmental configu-
 ration, 3) Egalitarian configuration, 4)
 Collaborative configuration, 5) Docu-
 mentation configuration, and 6) Infor-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 348 Youndt and Snell

 the net effect of the system (Mac-
 Duffie, 1995) . See Appendix Β for de-
 tailed descriptions of the HR config-
 urations.

 mation Technology configuration.
 The items for the Acquisition and De-
 velopment HR configurations were
 based on the prior empirical studies of
 Snell and Dean (1992) and Youndt et
 ai (1996). As no published, empirical
 scales or indices existed for our other
 four HR configurations, items for
 these indices were derived from the-
 oretical discussions surrounding the
 development of the various forms of
 intellectual capital. Specifically, we
 drew upon Pfeffer's (1994) work on
 how organizations gain competitive
 advantage through people and Mc-
 Gill and Slocum's (1994) discussions
 on building "smarter organizations"
 in developing our Egalitarian and
 Collaborative HR configurations,
 while our Documentation and Infor-
 mation Systems configurations were
 based on Stewart (1997) and Daven-
 port and Prusak's (1998) discussions
 surrounding how certain employee
 practices and information systems aid
 in the codification and storage of
 knowledge.

 Organizational Performance. An as-
 sessment of an organization's per-
 formance should include multiple
 measures (Venkatraman and Rama-
 nujam, 1986). Accordingly, we util-
 ized a composite performance metric
 consisting of both asset- (ROA) and
 equity-based (ROE) performance
 measures. Specifically, organizational
 performance was calculated by averag-
 ing each organization's 2000 and
 2001 ROA and ROE. We utilized a
 two-year average to help guard
 against random fluctuations and
 anomalies in the data (Venkatraman
 and Ramanujam, 1986). Additionally,
 we used 2000 and 2001 performance
 data to lag our dependent variable
 two to three years from the data col-
 lection of our independent variables
 in an effort to minimize the potential
 effect of successful organizations pos-
 sessing more slack resources to invest
 in HR activities and intellectual capi-
 tal development. All performance
 data were obtained through Disclosure
 and Research Insight.

 Following the procedures used by

 Koch and McGrath (1996), Mac-
 Duffie (1995), and Youndt et al
 (1996), each configuration was oper-
 ationalized as an additive index of
 multiple HR activities outlined in our
 theory and hypotheses section. Such
 an additive approach to combining
 HR activities implies organizations
 can improve their effectiveness either
 by using individual practices in a
 more comprehensive manner or by
 increasing the number of practices
 they employ within the system. This
 approach is better conceptually and
 empirically than a multiplicative ap-
 proach to creating HR systems be-
 cause it does not reduce the index
 value to zero if a single HR practice
 is absent from the system. Instead, the
 absence of a practice only weakens

 Control Variables. Since numerous

 studies have shown that large organ-
 izations exhibit better performance
 than smaller ones, we controlled for
 any potential extraneous effects of or-
 ganizational size. Similar to other HR
 studies, organizational size was opera-
 tionalized as the number of employ-
 ees and was obtained from the Direc-
 tory of Corporate Affiliations. We also
 controlled for R&fD intensity (R&D/
 sales) due to its potential influence
 on intellectual capital development.
 Data for R&D intensity were obtained
 from Disclosure, Research Insight, and
 Bloomberg. Additionally, as organiza-
 tions' HR activities, intellectual capi-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 349

 tal investments, and performance
 outcomes may systematically differ
 across industries, we controlled for
 three industry dimensions (munifi-
 cence, dynamism, and complexity),
 as suggested by Dess, Ireland, and
 Hitt (1990). Following Boyd (1990),
 industry munificence, or resource
 abundance, was measured as the re-
 gression slope coefficient divided by
 mean sales value when regressing
 time against industry sales for the past
 five years. Dynamism, or volatility, was
 assessed using the same regression
 model and was measured as the stan-
 dard error of the regression slope co-
 efficient divided by the mean sales
 value. Lastly, complexity, or heteroge-
 neity in the environment, was as-
 sessed using the MINL formula of
 sales concentration (Schmalensee,
 1977) . Data for the industry measures
 were obtained from U.S. Industnal
 Outlook, StatUSA, Census of Manufac-
 turers, and Moody s.

 As predicted in Hypotheses 1 and 2,
 the acquisition (Beta = .164, ρ < .05)
 and developmental (Beta = .235, ρ <
 .01) HR configurations were signifi-
 cantly related to an organization's
 level of human capital. With regard
 to social capital, the egalitarian HR
 configuration was not significantly re-
 lated to an organization's level of so-
 cial capital. Thus, we found no sup-
 port for Hypothesis 3. As anticipated
 in Hypothesis 4, however, the collab-
 orative HR configuration (Beta =
 .215, ρ < .05) was significantly related
 to social capital. Lastly, both the doc-
 umentation (Beta = .227, ρ < .01)
 and information systems (Beta =
 .271, ρ < .01) HR configurations
 were significantly related to an organ-
 ization's level of organizational capi-
 tal, supporting Hypotheses 5 and 6.
 Although not hypothesized, the egal-
 itarian HR configuration was signifi-
 cantly related to human capital (Beta
 = .185, ρ < .05), and the acquisition
 HR configuration was significantly re-
 lated to organizational capital (Beta
 = .248, ρ <. 01).

 RESULTS

 All of the variables used in the

 study exhibited normal distributions,
 and we found no evidence of restric-
 tion of range in any of the response
 scales. For more details surrounding
 the variables' properties, see Table 1
 which highlights the variables'
 means, standard deviations, alphas,
 R^, and correlations.

 HR Configurations and Intellectual
 Capital (Hypotheses 1 - 6)

 To test the notion that the differ-

 ent HR configurations would be re-
 lated to human, social, and organi-
 zational capital, we used multiple
 regression analysis controlling for
 size, industry effects, and R&D inten-
 sity. These results appear in Table 2.

 Intellectual Capital and
 Organizational Performance
 (Hypotheses 7, 8, and 9)

 To test the notion that human, so-

 cial, and organizational capital would
 be positively related to performance,
 we once again used multiple regres-
 sion analysis controlling for size, in-
 dustry effects, and R&D intensity.
 These results appear in Equation 2 in
 Table 3. Human capital (Beta = .211,
 ρ < .05), social capital (b = .396, ρ
 < .01), and organizational capital (b
 = .189, ρ < .05) were all significantly
 related to organizational perform-
 ance, providing strong support for
 Hypotheses 7-9 and the contention
 that intellectual capital plays a signif-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 350 YOUNDT AND SNELL

 _ ___

 7Γ ~f 8 8

 m τ"§δδδίί(?οο3§

 si
 H

 II Ι II

 ι

 ι ι ι ι ■

 ^¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥sss¥

 %_

 to y- u)
 ??5888SlSSfe8S288 " " " * χ
 ®ι^ " " " "cococôcôcvicocôcocvi * .2"

 s s
 ί χ 1 x - ? S

 T-CMCO^-in<ONOOO>Oi-CMCO^tlO μ g

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 351

 Table 2

 Results of Regression Analysis for

 HR Configurations and Intellectual Capital

 Human Capital Social Capital Organizational Capital
 Standardized Standardized Standardized

 Size .062 .076 -.054
 Complexity .035 .005 .030
 Dynamism .053 .061 .168*
 Munificence .085 .087 .114
 R&D Intensity .229** -.012 .201**
 Acquisition HR .164* .096 .248**
 Developmental HR .235** -.013 -.062
 Egalitarian HR .185* .133 -.071
 Collaborative HR -.030 .215* .064
 Documentation HR .148 .159 .227**
 Information Systems HR -.054 .045 .271**

 R2 .340 .280 .428
 F 6.320*** 4.830** 9.191***

 *p<.05,**p<.01,***p<.001

 icant role in determining firm per-
 formance. Additionally, the intellec-
 tual capital-performance relation-
 ships are not only statistically signifi-
 cant, but practically meaningful as
 well. For example, a one standard de-
 viation increase in organizational
 capital increases performance (ROA
 and ROE) by 35%.

 equation shows the effects of intellec-
 tual capital on performance. Without
 significant effects here for HR and in-
 tellectual capital on performance,
 there is no possibility of mediation.
 As the results in the table indicate,
 the acquisition (Beta = .174, ρ <
 .05), developmental (Beta = .222, ρ
 < .01), egalitarian (Beta = .178, ρ <
 .05), and collaborative (Beta = .241,
 ρ < .01) HR configurations are sig-
 nificantly related to performance
 and, as highlighted in the previous
 section, all three intellectual capital
 variables are also significantly related
 to performance. Since we found no
 significant relationships between the
 documentation and information sys-
 tems HR configurations and perform-
 ance, we can eliminate the possibility
 of organizational capital mediating
 any relationships between these vari-

 sion equations was required to test
 the notion that intellectual capital
 mediates the relationship between
 HR configurations and organiza-
 tional performance. In Table 3 the
 first equation shows the effects of the
 HR configurations on performance
 and, as pointed out above, the second

 The Mediating Role of Intellectual
 Capital (Hypotheses 10, 11, and 12)

 A comparison of numerous regres-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 352 YOUNDT AND SNELL

 ^ 1 î :
 'S CO "φ CM CM QÔ Iß tO O> CO ^í" f·*· CM GO Is- CO CO ^" JT
 3.|m op. pop ---^o^.- .^

 Cv = 1 S"^ çQ i^fr CO CJ) CO CO . ▼Ie ί ^^ CO . CO CO ^^ i ^^ CO I
 Cv S"^ çQ i^fr CO CJ) CO CO ▼Ie ^^ CO CO CO ^^ ^^ CO "^^
 "5 CO φ CM ^^ O> Q? h* CO CM ^ Γ** Ο Ο) ΙΟ CO CO
 g^-O CD . ,· . . . "Τ . Τ *". ,. · . . ^
 LU -2 """

 CO ^ *
 c £ - : : î
 Ο S^ CO ^f ^f OJ Οϊ CO CO lO r*"· CO C3 ^-~ CM CO CM
 :♦= £j S^ -£ CO ^f cOCMOr^CMT-CDCO^hOOCMCM ^f OJ Οϊ CO CO lO r*"· CO C3 ^-~ CM CO ^ ^

 CM ^ *
 c^ cm ^- σ> co in X-hb> τ- 5

 σ-S
 LU iS

 S
 i
 J
 !f
 ig

 i§
 il
 'S
 I

 -- M * * *

 ΤΪ * * * * /"'

 3- S '
 lu SS

 ν
 _ ο.

 §

 Ι Œl^_ ϋ ρ

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 353

 ables and performance (Hypothesis
 12).

 In the third equation, we again ex-
 amined the HR configurations' ef-
 fects on performance, but this time
 we also added human capital to the
 equation. Evidence of mediation ex-
 ists when a significant Beta for the ac-
 quisition and developmental HR con-
 figurations in the first equation
 diminishes substantially (perhaps to
 nonsignificance) in the third equa-
 tion after human capital has been ac-
 counted for. As the results indicate,
 both the acquisition and develop-
 mental Betas dropped to nonsignif-
 icance. Thus, we have strong support
 for Hypothesis 10 and can conclude
 that most of these HR configurations'
 effects on performance are derived
 through their ability to build human
 capital, which, in turn, drives per-
 formance.

 We tested social capital's mediating
 role (Hypothesis 11) in the fourth
 equation. As the egalitarian HR con-
 figuration was not significantly re-
 lated to social capital, social capital's
 potential mediating role was limited
 to the collaborative HR and perform-
 ance linkage. In comparing the Betas
 for collaborative HR in equations 1
 and 4, we see a substantial decrease
 (from Beta = .241, ρ < .01 to Beta =
 .173, ρ < .05). Thus, we can conclude
 that social capital mediates the rela-
 tionship between collaborative HR
 and performance and have partial
 support for Hypothesis 1 1 .

 In Equation 5 we tested an overall
 model incorporating the six HR con-
 figurations and three intellectual cap-
 ital variables to assess the relative im-
 portance of all the variables as well as
 to determine to what degree the var-
 ious HR configurations' effects on
 performance were operating through
 some combination of the three intel-

 lectual capital measures. The results
 in this equation point out that most
 of the HR configurations' effects on
 performance are operating through
 the intellectual capital variables and
 that human and social capital are the
 primary drivers of performance.

 DISCUSSION

 This study provides consistent sup-
 port for the notion that HR systems
 are fundamental in the development
 of intellectual capital. Not surpris-
 ingly, investments made to attract
 and select the best and brightest
 workers were shown to correspond to
 an organization's human capital.
 Likewise, comprehensive training
 and development efforts were also
 shown related to an organization's
 human capital. These results validate
 the arguments of human capital the-
 orists who suggest organizations have
 the option of either buying or making
 human capital. When only looking at
 the level of human capital (as op-
 posed to specific skills and knowl-
 edge), it appears selection and train-
 ing may act as substitutes for one
 another. Accordingly, companies that
 do not possess the resources to en-
 gage in both comprehensive training
 and selection activities may be wise to
 primarily focus their resources on
 one or the other.

 Moving on to social capital, the re-
 duction of vertical organizational bar-
 riers through the use of egalitarian
 work practices that minimize status
 differences was not related to an or-
 ganization's social capital; however,
 the reduction of horizontal barriers
 through the use of collaborative HR
 activities was related to an organiza-
 tion's knowledge sharing and trans-
 fer. This finding echoes the convic-
 tions of executives such as Jack Welch

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 354 Youndt and Snell

 (Ex-CEO of General Electric) who
 have vocally supported the boundar-
 yless organization as a means to pro-
 mote teamwork and group problem
 solving and decision making. Simply
 put, it appears one of the quickest
 and best ways to build a trusting and
 open culture where people freely
 share and seek information is to elim-
 inate as many horizontal organiza-
 tional barriers as possible. As func-
 tional, divisional, and other barriers
 break down and ultimately disappear,
 social capital can prosper and grow
 because people have much greater
 access to one another as well as the
 motivation and incentive to utilize
 this newly developing knowledge net-
 work.

 model (Equation 2). In the overall
 model containing the intellectual
 capital variables and the HR config-
 urations (Equation 5), however, only
 human capital and social capital ex-
 hibited strong relationships with per-
 formance. The human capital-per-
 formance linkage lends support to
 the widespread anecdotal evidence
 suggesting that talented people are a
 critical, and maybe even the critical,
 ingredient in developing and deliv-
 ering superior products and services
 that generate high consumer de-
 mand. Scholars and practitioners
 have argued for quite some time that
 many of the fastest growing compa-
 nies over the past several decades
 (e.g., Southwest Airlines, Tyson
 Foods, Wal-Mart) achieved their phe-
 nomenal growth and competitive ad-
 vantage through their talented peo-
 ple (Pfeffer, 1994).

 With regard to organizational cap-
 ital, the utilization of user-friendly
 and easily accessible information sys-
 tems and the use of HR activities that
 encourage knowledge documenta-
 tion (e.g., employee work redesign
 programs, employee suggestion sys-
 tems, lessons learned reports) both
 appear to help organizations institu-
 tionalize knowledge. Thus, organiza-
 tions seeking to transfer knowledge
 from people into organizational
 structures and systems should invest
 in "hard" information infrastruc-
 tures as well as "softer" management
 systems that motivate employees to
 share and record their expertise.
 These latter management systems ap-
 pear to be very important because,
 without the proper incentives, em-
 ployees may be reluctant to docu-
 ment their unique knowledge for fear
 of losing their expert power and es-
 sential roles.

 The study also found each of the

 three types of intellectual capital to
 be associated with increased organi-
 zational performance in the intellec-
 tual capital-performance regression

 Social capital was by far the strong-

 est predictor of performance in the
 study. Thus, it is not surprising that
 there has been a recent surge in in-
 terest and research surrounding so-
 cial capital (e.g., Adler and Kwon,
 2002; Kostova and Roth, 2003). Such
 a strong linkage between social capi-
 tal and performance supports those
 whose contend that knowledge tied
 up in relationships among employ-
 ees, customers, suppliers, alliance
 partners, and the like tends to lead to
 process and product innovations, bet-
 ter problem solving, and so on, all of
 which increase production and serv-
 ice delivery efficiencies as well as cus-
 tomer satisfaction. Also, social capital
 may enable organizations to more ef-
 ficiently utilize their knowledge-base
 by leveraging it across the entire or-
 ganization and thereby reduce re-
 dundancies, effort duplication, and
 ultimately organizational costs.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 355

 One could argue that the reason
 the relationship between organiza-
 tional capital and performance be-
 comes statistically non-significant
 when adding all the HR configura-
 tions into the performance regres-
 sion model might be due to its strong
 correlation with Acquisition HR. Or-
 ganizational learning theorists (e.g.,
 Argyris and Schon, 1978; Nonaka,
 1991) have pointed out for years that
 organizations - in and of them-
 selves - do not create knowledge,
 people do. That is, individuals (i.e.,
 human capital) form the foundation
 for organizational-level learning and
 knowledge accumulation (i.e., organ-
 izational capital). Thus, it seems log-
 ical that Acquisition HR enables or-
 ganizations to attract more talented
 employees who, in turn, are the driv-
 ing force behind knowledge devel-
 opment. Further, it seems reasonable
 to assume that some of this individ-
 ual-level knowledge ultimately turns
 into organizational capital in the
 form of patents, databases, routines,
 systems, etc. Hence, there is a con-
 nection between Acquisition HR and
 organizational capital that creates
 multicollinearity among these varia-
 bles in our overall performance re-
 gression model.

 As hypothesized, most of HR's per-
 formance effects were mediated by
 the intellectual capital variables. Col-
 laborative HR, however, was still a
 predictor of performance after in-
 cluding the intellectual capital meas-
 ures in our performance regression
 model. This suggests that organiza-
 tional efforts to encourage collabo-
 ration not only support the develop-
 ment of social capital, but also aid in
 other organizational activities and
 outcomes that directly or indirectly in-
 fluence organizational performance.
 For example, Adler and Kwon (2002)

 point out that social networks and col-
 laboration create value for organiza-
 tions by building cohesiveness, trust,
 and a strong organizational culture
 among employees. Thus, managers
 should take note of the widespread
 performance benefits resulting from
 the utilization of HR activities that sup-
 port collaboration.

 With regard to intellectual capital's
 mediating role in the HR-perform-
 ance linkage, this study provides both
 managers and academics with a more
 fine-grained analysis of how to target
 HR investments that build human
 and social capital, which, in turn,
 drive performance. Instead of simply
 investing in HR with the hope that a
 trickle-down effect on performance
 will occur, we now have a clearer un-
 derstanding as to what happens in the
 large black box between micro HR ac-
 tivities at the one end and macro per-
 formance measures at the other.

 limitations and Future Directions

 In interpreting the results of this
 study, several limitations should be
 kept in mind. First, although we de-
 veloped our theoretical arguments in
 terms of HR activities facilitating the
 development of intellectual capital,
 which, in turn, drives organizational
 performance, other sequences are
 certainly possible. For example, it is
 reasonable to contend that firms with
 high levels of intellectual capital
 and/or performance may possess the
 knowledge and slack resources re-
 quired to invest in HR activities
 (which is why we lagged our perform-
 ance variable two years). Future re-
 search might look at HR investments,
 intellectual capital, and performance
 over time to replicate our findings or
 determine if other sequential and re-

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 356 Hogler, Shulman and Weiler

 ciprocal relationships exist among
 these variables.

 Second, we synthesized previous
 work surrounding the various aspects
 of intellectual capital into a unified
 typology consisting of human, social,
 and organizational capital. However,
 it may also be appropriate to ap-
 proach intellectual capital from other
 levels of analysis. For example, while
 recognizing the importance of these
 three distinct aspects of intellectual
 capital, it may prove beneficial to
 move beyond the independent anal-
 ysis of each to examine the effects of
 their coexistence. Conversely, re-
 searchers (e.g., Adler and Kwon,
 2002; Kostova and Roth, 2003; Na-
 hapiet and Ghoshal, 1998) have also
 indicated that human capital, social
 capital, and organizational capital
 may have multiple dimensions. Thus,
 we. need more research to clarify the
 make-up of these variables as well as
 determine their relative independ-
 ence.

 not take into account the costs of de-
 veloping and utilizing such capital.
 Thus, future intellectual capital re-
 search should employ a host of organ-
 izational performance metrics such as
 economic value added (EVA) to gain
 a more complete understanding of
 the performance outcomes of intel-
 lectual capital.

 Fourth, the HR configurations ex-
 plained only twenty-eight percent of
 the variance in social capital, the most
 important predictor of organiza-
 tional performance. In order to bet-
 ter understand how organizations
 can facilitate the development of this
 important construct, future empirical
 studies should examine other varia-
 bles such as boundary spanning activ-
 ities, market relations, hierarchical
 relations, symbols, and values that re-
 cent theoretical discussions suggest
 might be instrumental in social capi-
 tal formation (e.g., Adler and Kwon,
 2002; Kostova and Roth, 2003). Sim-
 ilarly, it would be helpful if future re-
 search moved beyond HR activities to
 explore other variables (e.g., organi-
 zational design and R&D invest-
 ments) prescribed to build human
 and organizational capital.

 Third, we encompassed a signifi-

 cant portion of the organizational
 performance domain by using both
 equity and asset-based measures
 (ROE and ROA) to assess the rela-
 tionships between HR, intellectual
 capital, and performance. Nonethe-
 less, all performance measures have
 their limitations. Asset-based per-
 formance measures such as ROA, for
 example, tend to overstate the per-
 formance impacts of intangible assets
 such as intellectual capital because
 they understate organizations' capital
 bases. Sales-based metrics may also
 overstate the performance benefits of
 intellectual capital because they do

 In conclusion, all the recent hype
 surrounding intellectual capital ap-
 pears warranted. Intellectual capital
 does play a significant role in deter-
 mining organizational performance
 and, consequently, we need to better
 understand how to build, manage,
 and leverage it. While this study has
 focused on HR's role in developing
 intellectual capital, a host of other or-
 ganizational activities most likely play
 a very important role as well.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 357

 Appendix A

 Factor Analysis for Intellectual Capital

 Human Capital 1 2 3
 Our employees are highly skilled. .17 .66 .11
 Our employees are widely considered the best in our industry. .18 .52 -.01
 Our employees are creative and bright. .16 .63 .14
 Our employees are experts in their particular jobs and functions. .17 .65 .07
 Our employees develop new ideas and knowledge. .23 .76 .19

 Social Capital
 Our employees are skilled at collaborating with each other to diagnose and solve problems. .77 .21 -.01
 Our employees share information and learn from one another. .85 .28 .06
 Our employees interact and exchange ideas with people from different areas of the company. .81 .15 .08
 Our employees partner with customers, suppliers, alliance partners, etc., to develop solutions. .54 .33 .04
 Our employees apply knowledge from one area of the company to problems and opportunities .71 .23 .11

 that arise in another.

 Organizational Capital
 Our organization uses patents and licenses as a way to store knowledge. -.1 1 .19 .40
 Much of our organization's knowledge is contained in manuals, databases, etc. .15 -.04 .98
 Our organization's culture (stories, rituals) contains valuable ideas, ways of doing business, etc. .16 .27 .46
 Our organization embeds much of its knowledge and information in structures, systems, and .12 .11 .50

 processes.

 eigenvalue 4.96 1.77 1.54
 percent of variance 21.74% 18.31% 10.58%

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 358 Youndt and Snell

 Appendix Β

 HR Configurations

 Acquisition:
 • Our hiring process is thorough and comprehensive.
 • We screen many applicants to fill job openings.
 • We use many different recruiting sources.
 • We pay higher wages than our competitors.

 Developmental:
 • Our training and development activities are comprehensive.
 • We spend more money per employee on training than our competitors.
 • Our employees spend more hours a year training than our competitors.
 • We provide continuous developmental opportunities for our employees.
 • We offer many different types of training programs.
 • Our performance appraisal process tolerates mistakes that are non-repetitive.
 • Our employees receive a lot of developmental feedback.
 • We try to promote from within.
 • Our employees are rewarded for their knowledge/skill development.

 Egalitarian:
 • We try to eliminate and minimize status symbols.
 • Our organizational structure minimizes the number of hierarchical levels.
 • Our jobs encourage empowerment and participation.
 • We have few job classifications.
 • We have a narrow range of pay grades.

 Collaborative:
 • We select job candidates based on their interpersonal skills.
 • We select job candidates based on their ability to collaborate and work in teams.
 • Our training and development programs incorporate team building.
 • Our performance appraisal system uses multiple inputs (peers, customers, subordinates, etc.).
 • We utilize group-based incentives (gainsharing, group bonuses, etc.).
 • Our jobs involve a lot of teamwork.
 • We utilize cross-functional teams and networks.
 • We have joint employee-customer teams and networks.

 Documentation:
 • We encourage employees to write lessons learned" reports after learning experiences (employee exchange programs,

 projects, etc.).

 • Our employees help redesign work systems.
 • We encourage our employees to continuously update our company's knowledge databases.
 • We have a successful employee suggestion program.

 Information Systems:
 • Our information systems are user-friendly.
 • Our information systems are accessible to all employees.
 • Our information systems are integrated with each other.
 • We utilize groupware, email, etc.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 Configurations, Capital, and Organizational Performance 359

 References

 Adler, P. S. and S. Kwon. 2002. "Social Capital: Prospects for a New Concept."

 Academy of Management Review 27: 17-40.

 Argyris, C. and D. A. Schon. 1978. Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action

 Perspective. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

 Becker, B. E., M. A. Huselid, P. S. Pinkus, and M. F. Spratt. 1997. "HR as a Source

 of Shareholder Value: Research and Recommendations." Human Resource
 Management 36(1): 39-47.

 Becker, G. S. 1964. Human Capital New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
 Bon tis, Ν. 1996. "There's a Price on Your Head: Managing Intellectual Capital

 Strategically." Business Quarterly 60(4): 40-47.

 Boyd, B. 1990. "Corporate Linkages and Organizational Environment: A Test of

 the Resource Dependence Model." Strategic Management Journal 11: 419-430.
 Davenport, T. H. and L. Prusak. 1998. Working Knowledge: How Organizations Man-

 age What They Know. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

 Deming, W. E. 1986. Out of Crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Center for Advanced

 Engineering Study.

 Dess, G. G., R. D. Ireland, and M. A. Hitt. 1990. "Industry Effects and Strategic

 Management Research." Journal of Management 16(1): 7-27.

 Dixon, N. M. 1992. "Organizational Learning: A Review of the Literature with
 Implications for HRD Professionals." Human Resource Development Quarterly
 3(1): 29-49.

 Edvinsson, L. and M. S. Malone. 1997. Intellectual Capital: Realizing Your Company's

 True Value by Finding its Hidden Brainpower. New York, NY: Harper Business.

 Galbraith, J. R. 1973. Designing Complex Organizations. Reading, MA: Addison-

 Wesley.

 Huselid, M. A. 1995. "The Impact of Human Resource Management Practices
 on Turnover, Productivity, and Corporate Financial Performance. Academy of
 Management Journal 38: 635-672.

 James, L. R, R. G. Demaree, and G. Wolf. 1993. "R^: An Assessment of Within-

 group Interrater Agreement." Journal of Applied Psychology 78: 306-309.

 Koch, M. J. and R. G. McGrath. 1996. "Improving Labor Productivity: Human
 Resource Management Policies Do Matter." Strategic Management Journal 17:
 335-354.

 Kostova, T. and K. Roth. 2003. "Social Capital in Multinational Corporations
 and a Micro-Macro Model of its Formation." Academy of Management Review
 28: 297-317.

 MacDuffie, J. P. 1995. "Human Resource Bundles and Manufacturing Perform-
 ance: Organizational Logic and Flexible Production Systems in the World
 Auto Industry." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48(2): 197-221.

 McGill, M. E. and J. W. Slocum. 1994. The Smarter Organization: How to Build a

 Business That Learns and Adapts to Marketplace Needs. New York, NY: Wiley.

 Murray, B. and B. Gerhart. 1998. "An Empirical Investigation of a Skill-based
 Pay Program and Plant Performance Outcomes. Academy of Management Journal
 41: 68-78.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms


 360 YOUNDT AND SNELL

 Nahapiet, J. and S. Ghoshal. 1998. "Social Capital, Intellectual Capital, and the

 Organizational Advantage." Academy of Management Review 23: 242-266.

 Nonaka, I. 1994. "A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation."

 Organization Science 5 ( 1 ) : 1 4-37.

 Pfeffer, J. 1994. Competitive Advantage Through People: Unleashing the Power of the

 Workforce. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

 Schmalensee, R. 1977. "Using the Η-index of Concentration with Published

 Data." Review of Economics and Statistics 59: 186-213.

 Schultz, T. W. 1961. "Investment in Human Capital." American Economic Review

 51 (March): 1-17.

 Snell, S. A. and J. W. Dean. 1992. "Integrated Manufacturing and Human Re-
 sources Management: A Human Capital Perspective." Academy of Management
 fournal 35: 467-504.

 Spender, J. C, and R. M. Grant. 1997. "Knowledge and the Firm: Overview."

 Strategic Management Journal 17: 5-9.

 Stewart. T. A. 1997. Intellectual Caòital New York. NY: Doubledav-Currencv.
 Szulanski, G. 1996. "Exploring Internal Stickiness: Impediments to the Transfer

 of Best Practices within the Firm." Strategic Management Journal 17(S2): 27-44.

 Upton, D. A. 1995. "What really makes factories flexible?" Harvard Business Re-

 view 73(4): 74-84.

 Venkatraman, N. and V. Ramanujam. 1986. "Measurement of Business Perform-
 ance in Strategy Research: A Comparison of Approaches." Academy of Man-
 agement Review 11: 901-814.

 Walsh, J. P. and G. R. Ungson. 1991. "Organizational Memory." Academy of Man-

 agement Review 16: 57-91.

 Youndt, Μ. Α., S. A. Snell, J. W. Dean, and D. P. Lepak. 1996. "Human Resource
 Management, Manufacturing Strategy, and Firm Performance. Academy of
 Management Journal 39: 836-866.

 JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVI Number 3 Fall 2004

This content downloaded from 152.15.47.133 on Tue, 14 Feb 2017 02:51:42 UTC

All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

