Experiencing Job Burnout: The Roles of Positive and Negative Traits and States 
 
By: Kelly L. Zellarsi, Wayne A. Hochwarter, Pamela L. Perrewe, Nicole Hoffman, and Eric W. Ford 
 
Zellars, K. L., Hochwater, W. A., Hoffman, N. P., Perrewé, P. L., and Ford, E. W. (2004). Experiencing Job 

Burnout: The Roles of Positive and Negative Traits and States. Journal of Applied Social Psychology. 
Volume 34 (5), pp. 887-911. 

 
Made available courtesy of Wiley-Blackwell: http://www.wiley.com 
 
*** Note: Figures may be missing from this format of the document 
*** Note: The definitive version is available at www3.interscience.wiley.com 
 
Abstract: 
Extending recent research efforts on the effects of personality and moods at work, this study examined the 
impact of personality traits and mood states in job burnout. Specifically, the field study examined the role of 2 
personality traits and positive and negative moods (states) in burnout among nurses working at 2 hospitals. 
Results indicate that extra-version significantly predicted the diminished accomplishment component of 
burnout, and neuroticism significantly predicted the exhaustion and depersonalization components. Thus, the 
findings indicate that personality dimensions predict burnout components differentially. Further, positive moods 
mediated the relationship between extraversion and accomplishment, while negative moods partially mediated 
between neuroticism and exhaustion. Thus, moods exhibited both direct and mediating effects. Implications for 
management and suggestions for figure research are offered. 
 
Article: 
Pressures on workers are intensifying as they attempt to provide high-quality service in an environment 
characterized by rapidly advancing technologies, budgetary cutbacks, shifting priorities, and leaner staffs. Such 
pressures can be expected to contribute to job burnout. A distinguishing feature of burnout is the belief that 
resources for coping with stressful conditions are scarce, and therefore individuals must simply "make do" (Lee 
& Ashforth, 1993). These feelings of defeat, or sometimes hopelessness, may explain why researchers have 
linked burnout to a variety of mental and physical health problems (Burke & Deszca, 1986; Jackson & Schuler, 
1983; Maslach & Pines, 1977), as well as lower organizational commitment (Leiter & Maslach, 1988), 
increased voluntary turnover (Wright & Cropanzano, 1998), and impaired performance (Wright & Bonett, 
1997). 
 
Although the negative consequences of burnout have been the focus of numerous studies during the last 30 
years, the question remains as to why some workers in an organization flourish and others report feeling 
exhausted and anxious, and perceive fewer personal accomplishments. Organizational researchers have 
proposed that the causes of job burnout are found in both the individual and job environment (Beehr, 1998; 
Savicki & Cooley, 1983). However, the preponderance of research has focused on the conditions of the job 
environment (e.g., Friesen & Sarros, 1989; Savicki & Cooley, 1994; Saxton, Phillips, & Blakeney, 1991). 
Consequently, relatively little attention has been devoted to differences among individuals that may create a 
greater vulnerability or resistance to job burnout. 
 
The purpose of this study is to refocus some attention on the individual by examining the impact of personality 
and mood differences on burnout. Although there has been a surge of recent research focusing on traits and 
states in the organizational literature (e.g., Chen, Gully, Whiteman, & Kilcullen, 2000; Hurtz & Donovan, 
2000), the effects of moods on burnout have not been studied previously, but appear to be an important area in 
need of empirical examination. In the following sections, we discuss the underlying literature, offer hypotheses 
and results, and discuss the implications. First, however, we discuss the dimensionality of job burnout. Given 
the importance of job burnout to organizational scientists, as well as practicing professionals concerned with 


reducing the effects of burnout, the dimensionality of burnout is an important consideration in substantive 
research. 
 
The Three Dimensions of Job Burnout 
Currently, most researchers (Lee & Ashforth, 1993; Leiter, 1990) support the use of a three-factor 
conceptualization of the burnout construct. The first component of burnout, emotional exhaustion, is 
characterized by high frustration, irritability, low energy, and depleted emotional resources (Cordes & 
Doughtery, 1993; Jackson, Turner, & Brief, 1987; Koeske & Koeske, 1989; Maslach & Jackson, 1981). The 
second component of burnout, depersonalization, encompasses a negative, dehumanizing approach (Jackson et 
al., 1987) to patients or clients, treating them like objects or numbers. Depersonalization exhibits itself through 
healthcare workers' extensive use of jargon (Maslach & Pines, 1977), an over-reliance on bureaucratic rules 
(Daley, 1979), and derogatory language in referring to clients (Cordes & Doughtery, 1993). Finally, diminished 
personal accomplishment refers to feelings of decreased or insufficient progress toward job goals, and a sense a 
decline in personal job competency (Leiter & Maslach, 1988), leading to a negative self-characterization. 
Optimistic expectations for the future are replaced by a sense of futility. 
 
Job burnout studies have predominantly focused on workplace conditions (e.g., job roles, supervisor behaviors, 
types of patients) as antecedents to burnout (for a review, see Cordes & Doughtery, 1993). Despite calls for 
more investigation into individual differences that may contribute to burnout (e.g., Nagy & Davis, 1985; 
Savicki & Cooley, 1983), a review of the burnout literature indicates that the role of personality differences has 
been ignored to a great extent. Nevertheless, not all workers in the same environment report burnout, and 
researchers continue to offer theoretical frameworks (House, Shane, & Herold, 1996), conceptual reviews of the 
literature (Judge, 1992), and empirical evidence suggesting the importance of individual differences on work 
outcomes (e.g., George, 1989; Weiss & Adler, 1984; Weiss & Cropanzano, 1996). Therefore, further 
examination of the role of individual differences in reported burnout appears to be warranted. In this study, we 
examine two individual differences: affective personality and moods. 
 
The Role of Personality in Job Burnout 
The past two decades of personality research has focused on the Big Five personality dimensions (Barrick & 
Mount, 1991; Hurtz & Donovan, 2000), as well as positive affectivity and negative affectivity (Cooper, 2000; 
Judge, Erez, & Thoresen, 2000; Payne, 2000; Spector, Zapf, Chen, & Frese, 2000; Wright & Staw, 1999). It is 
not surprising that a significant number of studies in stress and coping have focused on the affective traits of 
neuroticism and extraversion, given their relationship with negative emotionality and positive emotionality, 
respectively (Watson, David, & Suls, 1999). Personality may influence psychological well-being through its 
impact on how individuals react to a stressful situation; that is, through ineffective coping when under stress 
(Bolger & Schilling, 1991). Emotional aspects of extraversion and neuroticism can motivate individuals' 
behaviors, including behaviors related to burnout (Cordes & Doughtery, 1993; Zellars, Perrewe, & Hochwarter, 
2000). 
 
Extraversion 
Extraversion includes such traits as talkativeness, social poise, assertiveness, and venturesomeness (Block, 
1961; Botwin & Buss, 1989; Watson & Clark, 1997). While individuals low in extraversion appear quiet or 
reserved, those high in extraversion are cheerful and energetic (John, 1990), possibly because they engage in 
more activities to overcome stressful conditions. According to Peterson (2000), the optimism frequently 
exhibited by extraverts "leads to desirable outcomes because it predisposes specific actions that are adaptive in 
concrete situations" (p. 49). The ability to adapt may explain in part the positive correlation between optimism 
and burnout among working college students (Chang, Rand, & Strunk, 2000). One study (Iverson, Olekalns, & 
Erwin, 1998) reported that workers who were higher in positive affectivity (a primary component of 
extraversion) experienced less burnout. 
 
 
 


Neuroticism 
Neuroticism reflects feelings of distress and nervousness (George, 1989) and underlies the chronic emotional 
experiences of guilt and frustration (McCrae, 1991). In general, individuals higher in neuroticism possess more 
negative views of themselves and of others (Watson & Clark, 1984). One explanation for the effects of 
neuroticism is that it may increase one's susceptibility or exposure to stimuli that generate negative emotions 
(Bolger & Schilling, 1991; Larsen, 1992). 
 
In addition to the personality differences that employees exhibit, they also exhibit different moods on the job. 
George and her colleagues (George, 1989, 1991; George & Brief, 1992; George & Jones, 1996) reported 
significant findings demonstrating that positive and negative moods of employees influence their feelings about 
work and their behaviors on the job. Weiss and Croparizano's (1996) review of the mood literature concluded 
that the effects of moods on work outcomes are consistent, pronounced, and complex. 
 
Moods at Work 
Moods at work refer to pervasive generalized affective states encountered on the job (George & Brief, 1992). 
As such, moods have been shown to predict one's impression of a situation and one's own actions (Clark & Isen, 
1982). Studies have demonstrated that positive moods encourage helping behaviors (for a review, see George, 
1991; George & Brief, 1992) and higher quality service (George & Bettenhausen, 1990), while negative affect 
is associated with increased absenteeism and turnover (Pelled & Xin, 1999). Research also has suggested that 
individuals in positive mood states are more optimistic (Fiske & Taylor, 1991), tend to exhibit a greater degree 
of information processing, integrate divergent stimuli, produce more innovative and flexible solutions to 
problems (Isen & Daubman, 1984; Isen, Daubman, & Nowicki, 1987; Isen, Johnson, Mertz, & Robinson, 1985), 
and tend to perceive a higher probability of success (Brown, 1984). Their greater ability to produce more 
creative solutions may explain why some researchers (Wright & Mischel, 1982) have reported that individuals 
experiencing more positive moods are, in fact, more successful. Thus, they are likely to have a greater sense of 
accomplishment. 
 
Alternatively, negative moods are associated with increased self-focused attention (Pyszczynski, Hamilton, 
Herring, & Greenberg, 1989). Consequently, an individual experiencing frequent negative moods may blame 
himself or herself and perceive fewer personal accomplishments when he or she fails to achieve expected 
successful outcomes (e.g., patients with less than full recoveries). Distancing oneself from a perceived source of 
stress is one type of coping used by employees (Leiter, 1991). For example, attempting to cope with negative 
moods, a nurse may spend less time with a patient, thus minimizing personal contact and making it more 
difficult to see the person behind the illness. The patient becomes just another obstacle to avoid for an employee 
experiencing negative moods on the job. Thus, more frequent negative moods are expected to contribute to 
tendencies to depersonalize patients. 
 
Personality, Moods, and Burnout 
The distinction between neuroticism and extraversion as a trait, and positive and negative affect as a state (i.e., a 
mood), is critical in attempting to examine the roles of personality and moods in burnout. Positive affectivity 
and negative affectivity (traits) represent stable personality differences in affect levels and have been discussed 
previously as part of the extraversion and neuroticism dimensions. Unlike affective personality differences, 
positive affect and negative affect as states capture how an individual feels at a given point in time (Watson & 
Pennebaker, 1989) or in a specific situation. Thus, moods fluctuate over time. However, while moods are less 
permanent than are affective personality traits, "moods are not normally fleeting experiences, but typically have 
some duration" (Fiske & Taylor, 1991, p. 411). Further, while a single event may trigger a mood, once 
established, that mood provides the context for other unrelated events, interactions, and experiences. 
 
Previous research (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1980, 1984; Emmons & Diener, 1985) has reported a consistent 
relationship between personality and moods. Further, some have suggested that it is the affective nature of some 
personality characteristics that influence moods at work, which in turn influence job satisfaction and other work 
behaviors (Weiss, Nicholas, & Daus, 1993). In the social psychology literature, it is generally accepted that at 


any given time, individuals higher in neuroticism are more likely to be in an unpleasant mood state than are 
individuals lower in neuroticism. Conversely, individuals high in trait positive affectivity (a component of 
extraversion) tend to have an overall sense of well-being, tend to see themselves as pleasurably engaged in 
activities, and tend to experience positive emotional states (Tellegen, 1985). Hence, we expect to find a positive 
association between extraversion and positive moods, and between neuroticism and negative moods. Such a 
prediction is consistent with the significant Pearson correlations between dispositional and state measures of the 
Positive Affectivity and Negative Affectivity Scales (PANAS) reported by Wright and Staw (1999), and a mood 
induction study conducted by Gomez, Cooper, and Gomez (2000). 
 
Researchers have proposed that personality may influence behavior through its influence on internal states (i.e., 
mood; George, 1991; Nesselroade, 1988), possibly because some personality traits increase one's emotional 
susceptibility or responsiveness to environmental stimuli (Larsen & Ketelaar, 1991; McCrae & Costa, 1991; 
Watson & Clark, 1992). Several studies have reported that individuals higher in neuroticism tend to react more 
negatively and experience more stress to daily problems (e.g., interpersonal conflicts; Bolger & Schilling, 1991; 
Bolger & Zuckerman, 1995; Suls, Martin, & David, 1998). Bolger and Schilling reported that among 339 adults 
who kept diaries about daily distress, individuals high in neuroticism, compared to individuals low in 
neuroticism, were more likely to feel distress from a stressful situation. According to Bolger and Schilling, 
"Reactivity to stressors accounted for twice as much of the distress difference as exposure to stressors" (p. 355). 
Suls et al. also reported that individuals higher in neuroticism appeared to exhibit a heightened sensitivity to 
negative events and were more distressed by daily problems. Earlier, Parkes (1990) reported that teachers 
higher in negative affectivity showed greater reactivity to work demands. Overall, there appears to be ample 
evidence indicating that although certain job conditions in a job environment (e.g., patients who have poor 
outcomes) may generate distress in most nurses, those higher in neuroticism will likely respond more negatively 
given their heightened responsiveness to aversive stimuli. 
 
It may be that the negative outcomes reported by individuals higher in neuroticism are partially explained by 
their tendencies to experience more frequent negative moods. Conversely, George (1989, 1991) reported that 
trait positive affectivity predicted positive mood states, which in turn predicted levels of absenteeism and 
prosocial behavior. It seems reasonable, therefore, to expect that nurses higher in extraversion report more 
positive outcomes, in part, because they experience more positive moods. 
 
Hypothesis 1. Positive moods will mediate the relationship between extraversion and emotional exhaustion, 
depersonalization, and diminished personal accomplishment. 
 
Hypothesis 2. Negative moods will mediate the relationship between neuroticism and emotional exhaustion, 
depersonalization, and diminished personal accomplishment. 
 
This study extends the findings reported by Wright and Staw (1999) by simultaneously examining the 
relationship between personality and moods on burnout. Further, in order to take a conservative approach, we 
statistically controlled for variables previously demonstrating relationships with burnout: age (Jayaratne, Himle, 
& Chess, 1991; Maslach & Jackson, 1981, 1985) and hierarchical position (e.g., Friesen & Sarros, 1989). We 
also controlled for organization to account for any unknown differences in the two hospital settings used in our 
study. Finally, research (e.g., George, 1989, 1991) has indicated that mood states are influenced by personality 
traits as well as situational factors (e.g., role stressors), and reviews of the burnout literature (Cordes & 
Doughtery, 1993; Perlman & Hartman, 1982) have indicated that higher levels of role stressors in a job 
environment contribute to greater levels of burnout among employees. Therefore, we measured and statistically 
controlled for three typical job stressors: role ambiguity, quantitative role overload, and role conflict. 
 
Method 
Sample and Data Collection 
The data for this study were drawn from nurses in two hospitals located in the Southeast. The two hospitals, 
approximately 30 miles (48.28 km) apart, were both acute care facilities offering a wide variety of inpatient and 


outpatient services. The Directors of Nursing provided in-house mailing labels for nursing employees based on 
their employee database information. A cover letter and anonymous questionnaires were sorted by hospital 
department and were delivered to the nurses via hospital mail. Respondents were given a stamped envelope and 
were requested to mail their completed questionnaires directly to the first author. A total of 296 (153 and 143, 
for the two hospitals, respectively) voluntary questionnaires were returned for a 23% response rate (21% and 
33% response rates, respectively). 
 
During follow-up interviews, the Directors of Nursing at both hospitals indicated that the demographics of the 
respondents reflected those of the entire nursing staff. The Directors also noted that it was impossible to 
determine if all nurses received the questionnaires, since hospital mail delivery relies on volunteers within the 
departments to sort the mail on a timely basis. It was known, however, that some questionnaires were 
undeliverable as a result of turnover or interdepartmental staffing changes. The exact number of such 
questionnaires is not known since hospital personnel simply disposed of questionnaires without counting them; 
thus, the response rate is likely higher than that reported here. 
 
Measures 
Burnout. Levels of burnout were measured with the Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI; Maslach & Jackson, 
1986). The MBI measures the three burnout dimensions: emotional exhaustion (9 items; a = .92), 
depersonalization (5 items; a = .86), and diminished personal accomplishment (8 items; a = .88). Higher scores 
indicate greater emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and less personal accomplishment (i.e., greater 
diminished personal accomplishment). 
 
Neuroticism and extraversion. The two personality dimensions were measured by the NEO Five-Factor 
Inventory (NEO-FFI), which was developed by Costa and McCrae (1992). The instrument contains 12 items for 
each dimension. Respondents use a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree)to 5 (strongly agree) to 
indicate the degree to which the item describes them. We reverse coded 4 items for neuroticism and 
extraversion. Higher scores indicate a greater degree of each dimension. Cronbach's alpha coefficients were .85 
and .80 for neuroticism and extraversion, respectively. 
 
Moods on the job. Respondents' moods (states) on the job were measured using the Job Affect Scale (JAS; 
Brief, Butcher, George, Robinson, & Webster, 1988), which is based on an integrative analysis of self-reported 
moods by Watson and Tellegen (1985). The JAS is composed of 10 markers of positive (e.g., enthusiastic) and 
negative (e.g., distressed) mood. Following Burke and colleagues' (Burke, Brief, George, Roberson, & Webster, 
1989) recommendation, and consistent with George (1991), six mood states were summed to determine a 
positive mood score (a = .88) and six states were summed to determine a negative mood score (a = .91). Using 
the design of previous research (George, 1989, 1991; George & Bettenhausen, 1990), respondents were asked to 
indicate how they felt at work during the past week using a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (very slightly or not at 
all) to 5 (very much). Higher scores indicate more frequent positive or negative moods. 
 
Control Variables 
Age. Respondents were provided a space to indicate their age. 
 
Position. The nurses were given a space to indicate their current position within the hospital. Based on 
information provided by the Directors of Nursing, the nurses were given five options: nursing manager/leader 
(1), clinical nurse specialist (2), nurse educator (3), staff nurse (4), or other nursing (5). 
 
Organization. Discussions with the Directors of Nursing and a t test did not reveal any significant differences 
in the demographic data of the nurses or the working conditions at the two hospitals. However, a t test found 
that the hospitals differed significantly in the number of nurses in five hierarchical positions. For the regression 
analyses, the hospitals were coded 1 and 2. 
 


Role stressors in the work environment. Role ambiguity and conflict were measured using the six-item (cc = 
.81) and eight-item (a = .86) scales, respectively, as developed by Rizzo, House, and Lirtzman (1970). A sample 
item measuring role ambiguity is, "I know exactly what is expected of me" (reverse scored). A sample item for 
role conflict is, "I receive incompatible requests from two or more people." Higher scores indicate that the 
respondent perceives greater ambiguity or conflict. Quantitative overload was measured using a 10-item (cc = 
.91) adapted version of the quantitative workload scale developed by Caplan (1971). The items were adapted to 
reflect nursing jobs and to reflect the respondent's evaluation of the amount of work encountered as too much or 
unrealistic. Higher scores indicate that the respondent perceives greater quantitative over-load. 
 
Results 
Because of missing observations, the sample size for the variables ranged from 291 to 296 respondents. Table 1 
presents the means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations of all variables. The means for the burnout 
dimensions were consistent with prior research with nurses (e.g., Maslach, Jackson, & Leiter, 1996; Robinson et 
al., 1991; Zellars, Perrewe, & Hochwarter, 1999; Zohar, 1997). An analysis of the individual burnout scores 
indicates that most of the nurses reported average burnout, but our sample also included a significant percentage 
reporting low burnout and high burnout. To test our hypothesis for each dimension of burnout, we conducted 
hierarchical multiple regression (i.e., emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, diminished personal 
accomplishment), and the control variables (i.e., age, position, organization, role ambiguity, role conflict, 
quantitative role overload) were entered in Step 1. The two personality dimensions (i.e., neuroticism and 
extraversion) were entered in Step 2; followed by moods (positive and negative), which were entered in Step 3. 
 
Consistent with previous research (Iverson et al., 1998; Zellars et al., 2000), personality dimensions 
significantly predicted burnout. The models for all three dimensions of burnout were significant: emotional 
exhaustion (EE; Table 2), F(8, 281) = 37.22, p < .01; depersonalization (DP; Table 3), F(8, 281) = 16.15, p < 
.01; and diminished personal accomplishment (DPA; Table 4), F(8, 281) = 10.87, p < .01. After statistically 
controlling for the variance explained by the demo-graphics and three role stressors, the personality variables, 
entered in Step 2, explained an additional 14% (p < .01), 9% (p < .01), and 12% (p < .01) of the variance in EE, 
DP, and DPA, respectively. 
 
The effects of personality varied across the dimensions. Neuroticism positively predicted EE (p < .01) and DP 
(p < .01), but extraversion failed to significantly predict either EE or DP. Extraversion negatively predicted 
DPA (p < .01), but neuroticism was not a significant predictor of DPA. In sum, nurses higher in neuroticism 
reported greater exhaustion and depersonalization, and nurses higher in extraversion reported less DPA; that is, 
they were able to perceive greater personal accomplishments in their jobs. 
 
Tables 2, 3, and 4 also show that positive and negative moods, entered in Step 3, explained an additional 6% (p 
< .01) and 5% (p < .01) of EE and DPA, respectively. The additional explained variance for depersonalization 
was not significant. The effects of moods on EE and DPA varied. Negative mood positively predicted 
exhaustion, but positive mood did not. Positive mood negatively predicted DPA (p < .01), but negative mood 
was not significant. In summary, negative mood significantly predicted one component of burnout, exhaustion 
(Table 2); and positive mood significantly predicted one component of burnout, diminished personal 
accomplishment (Table 4). Nurses experiencing more negative mood reported greater emotional exhaustion, 
and nurses experiencing more positive mood reported greater personal accomplishment. Mood had no 
significant effect on DP. 
 


We predicted that positive mood would mediate the relationship between extraversion and burnout (Hypothesis 
1) and that negative mood would mediate the relationship between neuroticism and burnout (Hypothesis 2). 
Three conditions (Baron & Kenny, 1986) are necessary in order to test for this mediating relationship. First, the 
independent variable (extraversion or neuroticism, respectively) must predict the mediator (positive or negative 
mood, respectively). Second, the independent variable must predict burnout (the dependent variable). Finally, 
mood must predict burnout. 
 

 

 


 

Hierarchical regression analysis was used to test the hypotheses. To deter-mine effects on mood, the 
demographic variables and the three environmental role stressors were entered in Step 1 as control variables, 
followed by extra-version and neuroticism in Step 2. The results for positive mood are shown in Table 5 and for 
negative mood in Table 6. The overall model for positive mood was significant, F(8, 281) = 18.34, p < .01, and 
explained 34% of the variance in positive mood. After controlling for demographics and role stressors, 
extraversion positively predicted positive mood (p < .01). The overall model for negative mood was significant, 
F(8, 281) = 16.80, p < .01, and explained 32% of the variance in negative mood. After controlling for 
demographics and role stressors, neuroticism positively predicted negative mood (p < .01). 
 
As reported earlier, extraversion and positive mood significantly predicted the DPA component of burnout 
(Table 4, Steps 2 and 3, respectively). Therefore, conditions necessary to test Hypothesis 1 were present for the 
DPA component of burnout. If positive moods mediate between extraversion and DPA, the effect of 
extraversion on DPA will be less (Baron & Kenny, 1986) when moods are entered into the model (i.e., 
examining the coefficients for extraversion in Steps 2 and 3 of Table 4). The results reported in Table 4 indicate 
that the significant effect of extraversion on DPA decreased to a nonsignificant effect when the mood variables 
were entered into the model. Therefore, the results indicate that positive mood fully mediated the relationship 
between extraversion and DPA, providing some support for Hypothesis I. 
 
As indicated, neuroticism did significantly predict negative moods (Table 6) and two components of burnout: 
EE (Table 2, Step 2) and DP (Table 3, Step 2). Negative moods predicted only one component of burnout: EE 
(Table 2, Step 3). (Recall that when moods were entered into the model for DP, the step was not significant.) 
Therefore, the necessary conditions for testing a mediating relationship between neuroticism and negative 
moods and EE were present. If positive moods partially mediated between neuroticism and EE, the effect of 


neuroticism on EE would be less but would remain statistically significant (Baron & Kenny, 1986) when moods 
were entered into the model. The results reported in Table 2 indicate that the significant effect of neuroticism on 
EE decreased from .37 to .23 when moods were entered into the model. Therefore, the results indicate that 
negative moods partially mediated between neuroticism and EE, providing some support for Hypothesis 2. 
 
Discussion 
Burnout continues to plague some workers and their organizations. Historically, most of the job burnout 
research has focused on stressors in the job environment, has discounted the impact of an individual's 
personality, and has not yet examined the impact of moods. Our findings suggest that the individual remains an 
important factor in the burnout process and should not be overlooked. We found that personality differences did 
explain additional variance in reported levels of job burnout after statistically controlling for the variance 
explained by three common job stressors, demographics, and organization. We also found that moods 
significantly influenced reported burnout levels. Our approach in testing the impact of moods was conservative 
in that we statistically controlled for demo-graphics, organization, individual personality, and role stressors, and 
still found that moods explained additional variance in burnout. Our findings are consistent with recent research 
(Rhoades, Arnold, & Jay, 2001) that indicated both affective traits and states of employees influenced the 
conflict-management process. 

 

 


 

 


Personality 
Nurses higher in extraversion perceived more personal accomplishments in their jobs, possibly because their 
inherent sociability provides them with more opportunities to work with others who reinforce their personal 
accomplishments through feedback or support. Finding that nurses higher in neuroticism experienced greater 
emotional exhaustion and depersonalization may reflect the ineffective coping mechanisms that these 
individuals are predisposed to use. Neuroticism has been linked to avoidant coping, self-blame, and wishful 
thinking, which, in turn, are associated with increased stress (Bolger, 1990; McCrae & Costa, 1986). However, 
our finding also discloses an opportunity for research that explores the means by which supervisors and 
coworkers can aid the individual in seeing more positive or rewarding aspects of their jobs. Possibilities include 
personal counseling, peer mentoring, or stress-management programs that emphasize styles of coping. 

 

 

Although individuals higher in neuroticism are predisposed to perceive their situation more negatively than 
individuals lower in neuroticism, research (Hochwarter, Zellars, Perrewe, & Harrison, 1999) has indicated that 
positive improvements in some job conditions may improve job satisfaction for high negative affectivity 
employees. Similar improvements in job conditions for nurses may attenuate burnout, especially among nurses 
higher in neuroticism. Overall, the results of this study suggest that researchers should not abandon the 
examination of individual characteristics in studies of experienced burnout. 
 
Moods 
The most important contribution of this study is the examination of the influence of moods on burnout. This 
study expands the burnout literature by testing and finding that positive moods explain additional variance in a 
nurse's perceptions of personal accomplishments after controlling for demographics, job role stressors, and 
personality differences. Similarly, negative moods were found to explain additional variance in reported levels 
of exhaustion among nurses. Research (Salovey & Birnbaum, 1989) has indicated that individuals experiencing 
negative emotions (e.g., sadness) are less confident that they can take the necessary steps to alleviate a personal 


illness. The effects of negative moods on exhaustion found in this study may reflect a similar belief by the 
nurses experiencing negative moods on the job. Such moods may contribute to employees' bleak outlooks for 
the future and for their own abilities to cope with the job, improve their job situations, or fill patients' needs. 
Alternatively, depressed subjects in a laboratory study have been found to perceive less social support available 
to them (Cohen, Towbes, & Flocco, 1988). The negative moods of the nurses may reflect a similar belief that 
the availability of social support at work is lacking. If true, relying on a network of support may weaken 
negative moods and reduce exhaustion levels. Further research is needed in the relationship of support to moods 
and how changing sources of support impacts moods on the job. 
 
We found that moods mediate between personality characteristics and components of burnout; that is, moods 
partially explain which personality characteristics can impact the experience of burnout. The finding that a 
higher level of exhaustion for nurses high in neuroticism was partially explained by the more negative moods 
that they experience is an important contribution to this area of research. Further, it is consistent with the 
mediating role of moods reported by Rhoades et al. (2001) in examining conflict resolution by employees.  
Similarly, the ability of nurses higher in extraversion to perceive more job accomplishments is partially 
explained by the more frequent positive moods that they experience. Taking steps to improve the conditions 
surrounding some jobs may reduce levels of exhaustion among nurses high in neuroticism since moods are 
partially the result of situational conditions. Organizations that attempt to improve job conditions (e.g., 
establishing clear policies and procedures to reduce ambiguity) or help employees see positive aspects of their 
jobs (e.g., positive feedback, regarding accomplishments and past successes) may induce more positive moods 
(Forgas, 1991, 1998; Smith & Lazarus, 1990) and reduce exhaustion levels. A broad-based, management-
supported approach may be needed. Some evidence indicates that a combination of relaxation, stress 
management, cognitive coaching, and exercise techniques is the best strategy to alter negative moods (Thayer, 
Newman, & McClain, 1994). Further research is needed to determine the extent to which strengthening positive 
moods or weakening negative moods can bolster the natural buffer against burnout apparently held by 
extraverts and reduce the tendencies of high-neuroticism individuals to perceive and react to stimuli in their 
environments more negatively. 
 
Finally, this study contributes to the understanding of the dimensionality of the burnout construct. Prior research 
has argued that the dimensions of burnout should be examined as distinct constructs (Lee & Ashforth, 1993). 
The results of this study not only support this position, but also suggest that these components may have 
different antecedents. In general, extraversion and positive moods exhibited the strongest effect on diminished 
personal accomplishment, and neuroticism and negative moods exhibited the strongest effect on emotional 
exhaustion and depersonalization. Extraversion includes feelings of optimism and positive well-being. Perhaps 
individuals higher in extraversion are more able to see their achievements and competencies (i.e., personal 
accomplishment) than are those who are high on neuroticism. 
 
The null findings for extraversion on two of the burnout dimensions are more puzzling. Perhaps feelings of 
optimism and personal well-being do not have significant effects on fatigue and callousness toward others (i.e., 
exhaustion and depersonalization). For example, an employee could be optimistic and enjoy interactions with 
people (i.e., high extraversion), yet still approach his or her patients as individuals and feel exhausted as a result 
of the workload. In other words, such employees are better able to recognize job successes, yet feel (or not feel) 
emotionally exhausted and depersonalized from others. 
 
Individuals high in neuroticism think and act in ways that encourage negative emotional experiences across 
time and situations (George, 1992). Of the three components, perhaps emotional exhaustion and 
depersonalization represent constructs more emotion laden, or alternatively, the absence of emotion within the 
burnout phenomenon. Given this, it is not surprising that neuroticism affects these more emotional components. 
Because the current body of burnout research lacks studies in this area, we recognize the speculative nature of 
any explanation for the null findings and encourage additional research on the emotional aspects of the 
components. 
 


Limitations and Future Research 
Perhaps the most serious limitation of the present study is the reliance on cross-sectional, perceptual measures. 
Self-report data have the potential to inflate observed relationships spuriously, introducing common method 
variance as an alternative explanation for the findings. Common method variance is a serious concern when 
there appears to be a generalized and pervasive influence operating in a systematic fashion to inflate the 
associations among the variables (James, Gent, Hater, & Corey, 1979). Examining the correlation matrix in 
Table 1, the range of correlations is .01 to .59 and, although many of the correlations are significant, none are 
uncharacteristically high. 
 
The low response rate was disappointing and clearly could be improved upon in future research. Discussions 
with the Directors of Nursing following the data collection revealed that the rates were typical of previous 
questionnaire studies conducted with the nurses by outside researchers. There was no evidence of a response 
bias based on demographics; however, we do recognize that it is a possibility. 
 
The cross-sectional nature of this research also presents another problem. Specifically, it would be helpful to 
know the extent to which moods varied over time and whether burnout levels were rising or falling. 
Longitudinal research is needed to answer these important questions. Another limitation is that the direction of 
causality cannot be unambiguously determined. Although theory guided the hypotheses about causal 
relationships, alternative causal flows cannot be ruled out. For example, although it was hypothesized that 
negative moods contribute to exhaustion, it may be that, over time, higher levels of exhaustion contribute to 
negative moods or that some type of reciprocal relationship is present. As suggested by Wright and Staw 
(1999), researchers need to give further attention to the time frame of mood measures when used in conjunction 
with other dependent variables with different time references. 
 
Research examining additional relationships among moods and other variables important to burnout is also 
needed. For example, research (Fenlason, Johnson, & Beehr, 1997) has suggested that types of social support 
have differential effectiveness in reducing strains, and Zunz (1998) argued that protective factors (e.g., social 
support) might improve one's resiliency to burnout. It could be that positive and negative moods encourage the 
use of different types of support, attenuating or exacerbating burnout. These limitations notwithstanding, the 
results of the study indicate that future research in job burnout can be improved by putting the individual back 
into the burnout process. 
 
References 
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator—mediator variable distinction in social psychological 
research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 
1173-1182. Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The Big Five personality dimensions and job performance: 
A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1-26.  
Beehr, T. A. (1998). Research on occupational stress: An unfinished enterprise. Personnel Psychology, 51, 835-
844. 
Block, J. (1961). The Q-sort method in personality assessment and psychiatric research. Springfield, IL: 
Charles C. Thomas. 
Bolger, N. (1990). Coping as a personality process: A prospective study. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 59, 525-537. 
Bolger, N., & Schilling, E. A. (1991). Personality and problems of every day life: The role of neuroticism in 
exposure and reactivity to daily stressors. Journal of Personality, 59, 355-386. 
Bolger, N., & Zuckerman, A. (1995). A framework for studying personality in the stress process. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 890-902. 
Botwin, M. D., & Buss, D. M. (1989). Structure of act-report data: Is the five-factor model of personality 
recaptured? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 988-1001. 
Brief, A. P., Butcher, A. H., George, J. M., Robinson, B., & Webster, J. (1988). Should negative affectivity 
remain an unmeasured variable in the study of job stress? Journal of Applied Psychology, 73, 193-198. 


Brown, J. (1984). Effects of induced mood on causal attributions for success and failure. Motivation and 
Emotion, 8, 343-353. 
Burke, R. J., Brief, A. P., George, J. M., Roberson, L., & Webster, J. (1989). Measuring affect at work: 
Confirmatory analyses of competing mood structures with conceptual linkage to cortical regulatory systems. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 1091-1102. 
Burke, R. J., & Deszca, G. (1986). Correlates of psychological burnout among police officers. Human 
Relations, 39, 487-502. 
Caplan, R. D. (1971). Organizational stress and individual strain: A social psychological study of risk factors in 
coronary heart disease among administrators, engineers, and scientists (University Microfilms No. 72-14822). 
Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan. 
Chang, E. C., Rand, K. L., & Strunk, D. R. (2000). Optimism and risk for job burnout among working college 
students: Stress as a mediator. Personality and Individual Differences, 29, 255-263. 
Chen, G., Gully, S. M., Whiteman, J., & Kilcullen, R. N. (2000). Examination of relationships among trait-like 
individual differences, state-like individual differences, and learning performance. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 85, 835-847. 
Clark, M. S., & Isen, A. M. (1982). Toward understanding the relationship between feeling states and social 
behavior. In A. H. Hastorf & A. M. Isen (Eds.), Cognitive social psychology (pp. 73-108). New York, NY: 
Elsevier. 
Cohen, L. J., Towbes, L. C., & Flocco, R. (1988). Effects of induced mood on self-reported life events and 
perceived and received social support. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 669-674. 
Cooper, C. L. (2000). Introduction: A discussion about the role of negative affectivity in job stress research. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 77-78. 
Cordes, C. L., & Doughtery, T. W. (1993). A review and an integration of research in job burnout. Academy of 
Management Review, 18, 621-656. 
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. (1980). Influence of extraversion and neuroticism on subjective well-being: 
Happy and unhappy people. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 668-678. 
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1984). Personality as a lifelong determinant of well-being. In C. Malatesta & 
C. Izard (Eds.), Affective processes in adult development and aging (pp. 141-157). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). The NEO Personality Inventory manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological 
Assessment Resources. 
Daley, M. R. (1979, September). Burnout: Smoldering problems in protective services. Social Work, 374-379. 
Emmons, R. A., & Diener, E. (1985). Personality correlates of subjective well-being. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 11, 89-97. 
Fenlason, K. J., Johnson, J. W., & Beehr, T. A. (1997, April). Social support, stressors, and strains: Support for 
a cognitive model of job stress. Paper presented at the 12th annual conference of the Society for Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, St. Louis, Missouri. 
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.  
Forgas, J. P. (1991). Mood effects on partner choice: Role of affect in social decisions. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 61, 708-720. 
Forgas, J. P. (1998). On feeling good and getting your way: Mood effects on negotiator cognition and 
bargaining strategies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 565-577. 
Friesen, D., & Sarros, J. C. (1989). Sources of burnout among educators. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 
10, 179-188. 
George, J. (1989). Mood and absence. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 317-324. George, J. (1991). State or 
trait: Effects of positive mood on prosocial behaviors at work. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76, 299-307. 
George, J. (1992). The role of personality in organizational life: Issues and evidence. Journal of Management, 
18, 185-213. 
George, J. M., & Bettenhausen, K. (1990). Understanding prosocial behavior, sales performance, and turnover: 
A group level of analysis in a service con-text. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 698-709. 
George, J., & Brief, A. P. (1992). Feeling good—doing good: A conceptual analysis of the mood at work–
organizational spontaneity relationship. Psychological Bulletin, 11, 310-329. 


George, J., & Jones, G. R. (1996). The experience of work and turnover intentions: Interactive effects of value 
attainment, job satisfaction, and positive mood. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 318-325. 
Gomez, R., Cooper, A., & Gomez, A. (2000). Susceptibility to positive and negative moods states: Test of 
Eysenck's, Gray's, and Newman's theories. Personality and Individual Differences, 29, 351-365. 
Hochwarter, W. A., Zellars, K. L., Perrewe, P. L., & Harrison, A. W. (1999). The interactive role of negative 
affectivity and job characteristics: Are high-NA employees destined to be unhappy at work? Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology, 29, 2203-2218. 
House, J. S., Shane, S. A., & Herold, D. M. (1996). Rumors of the death of dispositional research are vastly 
exaggerated. Academy of Management Review, 21, 203-224. 
Hurtz, G. M., & Donovan, J. J. (2000). Personality and job performance: The Big Five revisited. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 85, 869-879. 
Isen, A. M., & Daubman, K. A. (1984). The influence of affect on categorization. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 47, 1206-1217. 
Isen, A. M., Daubman, K. A., & Nowicki, G. P. (1987). Positive affect facilitates creative problem solving. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 1122-1131. 
Isen, A. M., Johnson, M. S., Mertz, E., & Robinson, G. F. (1985). The influence of positive affect on the 
usualness of word associations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1413-1426. 
Iverson, R. D., Olekalns, M., & Erwin, P. J. (1998). Affectivity, organizational stressors, and absenteeism: A 
causal model of burnout and its consequences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 52, 1-23. 
Jackson, S. E., & Schuler, R. S. (1983). Preventing employee burnout. Personnel, 60, 58-68. 
Jackson, S. E., Turner, J. A., & Brief, A. P. (1987). Correlates of burnout among public service lawyers. 
Journal of Occupational Behavior, 8, 339-349. 
James, L. R., Gent, M. J., Hatter, J. J., & Corey, K. E. (1979). Correlates of psychological influence: An 
illustration of the psychological climate approach to work environment perceptions. Personnel Psychology, 32, 
563-588. 
Jayaratne, S., Himle, D. P., & Chess, W. A. (1991). Job satisfaction and burnout: Is there a difference? Journal 
of Applied Social Sciences, /5, 245-262. 
John, O. P. (1990). The Big Five factor taxonomy: Dimensions of personality in the natural language and in 
questionnaires. In L. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of personality theory and research (pp. 66-100). New York, NY: 
Guilford. 
Judge, T. A. (1992). The dispositional perspective in human resources research. Research in Personnel and 
Human Resources Management, /0, 31-72. 
Judge, T. A., Erez, A., & Thoresen, C. J. (2000). Why negative affectivity (and self-deception) should be 
included in job stress research: Bathing the baby with the bath water. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 
101-112. 
Koeske, G. F., & Koeske, R. D. (1989). Construct validity of the Maslach Burn-out Inventory: A critical review 
and reconceptualization. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 25,131-132. 
Larsen, R. J. (1992). Neuroticism and selective encoding and recall of symptoms: Evidence from a combined 
concurrent-retrospective study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 480-488. 
Larsen, R. J., & Ketelaar, T. (1991). Personality and susceptibility to positive and negative states. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 132-140. 
Lee, R. T., & Ashforth, B. E. (1993). A further examination of managerial burnout: Toward an integrated 
model. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 1, 3-20. 
Leiter, M. P. (1990). The impact of family resources, control coping, and skill utilization on the development of 
burnout: A longitudinal study. Human Relations', 43, 1067-1083. 
Leiter, M. P. (1991). Coping patterns as predictors of burnout: The function of control and escapist coping 
patterns. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 12, 123-144. 
Leiter, M. P., & Maslach, C. (1988). The impact of interpersonal environment on burnout and organizational 
commitment. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 9, 297-308. 
Maslach, C., & Jackson, S. E. (1981). The measurement of experienced burnout. Journal of Occupational 
Behavior, 2, 99-113. 
Maslach, C., & Jackson, S. E. (1985). The role of sex and family variables in burnout. Sex Roles, 12, 837-851. 


Maslach, C., & Jackson, S. E. (1986). Maslach Burnout Inventory: Manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 
Maslach, C., Jackson, S. E., & Leiter, M. P. (1996). Maslach Burnout Inventory Manual. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 
Maslach, C., & Pines, A. (1977). The burnout syndrome in the day care setting. Child Care Quarterly, 6, 100-
113. 
McCrae, R. R. (1991). The five-factor model and its assessment in clinical set-tings. Journal of Personality 
Assessment, 57, 399-414. 
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1986). Personality, coping, and coping effectiveness in an adult sample. 
Journal of Personality, 54, 385-405. 
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1991). Adding liebe und arbeit: The full five-factor model and well-being. 
Bulletin of Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 227-232. 
Nagy, S., & Davis, L. G. (1985). Burnout: A comparative analysis of personality and environmental variables. 
Psychological Reports, 57, 1319-1326. 
Nesselroade, J. R. (1988). Some implications of the trait-state distinction for the study of development over the 
life span: The case of personality. In P. B. Baltes, D. L. Featherman, & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Life-span 
development of behavior (pp. 163-189). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Parkes, K. R. (1990). Coping, negative affectivity, and the work environment: Additive and interactive 
predictors of mental health. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 399-409. 
Payne, R. L. (2000). Comments on "Why negative affectivity should not be con-trolled in job stress research: 
Don't throw out the baby with the bath water." Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 97-100. 
Pelled, L. H., & Xin, K. R. (1999). Down and out: An investigation of the relationship between moods and 
employee withdrawal behavior. Journal of Management, 25, 875-895. 
Perlman, B., & Hartman, E. A. (1982). Burnout: Summary and future research. Human Relations, 35, 283-305. 
Peterson, C. (2000). The future of optimism. American Psychologist, 55, 44-55. Pyszczynski, T., Hamilton, J. 
C., Herring, F. H., & Greenberg, J. (1989). Depression, self-focused attention, and the negative memory bias. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 351-357. 
Rhoades, J. A., Arnold, J., & Jay, C. (2001). The role of affective traits and affective states in disputants' 
motivation and behavior during episodes of organizational conflict. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 22, 
329-345. 
Rizzo, J. R., House, R. J., & Lirtzman, S. I. (1970). Role conflict and ambiguity in complex organizations. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 15, 150-163. 
Robinson, S. E., Roth, S. L., Keim, J., Levenson, M., Flentje, J. R., & Bashor, K. (1991). Nurse burnout: Work-
related and demographic factors as culprits. Research in Nursing and Health, 14, 223-228. 
Salovey, P., & Birnbaum, D. (1989). Influence of mood on health-relevant cognitions. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 5, 539-551. 
Savicki, V., & Cooley, E. J. (1983). Theoretical and research considerations of burnout. Children and Youth 
Services Review, 5, 227-238. 
Savicki, V., & Cooley, E. J. (1994). Burnout in child protective service workers: A longitudinal study. Journal 
of Organizational Behavior, 15, 655-666. 
Saxton, M. J., Phillips, J. S., & Blakeney, R. N. (1991). Antecedents and consequences of emotional exhaustion 
in the airline reservations service sector. Human Relations, 44, 583-595. 
Smith, C. A., & Lazarus, R. S. (1990). Emotion and adaptation. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (pp. 609-637). New York, NY: Guilford. 
Spector, P. E., Zapf, D., Chen, P. Y., & Frese, M. (2000). Why negative affectivity should not be controlled in 
job stress research: Don't throw out the baby with the bath water. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 21, 79-
96. 
Suls, J., Martin, R., & David, J. P. (1998). Person—environment fit and its limits: Agreeableness, neuroticism, 
and emotional reactivity to interpersonal conflicts. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 88-98. 
Tellegen, A. (1985). Structures of mood and personality and their relevance to assessing anxiety, with an 
emphasis on self-report. In A. H. Tuma & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 681-706). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 


Thayer, R. E., Newman, R. J., & McClain, T. M. (1994). Self-regulation of mood: Strategies for changing a bad 
mood, raising energy, and reducing tension. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 910-935. 
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition to experience aversive emotional 
states. Psychological Bulletin, 96, 645-690. 
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1992). On traits and temperament: General and specific factors of emotional 
experience and their relationship to the five-factor model. Journal of Personality, 60, 441-475. 
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1997). Extraversion and its positive emotional core. In R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & S. 
Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 767-793). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Watson, D., David, J. P., & SuIs, J. (1999). Personality, affectivity, and coping. In C. R. Snyder (Ed.), Coping: 
The psychology of what works (pp. 119-140). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Watson, D., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1989). Health complaints, stress, and distress: Exploring the central role of 
negative affectivity. Psychological Review, 96, 234-254. 
Watson, D., & Tellegen, A. (1985). Toward a consensual structure of mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 219-
235. 
Weiss, H. M., & Adler, S. (1984). Personality and organizational behavior. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw 
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 6, pp. 1-50). Greenwich, CT: JAI. 
Weiss, H. M., & Cropanzano, R. (1996). Affective events theory: A theoretical discussion of the structure, 
causes, and consequences of affective events at work. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in 
organizational behavior (Vol. 18, pp. 1-50). Greenwich, CT: JAI. 
Weiss, H. M., Nicholas, J. P., & Daus, C. (1993, April). Affective and cognitive influences on job satisfaction. 
Paper presented at the 8th annual conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, San 
Francisco, California. 
Wright, J. S., & Mischel, W. (1982). Influence of affect on cognitive social learning person variables. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 901-914.  
Wright, T. A., & Bonett, D. G. (1997). The contributions of burnout to work performance. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 18, 491-499. 
Wright, T. A., & Cropanzano, R. (1998). Emotional exhaustion as a predictor of job performance and voluntary 
turnover. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 486-493. 
Wright, T. A., & Staw, B. M. (1999). Affect and favorable work outcomes: Two longitudinal test of the happy-
productive worker thesis. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20, 1-23. 
Zellars, K. L., Perrewe, P. L., & Hochwarter, W. A. (1999). Mitigating burnout among high-NA employees in 
health care: What can organizations do? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29, 2250-2271. 
Zellars, K. L., Perrewe, P. L., & Hochwarter, W. A. (2000). Burnout in health-care: The role of the five factors 
of personality. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30, 1570-1598. 
Zohar, D. (1997). Predicting burnout with a hassle-based measure of role demands. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 18,101-115. 
Zunz, S. J. (1998). Resiliency and burnout: Protective factors for human service managers. Administration in 
Social Work, 22, 39-54. 

The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.
The author has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate.

